THE ZOIST: A Journal of Cerebral Physiology & Mesmerism, and their Applications
to Human Welfare. Vol. VII (March 1849 to January 1850).
Edited by John Elliotson. London: Hippolyte Bailliere, 219 Regent Street.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/s1id13659950).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE  ZOIST:

A  JOURNAL


CEREBRAL  PHYSIOLOGY  &  MESMERISM


AND


THEIR  APPLICATIONS  TO  HUMAN  WELFARE.


“  This  is  Truth,  though  opposed  to  tlu.  Philosophy  of  Ages.”—  Gall.


YOL  VII.

MARCH,  1849,  to  JANUARY,  1850.


LONDON :

HIPPOLYTE  BAILLIERE,  PUBLISHER,

219,  REGENT  STREET;

PARIS:  J.  B.  BAILLIERE,  RUE  DE  L’ECOLE  DU  MEDECINE;

LEIPSIZ  :  T.  O.  WEIGEL.


M  DCCC  L.


LONDON


PRINTED  BY  WALTON  AND  MITCHELL,
24,  Wardour-street,  Oxford-street.


MAG.^-3


INDEX.


page

Adams,  Mr.,  Distant  Mesmerism .  80

Africa,  Mesmerism  in  .  443

Aglionby,  Miss,  her  Cure  of  Epilepsy .  302

Alexander,  Mr.,  the  Oculist . .  199

Alexis  Didier .  96

Archbishop  of  Dublin .  414,  421

Armour,  Mr.,  Benefit  of  Mesmerism  in  Fever .  441

Asthma,  cured .  414

Bagnold,  Captain,  Mesmerism  in  Africa . . .  443

Barber,  Miss,  her  Death  and  Autopsy .  323

Barham,  Mr .  158

Barth,  Mr.,  his  Cures .  275

Baumann,  Madame,  her  Book .  211

Bible  .  232,  397

Blindness  (one  of  Twenty-six  years)  cured  .  81,  148-52,  168,  196

Bockett,  Rev.  Mr.,  Cure  of  Palpitation  . . . . . . .  194

Brain,  Disease  of,  cured  .  170

Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute .  152

Budd,  Drs . 388

Bushman,  Dr.,  his  conduct . 382

Cahagnet,  M.,  his  Book  Reviewed  .  414

Cancer,  aggravated  by  the  Pressure  Plan .  371

Capern,  Mr.,  his  Cures  . .  165,  403

Casci,  an  excellent  Taker  of  Casts. . .  119

Cattell,  Mr.,  on  Cross-Mesmerism  . 224

Cautley,  Rev.  Mr.,  removal  of  Agony .  192

Cerebral  Development,  mode  of  taking .  53

Cerebral  Organs,  boundaries  of. .  145

Chambers,  Dr .  385

Chandler,  Mr.,  Cure  of  Vomiting .  74

Chloroform,  deaths  from .  35,  122,  269,  371,  446

- its  convenience  in  an  awkward  circumstance  .  40

Chorea,  benefit  in  . 275

Clairvoyance .  91,  95,  154,  178,  181,  213,  281,  305,  318,  431,  433

Clark,  Sir  James . 384

College  of  Physicians,  its  conduct .  385

Conningham,  Mr.,  his  conduct .  47

Connolly,  Dr .  384

Cross-Mesmerism . 224

Crystals  . 183

Crystal,  Magic  .  66,  256


IV


INDEX.


page

Davidson,  Col.,  his  detection  of  a  misrepresentation .  448

Dawson,  Ellen  .  98

Deafness,  cured .  89,  141,  142,  144-47,  149-51

Dean  of  Exeter,  inexorable  .  333

Debility,  cured .  170,  178

Dropsy,  cured .  174,  178

Ducie,  Lord  152,  311

Dumbness,  cured  .  134

Electricity  .  183

Elliotson,  Dr.,  Note  by,  on  Dr.  Esdaile’s  Report .  33

- on  Mr.  Mouat’s  paper .  43

- Account  of  Rush  . .  107

- Note  on  Mesmeric  Disturbances .  233


on  Anti-Mesmerists  and  killing  with  poisons,  and  on  Mes


merisers  . .  396

* - -  on  Dr.  Maitland’s  absurdity .  403,  447

- Postscript  to  his  Paper .  446

Engledue,  Dr.,  his  pamphlet  on  the  conduct  of  a  party  in  Portsmouth  ....  106

Erysipelas,  cured  .  293

Epilepsy,  cured .  89,  203

Esdaile,  Dr.,  Report  of  his  Hospital  .  24,  121,  353

- Testimony  to  Clairvoyance .  213

Ether,  deaths  from .  369

Evans,  Mr.,  Cure  of  Toothache. .  89

Eyes,  inflammation  of,  cured .  175

Eyes,  agony  of,  cured  .  192

Fergusson,  Dr .  384

Fergusson’s,  Mr.,  praiseworthy  conduct  .  4

Fever,  benefit  of,  Mesmerism  in  . 441

Forbes,  Dr.,  conduct  of .  4

Gall,  original  Letter  of .  64

Graham,  Sir  James .  346

Green,  Mr.  Joseph .  385

Grey,  Sir  George  .  341

Gums,  cured .  169,  292

Haddock,  Mr.,  Cases  of  Clairvoyance .  308

Haemorrhage,  cured  .  298

Hands,  Mr.  Joseph,  his  Cures .  294

Hanging  the  Insane  .  338

Hawkins,  Dr.  F.,  his  conduct  .  7,  23,  44

Hazard,  Mr.,  Speech . 162

-  Cures .  175

Heart,  Palpitation  of,  cured  .  114,  169

Headache,  cured .  176,  180,  182

Hockley,  Mr.,  on  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal .  251

Holland,  Dr.  H .*  * .  384

Howell,  Mr.,  Speech .  163

Hull,  Dr.,  acrimony  against  Mesmerism .  368


INDEX.


V


page

Hypochondriasis,  cured . .  144,  177,  391

Imagination,  Power  of  .  190

Insanity,  Cataleptic,  cured . . .  9

Insanity,  from  Chloroform .  374

Insanity,  successful  treatment  .  135,  201,  360,  391

Jacobs,  Mr.,  benefit  in  Disease  of  Prostate  Gland  .  437

Janson,  Mr . . .  157,  314

Johnson,  Dr.  James,  his  conduct .  4,  40,  81

Johnson’s  Journal,  ignorant  conduct  of  .  382

Journals,  Conduct  of .  3,  368,  448

Kean,  Dr.,  success  in  Insanity .  135

Keely,  Mr.,  great  success  in  mesmerising . . .  138

Languages,  unlearnt,  comprehension  of  .  72,  101

Lawrence,  Mr.  Wm.,  his  conduct  .  376

Layard,  Dr.,  quotation  from  his  Nineveh .  403

Lewis,  Mr.  Cornewall,  his  ignorance  and  folly .  203

Love,  Miss,  benefit  to  her  spinal  affection  . . .  171

Lungs,  affection  of,  cured  . .  294

Lytton,  Sir  E.  B .  383,  388

Magnet  .  183

Maitland,  Rev.  Dr.,  Review  of  his  book  .  395,  403,  447

Martin,  Dr.,  painless  removal  of  an  eye  .  124

Mayo,  Dr.  T.,  conduct  of,  reproved  . .  44,  380

Mayo’s,  Dr.  Herbert,  book  . 211

Mechanic’s  Magazine,  its  virtuous  conduct .  326

Medical  Gazette . . .  309,  318,  380,  381,  391,  448

Medical  Times  .  386

Mesmerism  in  Africa . 443

Mesmerism,  distant  .  80

Millar,  Professor,  his  conduct  .  102

Morning  Post,  its  virtuous  conduct  . 309

Mouat,  Mr.  J.,  testimony  to  the  truth  of  Mesmerism  in  University  College

Hospital .  41

Nervousness  cured .  144,  147 — 152,  177,  180,  394

Neuralgia  cured .  32,  146,  148 — 152,  168,  169,  172,  180,  409,  413

Nitric  Acid,  painless  application  of  .  33

Operations,  painless .  27,  30,  124,  126,  354,  367,  396

O’Shaughnessy,  Mr.,  his  fatal  Cases  with  Chloroform  .  35,  123

Palpitation  cured . 194

Palsy  cured . . .  142,  144,  267

Parsons,  Mr.,  his  Cure .  9,  201

Prosecution  for  Mesmerism  .  151

Prostate  Gland,  benefit  in  Disease  of . 437

Provincial  Journal,  its  Conduct. . . . 378

Punishment,  Capital .  331

Quinsey  cured . 175

Ranking,  Dr.,  his  conduct .  378-9

Rheumatism  cured .  132,  141,  143 — 152,  166 — 171,  359,  360,  404-10


VI


CONTENTS.


page

Rush,  the  Murderer  .  107

Sandby,  Rev.  Mr.,  Cure  of  dreadful  Tooth-ache  .  80

- - - Exposure  of  Mr.  C.  Lewis’s  ignorance  and  folly .  203

- Review  of  M.  Cahagnet’s  book  . . .  414

Scoresby’s,  Rev.  Dr.,  book  .  326

Simpson,  Professor,  his  conduct  .  102

Solly,  Mr.,  his  conduct .  38,  372

Spinal  affection,  great  benefit  in  .  171

Stanley,  Mr . 385

Storer,  Dr.,  Cures  of  Epilepsy,  Insanity,  & c .  89,  391

Storer,  Dr.,  and  the  Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute  .  161,  311,  314

Straton,  Mr.,  on  taking  Cerebral  Developments .  53

Streeten,  Dr.,  his  conduct .  378

Strickland,  Miss  A.,  her  conduct .  74

Sympathy  of  Sensation  and  Thought  .  188,  426,  431,  433,  436

Sympathy,  Cerebral,  Spontaneous  .  431

Swedenborg .  418

Taylor,  Dr.  A.,  his  conduct .  382

Topham,  Rev.  Mr.,  benefit  in  Scrofula .  184

Tooth-ache,  dreadful,  cured  .  86

Ulcers,  Scrofulous,  great  benefit  in .  176,  184,  300

Voice,  loss  of,  cured  .  169

Vomiting,  cure  of  .  74

Wakley,  Mr.,  his  conduct .  5,  45,  89,  370,  375,  377

Wallace,  Miss,  her  Cure  of  Blindness .  196

Wesley,  John .  433


CONTENTS  0E  VOL.  VII.

No.  XXV.

Introduction  to  the  Seventh  Volume  of  The  Zoist.

Conclusion  of  Mr.  Parsons’s  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically.

“  Reports  of  the  Mesmeric  Hospital,  Calcutta,  by  James  Esdaile,  Esq.,  M.D.,
Presidency  Surgeon.” — From  “  The  India  Register  of  Medical  Science.”
With  a  Note  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

Testimony  to  the  Reality  of  the  Mesmeric  Phenomena  in  University  College
Hospital.  By  Mr.  James  Mouat,  Army  Surgeon.  With  a  Note  by  Dr.
Elliotson.

Remarks  of  a  Female  Mesmerist  in  reply  to  the  scurrilous  insinuations  of  Dr.

F.  Hawkins,  Dr.  Mayo,  and  Mr.  Wakley.  With  a  Note  by  Dr.  Elliotson.
Notes  on  the  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development.  By  Mr.

James  Straton,  Aberdeen.

Original  Letter  by  Gall.

On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal,  and  its  probable  Connexion  with  Mesmerism.
With  a  Note  by  L.  L.  D.


CONTENTS.  -


Vll


Clairvoyant  comprehension  of  unknown  Languages.  By  Mr.  Alfred  Roffe.

Cure  of  Vomiting  with  Mesmerism,  attended  by  interesting  Mesmeric  Facts.
By  Mr.  Chandler,  Surgeon.

Remarkable  Mesmeric  Phenomena.  By  Mr.  Adams,  Surgeon.  Communicated
by  Dr.  Ashburner

Mesmeric  Cure  of  Blindness  of  twenty-six  years’  duration.  By  a  Lady.

Mesmeric  Cure  of  intense  Tooth-ache ;  with  some  remarkable  Effects.  By  the
Rev.  George  Sandby,  jun.

Cure  of  Deafness.  By  Mr.  Evans,  Dentist.

Severe  Case  of  Epilepsy  cured  with  Mesmerism.  By  Dr.  Storer.

Alexis  Didier.  By  Mr.  Parsons.

Ellen  Dawson’s  Clairvoyance.  By  Mr.  Barth.

Mesmerism  and  Language.

The  conduct  of  Professors  Miller  and  Simpson.  With  a  Note  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

No.  XXVI.

An  Account  of  the  Head  of  Rush,  the  Norfolk  Murderer.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

Mesmerism  in  the  East.  “Report  of  the  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital  for
October.  By  James  Esdaile,  M.D.,  Presidency  Surgeon.’’

Mesmerism  in  the  West.  Reports  of  Cures  in  America,  by  Mr.  Keely.

Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.  Public  Meeting  at  Bristol  to  found
a  Mesmeric  Institute.

Various  Mesmeric  Cures.  By  Mr.  Capern,  of  Tiverton.

Great  benefit  in  a  Spinal  Affection.  By  Miss  Love,  of  Plymouth.

Mesmeric  Cures.  By  Mr.  William  Hazard,  17,  Avon  Crescent,  Hotwells,  Bristol.

Case  of  Scrofula  much  alleviated.  By  the  Rev.  E.  C.  Topham,  Combe  Down,
near  Bath.

Mesmerism  in  the  Rest  of  England.  The  Removal  of  Dreadful  Pain  of
long  standing  from  the  Eyes  of  a  Parishioner.  By  the  Rev.  Jos.  Cautley,
Curate  of  Thorney,  Cambridgeshire.

Cure  of  Palpitation  of  the  Heart.  By  a  Beneficed  Clergyman  of  the  Church  of
England.

Cure  of  Blindness.  By  Miss  Wallace.

Ultimate  Success  of  Mesmerism  in  Mr.  Parsons’s  Case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity.

Review  of  Mr.  G.  Cornewall  Lewis’s  Strictures  on  Mesmerism  and  Phrenology.
By  the  Rev.  George  Sandby,  M.A.,  Vicar  of  Flixton,  Suffolk.


No.  XXVII.

Dr.  Esdaile’s  Testimony  to  the  Reality  of  Clairvoyance.  In  a  letter  to  Dr.
Elliotson.

Cases  of  Cross-mesmerism,  with  some  Remarks  upon  the  Magnetic  and  Mes¬
meric  Fluid.  By  Mr.  W.  Cattell

Note  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  on  the  Disturbances  of  Mesmeric  Sleep-waking.

On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal,  and  its  Connexion  with  Mesmerism.  By  Mr.
Hockley.

Mesmerism  and  Chloroform  in  India.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.


vm


CONTENTS.


Great  benefit,  with  remarkable  Phenomena,  in  a  severe  and  long-standing  case
of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance.  By  Mr.  Barth.

Medical  and  Mesmeric  Cure  of  Erysipelas  contrasted ;  and  Cure  of  a  Chronic
Inflammation  of  the  Gums.  By  Mr.  Barth.

Cure  of  a  Case  of  supposed  Consumption,  and  of  one  of  Chronic  Intermittent
Intestinal  Hsemorrhage.  By  Mr.  Joseph  Hands.

Cure  of  a  Case  of  Scalded  and  Stiff  Arm,  and  of  one  of  Scrofulous  Sores.  By
the  Wife  of  a  distinguished  Mathematical  Philosopher.

Cure  of  long-standing  Epilepsy ;  with  Clairvoyance  and  other  Phenomena.  By
Miss  Aglionby.

The  unscrupulous  Conduct  of  the  London  Medical  Gazette ,  exposed  by  the
Morning  Post.

The  Clairvoyance  of  Mr.  Haddock’s  Subject.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

Death  of  Miss  Barber.

Review  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Scoresby’s  Lectures  on  Mesmerism.


No.  XXVIII.

Capital  Punishment ;  or,  Killing  according  to  Law.  With  a  Note  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Second  half-yearly  Report  of  the  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  From  1st
March  to  1st  September,  1849.”  With  a  Letter  published  in  the  Calcutta
Star  from  a  Visitor  to  the  Hospital ;  and  a  private  letter  from  Dr.  Esdaile
to  Dr.  Elliotson.

On  the  conduct  of  the  British  Medical  Journalists,  and  nearly  the  whole  of  the
Medical  Profession,  in  reference  to  the  greatest  of  medical  blessings  :  with
some  hints  to  the  Public  on  Mesmerisers.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

Cases  of  Insanity,  severe  Nervous  Affections,  Hypochondriasis,  Deafness,  &c.
By  Henry  Storer,  M.D.,  Bristol,  Physician  to  the  Bristol  Mesmeric
Institute.

Review  of  “  Illustrations  and  Enquiries  relating  to  Mesmerism,  Part  I.,  by  the
Rev.  S.  R.  Maitland,  D.D.,  F.R.S.,  F.S.A.,  some  time  Librarian  to  the
late  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  Keeper  of  the  MSS.  at  Lambeth.
London  :  William  Stephenson.” — pp.  82.

A  few  of  Mr.  Capern’s  Cures.

Review  of  M.  Alphonse  Cahagnet’s  Arcanes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles,  &c.  By
the  Rev.  George  Sandby,  Vicar  of  Flixton,  Suffolk.

Thought-reading  and  Clairvoyance.

Clairvoyance  reported  by  the  celebrated  John  Wesley.

Spontaneous  Sympathy — distant  influence  of  thought.

Great  relief  from  Mesmerism  during  ordinary  treament  in  an  affection  of  the
Prostate  Gland.  By  Mr.  Henry  Jacob,  35,  Surrey  Street,  Strand.

Advantage  of  Mesmerism  while  ordinary  treatment  is  adopted.  By  Mr.  Armour.

Mesmerism  in  Africa,  forty  years  ago.  By  Captain  Bagnold.

On  the  boundaries  of  the  Cerebral  Organs.

Postscript  to  Dr.  Elliotson’s  Paper  (Article  III.)  and  to  his  Note  to  the  Mottos
prefixed  by  him  to  Article  VI.


ZOIST.


THE

No.  XXV.


APRIL,  1849.


I.  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SEVENTH  VOLUME  OF

THE  ZOIST.

“  The  discovery  of  a  new  truth  gives  to  the  philosopher  intense  delight.  The
science  of  mesmerism  is  a  new  truth  of  incalculable  value  and  importance ;  and
though  sneered  at  by  the  pseudo -philosophers  of  the  day,  there  is  not  the  less
certainty  that  it  presents  the  only  avenue  through  which  is  discernible  a  ray  of
hope  that  the  more  intricate  phenomena  of  the  nervous  system — of  life, — will  ever
be  revealed  to  man.  Already  has  it  established  its  claim  to  be  considered  a  most
potent  remedy  in  the  cure  of  disease  ;  already  enabled  the  knife  of  the  operator  to
traverse  and  divide  the  living  fibre  unfelt  by  the  patient.  If  such  are  the  results
of  its  infancy,  what  may  not  its  maturity  bring  forth  ?  Let  us  pause  for  a  mo¬
ment  to  survey  our  position.  An  acute  susceptibility  of  pain  has  been  diffused
throughout  the  human  body  to  warn  man  of  injury,  and  hitherto  it  has  been
deemed  a  necessary  consequence  that  suffering  should  follow  the  violation  of  its
integrity.  Behold,  in  a  painless  operation  during  the  trance,  the  arrest  of  an
important  function  at  the  will  of  man  !  and  for  the  purposes  of  beneficence, — a
result  which  a  few  years  since  it  would  have  been  considered  madness  to  conjecture.
Is  not  this  a  triumph  justly  deserving  the  name  of  glorious,  quickening  the  pulse  in
the  bosom  of  philanthropy,  and  unfolding  bright  visions  of  the  future  to  the  glad¬
dened  eye  of  the  well-wisher  of  his  race  ?  Shall  an  era  occur  in  the  progress  of
man ,  and  the  tidings  fall  on  the  cold  ear  of  apathy  and  indifference  ?”

On  the  1st  of  April  1843,  the  first  number  of  The  Zoist  ap¬
peared.  The  above  quotation  is  extracted  from  the  Prospectus
which  heralded  the  appearance  of  this  number.  After  a  lapse
of  six  years,  the  commencement  of  another  volume  naturally
leads  us  to  look  back  on  the  progress  which  our  new  science
has  made, — on  the  result  of  our  own  labours, — and  on  the
attitude  of  the  members  of  that  profession  who  are  more  pecu¬
liarly  interested  in  its  progress,  and  who  ought  to  watch  with
anxiety  the  record  of  every  case  of  disease  which  is  made  to
yield  to  its  power,  and  the  fate  of  every  patient  who  is  brought
under  its  influence  for  the  purpose  of  undergoing  a  surgical
operation.

VOL.  VII.


B


2


Introduction  to  the  Seventh  Volume.


Has  an  era  occurred  in  the  progress  of  man,  and  have  the
tidings  fallen  on  the  cold  ear  of  apathy  and  indifference  ?  In
1843,  what  was  the  position  of  our  science  ?  The  development
of  phenomena  in  the  human  organism,  at  once  startling  and
important,  attracted  the  attention  of  an  immense  number  of
individuals,  and  at  the  period  we  refer  to,  there  was  scarcely
a  town  in  the  kingdom  which  had  not  been  visited  by  a  public
lecturer,  who,  too  frequently  regardless,  or  not  bestowing
sufficient  attention  on  the  requirements,  of  pure  science,  pa¬
raded  phenomena  calling  for  prolonged  and  pains-taking
research  and  secluded  investigation,  before  an  audience  little
calculated  to  grant  the  necessity  of,  or  to  see  the  paramount
importance  to  be  attached  to,  either  demand.  Much  mischief
ensued,  and  the  opponents  of  truth  were  thus  supplied  with
an  abundance  of  materials  for  their  disreputable  agitation.
Perceiving  the  impropriety  of  the  course  pursued  by  these
gentlemen,  we  inserted  an  article  in  our  first  number,  under
the  title  of  “  Lecture-mania,”  in  which  we  questioned  the
propriety  and  usefulness  of  the  plan.  However,  the  system
was  continued,  and  with  varied  results.  The  newspapers
teemed  with  the  reports  of  lectures,  with  the  successful  or
unsuccessful  experiments  of  these  gentlemen,  with  the  riotous
proceedings  of  the  medical  men  who  attended  these  meetings,
and  with  letters,  pro  and  con ,  from  innumerable  individuals
who  all  imagined  that  they  were  capable  of  giving  some  ex¬
planation,  or  of  denouncing  at  once  and  for  ever  a  subject
requiring  profound  physiological  knowledge  for  its  discussion,
and  a  delicacy  and  care  in  conducting  the  experiments,  that
it  is  certainly  not  the  lot  of  all  to  possess.  The  audience
attending  each  lecture  was  divided  into  approving  and  dis¬
approving,  believing  and  disbelieving,  sections,  and  at  the
head  of  those  who  manifested  their  doubts  with  the  greatest
noise  and  the  most  impudent  effrontery,  there  was  almost
always  a  medical  man.  On  some  occasions,  to  such  an  extent
was  the  feeling  of  opposition  carried,  that  at  no  great  distance
from  the  spot  where  we  are  now  writing,  the  opposing  parties
were  very  nearly  having  recourse  to  blows,  for  the  purpose  of
settling  their  gwasi-philosophical  disputes.

For  those,  who  at  the  time  did  not  take  an  interest  in  the
question,  it  is  almost  impossible  now  to  estimate  the  amount
of  excitement  throughout  the  country,  or  the  ill-will  and  bad
feeling  generated  whenever  or  wherever  the  name  of  the  new
science  was  mentioned.  For  a  medical  man  to  say  he  believed,
was  tantamount  to  passing  a  sentence  of  exclusion  upon  himself
from  all  medical  or  scientific  coteries,  and  quite  sufficient  to
cause  the  lip  and  nose  of  all  those  to  turn  up,  who  take  their


Introduction  to  the  Seventh  Volume .


3


philosophical  notions  from  the  prevailing  fashion  of  the  day,
instead  of  having  recourse  to  the  only  authority  which  can
give  them  the  right  to  pronounce  an  opinion, — nature.  But
time  works  wonders.  Time  has  now  calmed  down  the  angry
passion  of  our  medical  opponents.  The  public  opinion  is  now
in  advance,  and  they  consider  it  no  longer  safe  to  be  designated
the  laggers  behind :  accordingly  they  find  it  the  best  policy
to  say  but  little  in  an  opposing  spirit.  If  they  allude  to  the
subject  at  all,  it  is  merely  to  indulge  in  a  quiet  remark,  de¬
pending  upon  the  tone  of  the  society  in  which  they  may  happen
to  be,  and  which  is  calculated  to  convey  the  impression  that
it  is  a  matter  which  has  not  much  occupied  their  attention,
albeit,  they  have  no  doubt  “  there  is  something  in  it,”  but
not  to  the  extent  claimed  by  its  enthusiastic  supporters.  With
a  few  exceptions,  in  each  locality  this  is  the  style  of  remark
indulged  in,  and  affords  a  striking  contrast  to  the  period
when  mesmerisers  were  unanimously  voted  fools  and  quacks,
and  their  patients  impostors  or  miserable  imbeciles !  At  the
present  time  there  is  not  a  town  in  the  United  Kingdom,
which  does  not  furnish  a  medical  man  who  has  experimented
for  himself,  and  who  is  prepared  to  give  an  opinion  in  a  posi¬
tive  manner,  supported  by  facts  of  his  own  collection,  and  by
views  the  result  of  sincere  conviction.  Six  years  have  pro¬
duced  this  great  change  in  the  medical  world;  and  after
another  period  of  six  years,  we  shall  see  mesmerism  regularly
used  by  the  medical  profession  as  a  means  of  cure  in  many
diseases  which  now  baffle  the  resources  of  their  art.

In  1843,  the  literary  journals  burked  the  subject.  Now,
most  of  them  have  referred  to  it,  and  in  a  manner  calculated
to  excite  attention  and  calm  investigation,  rather  than  the
reverse.  In  1843,  the  medical  journals  referred  to  it  only  to
jeer  at  and  to  insult  all  who  were  investigating  it.  Now,
the  leading  medical  journal  in  our  own  country  calls  upon
the  profession  to  investigate  the  matter  thoroughly,  and  to
apply  its  influence  for  the  purpose  of  producing  insensibility.
And  the  leading  journal  in  one  of  our  colonies  says,  in  the
last  number,  <(We  have  no  objection  to  the  use  of  chloroform
in  extreme  cases,  when  life  and  death  are  in  the  scales,  and
with  due  care  to  its  proper  administration,  provided  always
mesmerism  has  been  first  tried  and  found  wanting. ”

Amongst  the  most  violent  of  the  opponents,  during  the
past  few  years,  have  been  Mr.  Wakley  and  his  confreres,  Drs.
Forbes  and  Johnson.  We  designate  them  the  most  violent
and  senseless  in  their  opposition,  because  they  persevered  in  a
course  which  no  men,  actuated  by  good  motives  or  a  love
for  science,  would  have  continued,  without  being  supported

b  2


4


Introduction  to  the  Seventh  Volume.


by  personal  experience,  the  result  of  prolonged  and  sincere
investigation.

April  1st,  1839,  Dr.  Forbes  writes,  “If  we  can  quicken
its  (mesmerism)  decline,  where  it  now  reigns  in  the  hearts  of
nervous  proselytes  and  dreaming  physicians,  or  can  assist  in
forming  a  barrier  against  a  probable  revisitation  of  it,  we
shall  not  think  the  otherwise  more  than  due  attention  we
have  given  to  the  wild  productions  which  treat  of  it  entirely
thrown  away.”

April  1st,  1843,  Dr.  Johnson  writes,  “The  mesmero-
mania  has  nearly  dwindled  in  the  metropolis  into  anile  fatuity ;
but  lingers  in  some  of  the  provinces  with  the  gobe-mouches
and  chaw-bacons ,  who,  after  gulping  down  a  pound  of  fat
pork,  would,  with  well-greased  gullets,  swallow  such  a  lot  of
mesmeric  mummery  as  would  choke  an  aligator  or  a  boa-
constrictor.”

Oct.  29th,  1842,  Mr.  Wakley  writes,  “Mesmerism  is  too
gross  a  humbug  to  admit  of  any  farther  serious  notice.  We
regard  its  abettors  as  quacks  and  impostors.  They  ought  to
be  hooted  out  of  professional  society. — Any  practitioner  who
sends  a  patient  afflicted  with  any  disease  to  consult  a  mes¬
meric  quack,  ought  to  be  without  patients  for  the  rest  of  his
days.”

These  three  journalists,  by  their  persevering  endeavours  to
laugh  the  subject  down,  and  by  their  dishonest  determination
to  oppose  by  sneers,  vulgar  witticisms,  and  unphilosphical
assertions,  the  facts  which  they  would  not  take  the  trouble
to  refute  by  arguments,  or  the  advance  of  counter-facts,  knew
that  they  were  pandering  to  the  taste  of  the  many ;  who,  on
most  occasions,  manifest  a  predisposition  to  listen  to  such  bad
advisers,  and  too  frequently  to  rank  themselves  with  those
who  laugh  and  dogmatically  assert,  rather  than  with  those
who  think  and  reason.  So  bad  is  the  education  of  the  ma¬
jority  of  individuals,  whether  professional  or  otherwise,  that
for  a  time  such  dishonest  efforts  are  almost  always  successful.
These  writers,  while  supplying  their  readers  with  intellectual
aliment,  appeal  to  their  depraved  tastes  and  feelings,  rather
than  to  their  reason ;  and  thus,  instead  of  endeavouring  to
lead  them  to  a  more  exalted  idea  of  their  duty,  they  reduce
them  by  degrees  to  their  own  level,  and  prevent  them  from
attaining  that  position  in  the  discussion  and  settlement  of  a
disputed  topic,  which  probably  their  unaided  efforts  might
have  enabled  them  to  reach.  If  they  do  not  write  the  articles
themselves,  they  issue  the  order  which  causes  these  to  be
written,  and  unfortunately  they  find  ready-made  literary  tools
in  the  review-market ;  who,  for  a  fee,  will  take  either  side,


Introduction  to  ike  Seventh  Volume.


r*

o


and  write  as  they  are  bidden.*  The  course  which  the  British
and  Foreign  Medical  Review,  under  its  first  editor,  pursued,
on  the  subject  of  mesmerism,  is  very  characteristic,  and  ex¬
emplifies  this  remark  in  a  way,  so  far  as  medical  literature  is
concerned,  much  to  be  deplored.

Is  it  not  lamentable  and  disheartening  when  we  are  en¬
deavouring  to  obtain  information  on  a  philosophical  subject,
and  for  this  purpose  consult  a  presumed  authority,  to  find
this  authority  led  by  the  prevailing  opinions  of  the  day,  and
instead  of  directing  us  into  the  right  path,  and  indicating  the
true  course  which  we  should  follow — instead  of  proving  a
faithful  adviser  and  an  intelligent  companion — to  appear  at
every  turn  as  the  partizan,  one  who  is  not  engaged  in  dis¬
cussing  the  only  plans  to  be  pursued  for  the  ascertainment  of
truth,  but  who  is  pressing  into  a  prominent  position  every
fact  and  every  argument  calculated  to  support  and  confirm
a  conclusion,  predetermined  by  his  interest,  his  prejudices,
or  his  position  in  society?  The  man  who  acts  thus,  is  using
his  efforts  to  enthral  his  neighbour — he  lowers  his  intellectual
standard,  and,  by  the  act,  debases  himself.  By  suppressing
or  perverting  facts  he  prevents  healthy  thought ;  and  thus,
in  his  position,  commits  a  great  crime.  “  Is  not  thought  the
right  and  duty  of  all  ?  Is  not  truth  alike  precious  to  all  ?
Is  not  truth  the  natural  aliment  of  the  mind,  as  plainly  as
the  wholesome  grain  is  of  the  body  ?  Is  not  the  mind  adapted
to  thought  as  plainly  as  the  eye  to  light,  the  ear  to  sound  ?
Who  dares  to  withhold  it  from  its  natural  action,  its  natural
element  and  joy  ?  Undoubtedly  some  men  are  more  gifted
than  others,  and  are  marked  out  for  more  studious  lives.
But  the  work  of  such  men  is  not  to  do  others’  thinking  for  them ,
hut  to  help  them  to  think  more  vigorously  and  effectually.  Great
minds  are  to  make  others  great.  Their  superiority  is  to  be
used  not  to  break  the  multitude  to  intellectual  vassalage,  not
to  establish  over  them  a  spiritual  tyranny,  but  to  rouse  them
from  lethargy,  and  to  aid  them  to  judge  for  themselves.  The
light  and  life  which  spring  up  in  one  soul  are  to  be  spread
far  and  wide.  Of  all  treasons  against  humanity,  there  is  no

*  All  literary  men  know  this  to  be  the  truth,  but  it  is  seldom  that  they  can
obtain  proof  of  the  fact.  Here  is  one,  however,  from  no  mean  authority,  Sir
W.  Scott.

Writing  to  a  correspondent,  he  says,  “  I  have  run  up  an  attempt  on  the
curse  of  Kehama  for  the  Quarterly.”  .  .  .

“  What  I  could,  I  did — which  was  to  throw  as  much  weight  as  possible  upon
the  beautiful  passages,  of  which  there  are  many,  and  to  slur  over  the  absurdities,
of  which  there  are  not  a  few.”  .  .  .

“  I  would  have  made  a  very  different  hand  of  it,  indeed,  had  the  order  of
the  day  been  pour  dechirer.” — Lockhart's  Life  of  Scott,  vol.  ii.,  p.  302,


6


Introduction  to  the  Seventh  Volume.


one  worse  than  his,  who  employs  great  intellectual  force  to
keep  down  the  intellect  of  his  less-favoured  brother

But  the  effect  produced  by  these  writings  was  not  con¬
fined  to  a  few  individuals — it  influenced  scientific  bodies.
The  learned  and  chartered  societies  adopted  a  course  of  pro¬
cedure  by  no  means  dignified ;  and,  whenever  the  subject  of
mesmerism  was  mentioned  by  one  of  their  members,  the
others  considered  themselves  justified  in  rushing  upon  the
intruder,  and  bv  their  sneers  and  the  senseless  hubbub  which
they  created,  they  endeavoured  to  check  the  progress  of  truth,
and  to  paralyze  the  efforts  of  those  who  were  too  candid  to
be  guided  by  the  majority,  and  too  honest  to  be  swerved  from
their  intention  by  the  clamour  of  party-cry,  or  the  recorded
opinions  of  the  great  men  who  surrounded  them.  The  pro¬
gress  of  truth  and  the  steady  advance  of  science  sooner  or
later  brings  a  day  of  retribution  for  all  those  who  thus  con¬
duct  themselves.  How  little  did  they,  who  designated  the
man  an  impostor  when  he  declared  that  he  felt  no  pain  while
his  leg  was  being  amputated  under  the  influence  of  mesmerism,
imagine  that  they  were  daily  using  a  fluid,  and  that  a  few
months  would  place  in  their  possession  several  other  fluids,
which  in  the  majority  of  cases  would  produce  the  very  insen¬
sibility  they  had  just  declared  could  not  exist !  Who  could
suppose  that  the  men  who  were  loudest  in  their  denuncia¬
tions  as  to  the  impropriety  of  operating  in  a  state  of  insen¬
sibility,  if  it  could  be  produced,  were  to  be  the  men  who
should  first  use  the  new  fluids ;  and  thus  practically  prove
the  possibility,  and  in  the  majority  of  cases,  the  harmlessness,
of  the  process,  and  in  these  circumstances  the  necessity,  in
most  cases,  of  having  recourse  to  it !  Men  who  are  guided
by  their  passions  and  not  by  their  reason  must  be  continually
placed  in  this  predicament ;  but,  since  the  course  pursued  by
them  is  the  course  pursued  by  the  many  wrho  surround  them,
they  care  not  for  an  occasional  rebuke,  but  continue  their
evil  and  mischievous  proceedings  without  shame  and  without
remorse.  Like  the  drunkard  and  debauchee,  who  forget  in
the  pleasures  of  the  moment  the  penalty  which  is  sure  to
overtake  them  at  a  future  period,  they  rush  on  in  their  un¬
principled  career,  because  they  are  supported  by  the  coun¬
tenance  and  the  approving  smiles  of  the  unthinking;  and
thus  disregard  altogether  the  verdict  which  posterity  will  re¬
turn  when  their  acts  become  the  subject  of  reflection,  and,  as
regards  the  progress  of  science,  a  matter  for  calm  judgment.

In  one  of  our  late  numbers,  are  reproduced  the  shameful  and


*  Dr.  Channing.


Introduction  to  the  Seventh  Volume.  7

disgusting  language  used  by  Dr.  Hawkins  in  the  hall  of  the
College  of  Physicians, — language  uttered  in  the  presence  of  the
leading  medical  celebrities  of  the  day,  and  which  was  not  only
listened  to  without  a  rebuke,  but  apparently  gave  an  amount
of  satisfaction  just  in  proportion  to  its  falseness  and  injustice.
How  reckless  the  man  who  could  thus  pollute  what  should  be
the  hall  of  science  and  abode  of  truth,  with  the  language  of
mendacity  and  the  twaddle  of  a  partizan  !  How  conscien¬
tious  the  man  who  could  thus  pervert  the  accumulated  facts
of  the  last  few  years,  and,  instead  of  recognizing  their  physio¬
logical  and  practical  importance,  attribute  motives  and  actions
to  the  men  who  discovered  them,  more  in  accordance  with
the  uncivilized  proceedings  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  islands  in
the  Pacific  Ocean,  or  the  semi-bestial  instincts  of  the  savage
N ew  Hollander !  Physiological  facts  which  stagger  the  thought¬
ful,  and  are  evidently  paving  the  way  for  the  solution  of  the
greatest  problem  in  this  world  of  wonders, — man,  and  the
cause  of  his  actions, — were  treated  as  of  no  importance  by
an  individual  whose  whole  life  ought  to  be  devoted  to  the
accumulation  of  natural  facts  and  the  practical  application
of  them  to  the  alleviation  and  cure  of  disease.  Yes,  in  the
very  hall  which  contains  the  anatomical  preparations  made  hy
the  immortal  Harvey ,  the  cunning  of  whose  hand  was  sneered
at,  and  the  thoughts  emanating  from  whose  brain  was  consi¬
dered  by  the  men  of  his  day  as  of  no  value,  did  a  physician
in  the  year  of  grace  1848  stand  up  and  make  manifest  how
little  he  was  influenced  by  the  moral  which  is  deduced  from
the  life  of  the  man  whose  career  he  was  that  day  requested
to  improve.  Are  the  proceedings  of  the  day  of  anniversary,
which  is  celebrated  by  the  delivery  of  an  oration,  degenerated
into  a  mere  form,  and  was  the  last  orator  permitted  to  make
his  remarks  without  censure,  for  the  purpose  of  shewing  how
little  influence  the  life  and  actions  of  one  of  nature’s  aristo¬
cracy  may  have  on  a  man  who  was  especially  selected  to  con¬
template  them  and  to  give  to  his  brethren  the  result  of  his
reflections  ?

Harvey  !  Why  is  he  considered  great  ?  Why  is  the  25th
of  June  celebrated  by  the  Physicians  of  London?  Why  do
they  treasure  up  in  glass  cases  the  work  of  his  hands  ?  Be¬
cause  he  did  that  which  other  men  could  not  do,  and  thus
stood  forth  from  amongst  the  herd,  the  man  of  his  day.  Be¬
cause  by  thoughtfully  interrogating  nature,  he  obtained  pos¬
session  of  a  great  truth — manfully  took  his  stand  thereon,
and,  in  the  face  of  an  opposing  world,  was  true  to  his  purpose,
true  to  science,  and  true  to  humanity.  Because  his  life,  view
it  in  whatever  aspect  you  will,  is  a  model  which  may  be


8


Introduction  to  the  Seventh  Volume.


elevated  as  a  beacon  to  guide  all  who  wish  to  be  great  and
good.

It  is  for  these  reasons  his  career  is  celebrated  by  an  annual

«/

oration,  and  yet  the  very  men  who  go  through  this  form
persecute  and  treat  with  contumely  the  individuals  who  are
adopting  a  precisely  similar  course,  albeit  it  may  be  at  an
immeasurable  distance,  and,  by  interrogating  nature,  are  de¬
veloping  the  most  extraordinary  and  important  phenomena,
and  obtaining  the  most  astounding  results.  If  we  had  not
watched  the  progress  of  events  in  the  medical  world  during
the  last  few  years,  we  should  express  more  surprize  that
Dr.  Hawkins  was  permitted  to  read,  even  in  a  dead  language,
the  outpourings  of  his  prurient  imagination,  or  that  the  assem¬
bled  great  men  did  not  repudiate  the  language  he  used — his
abominable  thoughts  and  beastly  insinuations.  In  1802,
Mesmer  wrote  to  the  College  of  Physicians,  and  said,  “  Gen¬
tlemen,  I  place  it  (the  cause  of  mesmerism)  to-day  in  your
hands,  because  I  feel  assured  that  the  spirit  of  justice  ivhich
influences  your  actions,  will  secure  it  from  that  party-spirit
which  has  so  outraged  it  upon  the  Continent,  and  which  you
are  destined  to  avenge.”  In  1846,  the  concluding  sentence
of  Dr.  Elliotson’s  Harveian  oration  was,  “In  the  name,  there¬
fore,  of  the  love  of  truth ;  in  the  name  of  the  dignity  of  our
profession ;  in  the  name  of  the  good  of  all  mankind,  I  implore
you  carefully  to  investigate  this  important  subject.”

In  the  interval  between  these  two  appeals  the  physicians
of  London  did  nothing,  and  the  practical  answer  to  the  last
appeal  was  rendered  two  years  after  by  Dr.  Hawkins,  who
delivered  himself  of  thoughts  in  language  more  like  the  rav¬
ings  of  a  madman,  than  the  convictions  of  a  philosopher, —
and  in  another  sense,  more  analogous  to  what  we  may  suppose
to  be  used  by  the  residents  in  a  low  brothel,  than  that  which
should  reverberate  in  the  hall  of  science,  the  presumed  abode
of  medical  philosophy.

But  let  us  leave  the  actions  of  individuals,  and  contemplate
the  progress  of  our  science.  It  is  in  every  way  cheering.
We  observe,  on  all  sides,  the  number  of  those  who  are  con¬
vinced  of  its  importance,  increase.  In  every  country, — in  the
old  world  and  in  the  new  world, — in  our  own  island  and  in
our  colonies,  there  are  reports  published  of  diseases  cured
and  of  operations  performed  during  mesmeric  insensibility.
As  our  own  pages  abundantly  prove,  all  the  returns  are  in
favour  of  the  production  of  insensibility  by  means  of  mes¬
merism,  and  against  the  induction  of  the  state  by  means  of
ether,  chloroform,  &c.  In  no  one  instance  has  a  fatal  result
ensued  from  the  use  of  mesmerism  :  in  how  many  cases  have


9


Conclusion  of  Mr.  Parsons’s  Case.

ether  and  chloroform  produced  instantaneous  death,  or  in¬
duced  symptoms  which  have  not  disappeared  for  days,  weeks,
and  even  months  ?  The  natural  conclusion  is  this,— in  any
case  of  surgical  operation,  mesmerism  should  first  be  tried ;
if  that  fails,  or  the  time  permitted  is  not  sufficient  to  induce
the  required  state,  then  the  propriety  of  using  the  other
methods  may  be  taken  into  consideration.  Our  readers  are
acquainted  with  the  astounding  results  obtained  by  Dr.  Es-
daile,  at  Calcutta.  As  yet  none  of  his  gigantic  operations  have
been  reported  in  the  English  surgical  periodicals  !  What  a  re¬
flection  on  the  age  !  What  a  disgrace  to  the  editors  who  are
morally  bound  to  present  to  their  readers  all  new  facts  and
new  doctrines.  But  we  shall  return  to  this  subject.

L.  E.  Gr.  E.


II.  Conclusion  of  Mr.  Parsons’s  case  of  Cataleptic  Insanity

treated  mesmeric  ally .


Royal  Marine  Library,  Brighton,
March  3rd,  *1849.


To  Dr.  Elliotson.

Dear  Sir, — My  last  note  concerning  the  case  of  Frank
Walker,  and  published  at  p.  380  of  the  last  number  of  The
Zoistj  was  dated  December  the  18th;  but  many  interesting
circumstances  occurred  before  that  date.  I  will  therefore
state  them  as  briefly  as  I  can  from  the  day  of  his  return  from
the  country,  on  the  20th  of  October.

On  his  arrival  at  home  he  had  a  long  fit,  perhaps  produced
by  the  fatigue  of  sitting  three  hours  and  a  half  in  an  uneasy  van.
I  visited  him  the  next  day,  and  found  him  in  a  mesmeric
condition.  He  had  been  in  a  similar  condition  at  one  part  of
the  room  with  his  head  against  the  wall  for  three  quarters  of
an  hour.  I  mesmerised  him  :  and  he  thus  described  his  state.

His  head  was  very  dark  again  over  the  old  spot  (Self¬
esteem)  ;  the  frontal  and  superior  parts  (Veneration  and
Benevolence)  were  also  rather  dark :  the  sides  (Ideality)  were
quite  well :  his  stomach  and  liver  were  both  a  little  out  of
order.  But  the  mesmerism  would  put  it  all  to  rights.  He
predicted  two  fits  ;  one  at  five  minutes  past  7,  and  another
in  the  morning  a  little  after  8.

He  had  been  free  from  fits  since  I  visited  him  in  the
country.  But  latterly  he  was  subject  to  this, — If  he  ever
stooped  down  incautiously,  so  as  to  bring  his  head  low,  a
cataleptic  state  would  come  on,  for  a  time.  He  was  also
occasionally  flighty  and  confused;  which  circumstance  was
misinterpreted  by  his  relatives,  and  their  conduct  to  him


10  Conclusion  of  Mr.  Parsons's  case  of

irritated  and  distressed  him.  He  had  thus  been  gradually
getting  worse  during  the  last  fortnight  till  his  return.

Oct.  22.  He  had  the  fits  at  the  time  predicted.  I  mes¬
merised  him  twenty-five  minutes.  He  predicts  one  fit  at  6
this  evening,  another  at  10.  His  mother  told  me  that  he
complained  last  night  of  a  choaking  in  his  throat  whenever
he  swallowed,  and  that  on  one  side  his  jaw  ached  and  the
gums  also.  I  was  suffering  at  that  time  from  sore  throat  and
inflamed  gums,  with  an  aching  tooth.  I  asked  him  to  look
at  me,  and  find  out  if  anything  was  the  matter  with  me.  His
reply  was,  “  The  stomach  looks  dark  and  the  bottom  of  the
face.”  “  Put  your  hand  on  the  part,”  said  I,  and  he  placed
it  exactly  on  the  spot  where  I  felt  the  pain.

Oct.  23.  His  fits  were  this  day  attended  by  much  delirium,
and  his  mother  is  much  alarmed  about  him.  He  says,  that  he
is  getting  better :  but  that  it  will  be  always  better,  when  he
falls  in  his  fits,  to  let  him  alone,  than  to  touch  him  as  she
had  done.

When  mesmerising  him  to-day,  I  tried  the  method  acci¬
dentally  discovered  by  M.  Petetin,  and  successfully  applied
to  his  patient  (see  Rapports  de  M.  Eoissac,  p.  309)  :  namely,
I  placed  one  hand  on  his  head  and  the  other  on  his  epigastrium .
I  asked  him  if  this  produced  any  peculiar  effect.

A.  It  causes  a  cloud  to  rise  out  of  the  dark  spot  on  my
head,  and  takes  the  darkness  away  faster.

I  now  removed  the  hand  from  the  stomach,  and  asked
him  if  any  change  took  place.

A.  It  does  not  go  away  so  fast  now.

Before  doing  this,  I  asked  him  which  method  was  the
most  efficacious  to  remove  the  darkness — mesmerising  down¬
wards  over  the  spot,  or  making  tractions  from  it.  He  said,
“  the  latter.”

Oct.  24th.  I  was  sent  for  to  him  at  11  o’clock,  as  he  was
very  ill  indeed.  I  found  him  tetanic  and  convulsed.  His
mother  said,  that,  since  3  o’clock  yesterday,  he  has  been  “  full
of  fits,”  and  drawn  and  twisted  in  a  most  extraordinary  man¬
ner.  He  had  rested  with  his  head  and  feet  on  the  floor :  his
body  forming  an  arch  above,  so  that  she  could  have  crawled
under  him,  ( opisthotonos ,)  and  he  had  knocked  his  head  and
limbs  against  the  bricks  of  the  floor  very  violently.

When  mesmerised,  he  said,  “  He  was  not  so  well,  but  that
these  were  spasmodic  fits  which  would  be  removed  in  a  few
days ;  the  faster  they  came  the  better,  they  would  be  over
the  sooner, — his  head  was  too  full  of  blood.”  This  he  had
stated  a  day  or  two  ago  also.  I  mesmerised  him  again  in  the
same  way  as  yesterday,  with  both  hands  :  and  he  said  that  it


Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically .  11

drew  the  blood  from  his  head  downwards  faster  than  the  ordi¬
nary  passes  which  I  had  at  first  tried.  I  mesmerised  some
water  for  him  to  drink  when  I  was  away.

Oct.  25th.  I  found  him  much  better,  and  mesmerised  him
half  an  hour.  His  fits  will  come  on  at  1  o'clock  and  last
nearly  all  day.  I  again  mesmerised  some  water  for  him.

Oct.  26th  &  27th.  Going  on  well.  His  sight,  however,  is
affected  by  the  fits,  so  that  he  is  at  times  almost  blind.  I
again  asked  him  how  it  was  he  told  the  time  of  day  by  the
sun  and  a  glass  of  water  (as  I  have  elsewhere  recorded).*  He
replied,  “  That  was  only  nonsense  sir,  I  did  not  tell  it  by  that,
and  yet  I  did  tell  it  somehow  :  when  I  wanted  to  know  it,  it
came  into  my  mind.,}

28th,  29th  &  30th.  Going  on  well :  but  still  his  fits  are
very  frequent — and  he  complains  much  of  a  pain  in  his  gums.
I  myself  have  been  suffering  so  much  from  tooth-ache  that
I  scarcely  slept  all  last  night.

Oct.  31st — Nov.  1st.  I  did  not  visit  him  these  two  days,
being  in  such  a  state  of  inflammation  that  I  could  not  leave
the  house.  After  applying  leeches,  in  vain,  I  had  the  molar
tooth  extracted  at  10  o'clock  at  night ;  and  an  hour  after¬
wards  Mrs.  Walker  sent  a  messenger  to  me  to  say  that  Frank
was  so  violent  that  they  could  do  nothing  with  him.  As  I
was  now  free  from  pain,  I  mesmerised  a  jug  of  water,  and,
wrapping  it  about  with  a  shawl  cravat  which  I  had  worn  all
day,  I  strictly  charged  her  to  carry  it  so  as  not  to  touch  the
vessel  with  her  hands,  not  to  look  at  it,  nor  to  stop  to  speak
with  any  one  on  the  way.  I  then  made  a  mental  effort  to
mesmerise  the  boy  during  the  interval  that  must  elapse  before
she  would  arrive.

Nov.  2nd.  The  method  succeeded  perfectly.  When  she
arrived  he  was  quite  still — he  eagerly  drank  some  of  the
water — and,  twisting  the  shawl  round  his  body,  became  calm
and  remained  so  all  night.

Nov.  6th.  Going  on  better.  His  attacks,  which  he  con¬
tinues  regularly  to  predict,  come  on  later  and  later  each  day ;
he  says  that  he  shall  be  soon  rid  of  them.

Nov.  7th.  To-day  he  announced  that  his  fits  will  cease  on
Friday,  November  10th.

Nov.  8th.  Mesmerised  as  usual.  His  eye-sight  has  so  failed
him,  that  I  have  got  him  a  pair  of  spectacles.  He  says  he
shall  not  get  rid  of  this  ailment  when  he  is  otherwise  well.
He  was  always  near-sighted.

Nov.  9th.  Adheres  to  his  prediction  that  he  shall  lose  his
fits  to-morrow.  I  now  regularly  mesmerise  water  for  him

*  No.  XXIV.  p.  374.


12  Conclusion  of  Mr.  Parsons’s  case  of

before  I  leave.  He  says,  it  calms  him ;  but,  if  any  person
touches  the  jug,  the  water  is  spoiled  and  he  cannot  drink  it :
it  even  becomes  unpleasant  and  worse  than  ordinary  water  to
him.  His  brother  the  other  day  removed  the  jug  from  one
table  to  another,  and,  although  Frank  was  not  in  the  room
when  this  was  done,  no  sooner  had  he  touched  the  jug  than
he  cried  out,  “  Somebody  has  spoiled  my  water,”  and  he
threw  it  away.

The  nature  of  his  fits  is  much  the  same  as  his  previous
maniacal  state :  but  in  the  intervals  he  is  perfectly  sane,  and
becomes  more  like  himself,  his  mother  says,  every  day.

Saturday,  Nov.  11th.  The  event  has  confirmed  his  pre¬
diction  :  he  has  had  no  fits  since  Friday  morning.

Tuesday,  Nov.  14th.  He  still  continues  free  from  fits —
but  he  fainted  once  yesterday ;  this  he  says  was  only  from
weakness,  and  is  of  no  consequence.

Nov.  16th,  17th,  18tli.  During  these  days,  matters  have
gone  on  tolerably  with  a  trifling  exception,  owing  to  the  dis¬
turbance  occasioned  by  the  visit  of  his  old  medical  attendant,
Mr.  Wilton,  with  a  gentleman  who  seemed  to  exercise  an
injurious  influence  on  him  when  he  approached  him  and
placed  his  hand  on  his  heart  to  feel  the  state  of  the  pulsation.
This  brought  on  a  fainting.

I  had  for  a  minute  each  day  tried  his  power  of  reading
what  was  placed  on  the  epigastrium.  He  read  the  word
“  Holloway”  on  a  letter — and  “  William  Henry”  on  my  card  :
and  a  ticket  which  I  drew  from  my  pocket  he  stated  correctly —
to  be  a  ticket  for  admission  to  the  mesmeric  lecture,  although
it  was  perfectly  concealed  by  my  hands,  and  he  could  not
possibly  have  seen  one  of  the  tickets  beforehand.  Yet  his
explanation  was  curious.  He  told  it  by  the  flame  on  it :  he
could  not  see  the  words.

On  this  day  (Saturday)  his  mother  was  a  good  deal  put
out.  Frank  had  a  delirious  fit  last  night,  which  lasted  two
hours.  She  will  have  it,  that  the  trials  to  make  him  read
have  hurt  him.  He  says  no,  it  was  the  gentleman  touching
him ;  but,  lest  both  may  have  had  a  share  in  it,  I  determined
to  discontinue  such  trials  in  his  case.

A  day  or  two  ago,  I  asked  him  to  find  out  some  method
by  which  he  could  prevent  that  extreme  susceptibility  to  my
presence,  as  I  wished  sometimes  to  see  him  as  other  people
saw  him :  and  to-day  he  announced  to  me,  that  he  thought
copper  worn  by  him  would  have  this  effect.

Nov.  19th.  He  had  another  bad  fit  at  10.

Nov.  20th.  I  told  him  yesterday  to  keep  two  pennies  in
his  waistcoat  pockets  till  1  came  :  and  to-day,  when  I  entered


Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically .  13

the  room,  he  arose,  quite  awake,  advanced  to  me  and  took
my  hand,  saying  “Good  morning,  sir;  how  do  you  do?

This  was  the  first  time  I  had  ever  seen  him  in  his  waking,
sane  state ;  and  consequently  the  first  time  he  had  seen  me.
I  asked  him  this  question,  and  he  replied  “  No,  sir,  I  have
never  seen  you  before  that  I  remember.”

I  asked  him  a  few  questions  about  himself,  and  then
desired  him  to  remove  the  pennies.  He  took  one  out  well
enough,  but  was  long  in  getting  out  the  other :  and,  as  soon
as  it  was  out  of  his  pocket,  he  was  asleep,  and  both  pence
rolled  from  his  hand  on  the  floor.  He  was  then  attracted
towards  me  in  the  usual  manner.  After  I  had  mesmerised
him  and  the  water,  he  observed: — “The  water  will  not  have
any  effect  on  me,  sir,  if  I  wear  the  copper.”

“  You  can  take  it  out  then  except  at  such  times  as  others
are  near  you  or  you  wish  to  render  yourself  less  susceptible.
Can  you  not  ?”

“Yes,  sir,  I  think  that  will  do:  but  you  must  not  touch
the  pennies,  or  they  will  lose  their  power.”  I  had  done  so  in
lifting  them  from  the  floor  and  placing  them  on  the  table.  I
now,  therefore,  blew  strongly  on  them.  I  now  desired  him
to  remark  how  the  water  became  mesmerised.  He  thus  des¬
cribed  it : — “A  fluid  comes  from  your  fingers  and  goes  to  the
bottom  of  the  water :  it  then  comes  up  again  like  a  smoke,
till  the  whole  water  seems  filled  with  the  smoke.”

I  then  asked,  “  Does  it  come  at  times  faster  and  at  other
times  slower,”  and  I  made  pauses  of  the  will  to  check  and
renew  the  flow  at  intervals ;  but  he  did  not  observe  any  dif¬
ference  in  the  rapidity  with  which  it  emanated.

Nov.  21st.  I  found  him  in  his  normal  condition  :  but,  as
soon  as  I  removed  the  pennies  from  his  waistcoat  pockets,  he
relapsed  into  the  mesmerised  state.  He  says,  that  his  mes¬
merised  water  yesterday  was  spoiled  by  himself  touching  it,
while  he  had  the  pennies  on  him ;  that,  then,  he  is  like  any
other  person,  and  it  will  be  necessary  to  remove  the  water
up  stairs  to  be  out  of  danger,  so  that  he  may  not  inadvertently
spoil  it :  he  will  soon  be  able  to  do  without  the  copper.

Nov.  23rd.  As  my  time  was  not  very  regular,  and  as  he
wore  the  pennies  sometimes  an  hour  before  I  arrived,  I  find
that  an  antagonistic  influence  is  exerted  by  the  copper,  so
that  the  mesmerism  is  neutralized.  The  consequence  has  been
a  flightiness  of  manner  and  a  confusion  of  thought  during  the
lucid  periods.  I  therefore  ordered  him  to  discontinue  its  use.
It  was  well  to  know  a  means  by  which  he  could  be  kept  in
the  waking  condition,  if  necessary  :  but  it  was  not  safe  to
make  a  dailv  use  of  it.


14?  Conclusion  of  Mr.  Parsons’s  case  of

His  mesmerised  water  he  much  prizes,  and  prefers  it  to
his  tea,  which  he  never  takes  when  he  has  the  water ;  and,  if
any  accident  spoils  it,  he  much  misses  it.  On  this  account
I  found  him  poorly.

Nov.  25th.  For  the  last  few  days  he  has  had  a  fainting
at  about  4  o’clock  in  the  morning  and  occasionally  at  night.
He  says  they  are  only  debility,  and  that  they  diminish  daily
in  intensity,  and  that  the  last  two  days  have  differed  from
previous  days  in  as  far  as  he  has  retained  consciousness
throughout,  whereas  he  lost  it  entirely  in  the  earlier  fits.
He  made  use  of  a  droll  figure  to  explain  them.  “They  are
the  carcases  of  the  fits,  sir ;  they  are  all  going  away.”

Nov.  28th.  He  was  not  so  well  last  night,  and  had  a  bad
fit,  and  another  just  before  my  arrival  this  morning.  He
wants  fresh  air,  which  he  cannot  take  while  he  is  mesmerised ;
he  sees  in  the  nerves  of  the  epigastrium  a  whiteness  not  pro¬
per  or  healthy.  This  was  in  part  altered  by  directing  the
points  of  my  fingers  towards  it.  His  heart  is  enlarged,  but
it  has  always  been  so.  His  mother  states,  that  in  these  last
fits  his  heart  does  not  palpitate  at  all ;  in  the  former  fits  it
beat  violently.

29th.  Still  very  poorly :  directed  mesmerism  to  the  epi¬
gastrium  particularly,  as  that  was  most  in  fault.  After  ten
minutes’  general  slow  passes :  then  said  he  was  full.  If  his
mother  touches  him  when  in  the  fits,  he  is  instantly  disturbed,
so  that  she  finds  it  better  to  leave  him  alone  when  he  falls,
till  he  comes  to  of  himself,  as  he  does  with  a  deep  sigh,  and
then  he  starts  up  wildly.

Dec.  1st.  Rather  better :  but  another  fit  last  night.

Dec.  2nd.  Very  ill,  at  half-past  9,  and  he  had  very  alarm¬
ing  fits  till  nearly  12  last  night:  his  mother  says,  she  never
saw  him  worse.  He  cannot  tell  me  whence  this  is.  “The
epigastrium  looks  better  but  is  far  from  right.”

Dec.  3rd.  He  was  very  ill,  and  I  much  alarmed  at  his
state:  his  fit  yesterday  was  quite  maniacal  and  tetanic.

Dec.  4th.  I  learned  to-day  a  fresh  thing.  His  mother
tells  me  that  he  has  been  taken  ill  just  before  Christmas  every
year,  for  the  last  four  years :  and  that  the  cause  in  the  first
instance,  she  suspects,  was  a  fright.

Dec.  5th.  He  had  no  fit  last  night.

Dec.  7th.  He  had  one  on  the  6th,  and  thinks  they  will
probably  now  intermit.  He  had  a  very  bad  delirious  fit  again
last  night,  which  was  of  long  duration.

Dec.  8th.  Again  a  very  violent  fit,  and  his  head  is  hot
to-day :  he  looks  very  ill.  He  cannot  see  any  thing  con¬
cerning  himself,  nor  suggest  anything  to  do  him  good ;  but


Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically .  15

still  says,  that  if  mesmerism  does  not  cure  him  nothing  else
can.  I  mesmerised  the  head  locally,  where  I  felt  the  heat.
He  says  it  looks  red  at  that  place.

Dec.  11th.  He  has  been  very  ill  to  this  day,  but  now  is  a
shade  better,  and  had  no  fit  last  night :  and  he  says,  he  shall
have  none  to-night.

Dec.  12th.  Much  better.  He  will  not  be  so  susceptible
the  day  after  to-morrow.

Dec.  13th.  Still  going  well.  When  I  came  in  to-day,  he
remained  awake  till  I  went  close  to  him  :  he  says  he  shall  be
able  to  speak  to  me  to-morrow  before  he  goes  to  sleep.  His
head  and  epigastrium  are  well  in  appearance,  and  his  dimin¬
ished  susceptibility  is  a  sign  of  recovery.  No  fit  yesterday.

14th.  He  remained  awake  till  I  took  his  hand.

15th.  He  went  out  for  a  walk  for  the  first  time.

18th.  All  well,  except  a  little  excitement  from  some
visitors  which  gave  him  the  head-ache  :  this  was  soon  removed
by  the  mesmerism.  He  now  regularly  takes  a  walk  once  or
twice  in  the  day,  and  improves  fast.

Dec.  26th.  To-day  the  water  was  discontinued  as  it  has
lost  its  influence.  He  announces  that  after  next  week  he  will  be
well  enough  to  do  without  the  mesmerism  on  alternate  days.

Jan.  4th.  As  the  boy  was  now  much  better,  and  in  his
general  manner  more  particularly  evidenced  recovery  from
his  illness,  he  began  to  feel  anxious  to  be  profitably  employed ;
and,  as  a  situation  in  a  very  respectable  bookselling  and  sta¬
tionery  business  was  about  to  become  vacant,  he  was  anxious
to  secure  it,  since  the  young  man  about  to  leave  it  was  an  ac¬
quaintance  and  had  assured  him  he  was  fully  equal  to  perform
all  the  duties  of  the  situation.  I  thought  the  boy  was  not
yet  strong  enough  or  well  enough  for  it ;  but  as,  if  he  were,
it  was  a  very  desirable  employment  for  him,  I  seconded  the
mother’s  request,  and  so  earnestly  recommended  Frank  to
the  head  of  the  establishment  that  I  believe  he  was  thereby
induced  to  try  him.  I  asked  Frank  if  he  thought  himself
capable  of  undertaking  the  employment,  and  he  replied  that
after  next  week  he  would  be,  and  then  if  he  were  to  be  mes¬
merised  every  Sunday  for  a  few  weeks  it  would  remove  what
little  excitement  the  novel  fatigue  of  the  employment  might
produce.

I  was  myself  very  sceptical  of  this,  and  had  determined
in  my  own  mind  to  mesmerise  him  every  evening  after  the
business  of  the  day,  as  I  feared  the  anxious  wish  of  the  boy
had  obscured  his  lucidity  on  this  point.  Yesterday,  therefore,
with  a  view  of  ascertaining  if  he  could  as  yet  do  without  a
day’s  mesmerism,  I  did  not  visit  him,  to  test  the  effects  before


16  Conclusion  of  Mr.  Parsonses  case  of

I  tried  the  alternate  day  system  on  the  following  week  at  his
suggestion.  It  is  true  that  in  doing  so  I  was  departing  from
the  strict  instructions  of  the  somnambule,  but  I  was  rather
glad  I  had  done  so  from  the  evidence  it  afforded  of  the  value
and  importance  to  the  boy  of  the  five  minutes*  mesmerism  I
gave  him  each  day.  I  was  sent  for  in  the  evening,  as  the
boy  had  been  taken  ill  at  8  o’clock.  I  found  him  in  a  faint¬
ing  fit,  and  to  my  surprise  he  did  not  manifest  any  suscep¬
tibility  to  my  approach  ;  his  hands  being  quite  relaxed,  and
when  I  lifted  them  they  fell  powerless.  I  began  to  mesmerise
him  by  laying  my  hand  on  his  head  ;  but  no  cataleptic  state
appeared  for  some  seconds.  I  had  great  difficulty  to  make
him  speak,  but,  when  he  did,  he  said  there  was  no  harm  done,
only  that  he  had  missed  the  mesmerism,  as  I  ought  not  to
have  omitted  a  day  till  Monday  next.  During  the  last  relapse
his  eyesight  has  been  very  dim,  so  as  to  prevent  him  from  em¬
ploying  himself,  but  it  is  now  nearly  restored.  He  was  re¬
gularly  mesmerised  till  Tuesday,  Jan.  9,  when  he  refused  it
after  I  had  put  him  to  sleep  to  ask  him,  as  he  did  not
require  it.

Wednesday.  Mesmerised  for  five  minutes,  and  not  to  be
mesmerised  till  Friday,  on  which  day  I  had  ordered  him  to
meet  me  at  the  house  of  a  lady,  also  a  patient,  who  wished
very  much  to  see  the  lad.  He  preceded  me  there  by  a  very
few  minutes,  and  was  mesmerised  seven  minutes  as  he  di¬
rected.  As  he  could  not  wake  while  I  was  in  the  room,  I
left  him.  My  friend  reports  that  he  awoke  in  about  five
minutes  after  I  left,  and,  after  giving  him  a  little  time  to
recover  from  his  confusion,  they  spoke  very  sparingly  to  him,
gave  him  a  glass  of  wine,  and  he  went  away.

I  went  again  to  him  on  Sunday,  which  was  to  be  the  last
day,  as  he  was  to  go  into  his  new  situation  on  Monday,  when
his  mother  with  some  temper  in  her  manner  told  me  he  was
gone  out  to  dine.  She  said  he  had  come  home  very  flighty
on  Friday  (this  was  the  wine),  and  that  it  hurt  the  boy  to
have  so  many  questions  asked  him.

I  was  a  good  deal  nettled  at  this  impertinent  pride  in  the
woman,  after  devoting  myself  to  her  son  as  I  had  for  so  many
months,  and  I  answered  her  sharply,  as  I  did  not  feel  dis¬
posed  to  put  up  with  her  airs.  She  retorted  very  saucily,
and  told  me  that  Frank  would  do  very  well  without  the  mes¬
merism  till  next  week  :  he  thought  so,  and  so  did  she.  “  And
I  think  otherwise,”  I  replied,  “  but  as  you  have  chosen  to
send  him  away  when  it  was  so  important  that  nothing  wrong
should  occur,  you  must  take  the  consequence.”

Monday,  Jan.  16th.  At  6  o’clock  this  evening  I  was  sent


Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically .  17

for  (I  had  an  uneasy  impression  all  day  about  him) :  he  was
taken  very  ill  and  was  in  a  fit.  I  went  to  him  at  7 ,  and
found  his  jaw  firmly  locked,  and  his  whole  body  rigid ;  but,
to  my  surprize,  there  was  no  sign  of  mesmeric  attraction.
I  then  pointed  to  the  poor  boy,  and  said  angrily  to  the  abom¬
inably  stupid  woman — his  mother,  “Now  I  suppose  you’ll
admit  I  know  more  of  the  boy  than  he  or  you.  This  is  only
what  I  expected  from  your  obstinate  folly.”  Instead  of  ad¬
mitting  this,  however,  she  charged  me  with  having  caused  it
by  sending  him  to  see  those  ladies  on  Friday,  and  was  alto¬
gether  so  insolent  that  I  left  the  house,  as  I  found  I  was  not
in  a  fit  temper  to  mesmerise  him.  I  tried  for  a  few  minutes,
but  I  could  not  release  his  jaws,  nor  succeed  in  affecting  him
mesmerically.  He  looked  at  times  quite  idiotic,  his  eyes
squinting  extremely ;  suddenly  he  started,  and  laughed  mania¬
cally.  It  appeared  that,  at  the  very  threshold  of  success,  I
had  suddenly  lost  all  control  over  him,  and  must  leave  him
in  the  same  state  as  I  found  him.  I  was  depressed  exceed¬
ingly, — utterly  disgusted  with  the  mother,  who  dotes  on  the
boy,  but  who  has  been  the  greatest  obstacle  to  his  recovery ;
and  I  went  home  grieved  and  disheartened  to  the  last  degree.
So  much  were  my  spirits  prostrated  and  my  nerves  shaken  by
the  disappointment,  that  I  was  unhappy  and  superstitious ;
a  horror  of  darkness  possessed  me  that  would  not  yield  to
reasoning  or  prayers,  and  I  never  in  my  life  received  such  a
shock  of  disappointment.  All  night  I  was  disturbed,  waking
the  greater  part  and  restless  sleep  the  remainder;  and,  although
the  daylight,  which  I  had  for  an  hour  observed  to  dawn  from
darkness,  in  some  measure  released  me,  I  was  not  free  from
the  vague  and  horrible  oppression  even  when  up  and  dressed.

I  had  to  see  another  patient  earlier  in  the  day,  and  at  one
o’clock  I  went  anxiously  to  Frank,  trembling  inwardly  at
what  I  might  find.

The  mother  was  broken  hearted,  pointing  the  way  up
stairs  and  saying,  “  Go  and  see  for  yourself,  I  can’t  bear  it,”
in  a  way  which  said,  “  Go  and  see  what  you  have  done.”

I  must  say  this  revived  me.  Indignation  at  the  prepos¬
terous  position  she  placed  me  in  by  her  folly  rebraced  my
nerves.  I  almost  expected  to  find  him  dead.

He  was  in  bed  up  stairs,  with  his  head  thrust  under  the
clothes.  He  had  remained  nearly  in  that  state  since  I  left
him.  Once  he  had  roused  and  spoken  sensibly ;  during  which
interval  they  learnt  from  him,  that  he  had  fallen  down  twice
in  his  way  home,  that  his  sight  had  quite  failed,  and  he
became  stone  blind  before  he  reached  his  mother’s  door,  he
then  relapsed  and  had  continued  the  same  as  I  found  him.

VOL.  VII.  c


18


Conclusion  of  Mr.  Parsons’s  case  of


I  now  approached  him,  and  made  a  pass  over  his  arm  ;  I
lifted  it,  and  it  remained  up,  quite  cataleptic;  I  tried  traction,
but  could  produce  no  effect.  I  then  mesmerised  his  head  a
few  minutes  and  fancied  that  the  countenance  improved.  I
lifted  him  and  laid  him  straight  on  the  bed,  and,  after  mes¬
merising  him  carefully  for  ten  minutes,  the  attraction  slowly
developed  itself  and  became  strong.

I  now  demesmerised  his  mouth  and  spoke  to  him,  but  he
made  no  effort  to  reply,  and  did  not  appear  to  notice  my
questions.  I  now  put  my  mouth  down  to  the  epigastrium
and  questioned  him,  and  his  countenance  instantly  shewed
that  he  heard  me,  and  he  tried  to  answer  me ;  but  his  lips
were  too  rigid.  After  dispelling  this  state  by  blowing  on
them,  I  obtained  this  account — “  He  was  very  poorly,  and  it
was  occasioned  by  the  excitement  of  Sunday,  by  dining  out,
and  the  conversation  which  ensued,  and  by  the  work  of  the
shop,  all  coming  on  him  at  once  :  he  had  missed  the  mes¬
merism  on  Sunday  which  ought  not  to  have  been  omitted.
His  visit  on  Friday  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  it, — that
rather  pleased  him  and  did  him  good.  He  must  be  mes¬
merised  for  an  hour  :  he  would  sleep  half  an  hour  before  he
awoke,  but  I  must  demesmerise  him  by  a  few  passes  over  the
epigastrium  before  I  left  him,  or  he  would  not  awake  till  next
day.  He  would  have  a  fit  at  6  o^clock,  but  must  not  be  mes¬
merised  again  till  to-morrow  at  12.  He  was  very  lucid  ;  and
correctly  stated  several  things  going  on  down  stairs.

“  The  reason  I  could  not  influence  him  last  night  was,
that  I  was  so  astonished  at  his  state  that  I  lost  all  power  of
will  over  him.”

His  head  he  described  as  dark,  but  lower  down  than  before ;
as  near  as  I  could  make  out,  over  the  organ  of  Concentrative-
ness,  as  if  the  effort  to  apply  himself  to  the  various  details  of
his  new  employment  had  overtaxed  him.  I  blew  strongly  on
the  part  for  some  seconds.

When  I  left  him  and  came  down  stairs  (three  stories  from
the  ground  floor),  the  mother  was  stating  her  own  view  of  the
case  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  D - ,  who  was  with  her.  I  contra¬

dicted  her,  and  she  began  another  altercation.  Immediately,
the  young  woman  came  down  to  say  that  Frank  was  very  ill
again,  and  I  returned  up  stairs.  I  calmed  him  by  a  few  passes,
and  asked  him  what  was  the  matter.  “  The  altercation,  Sir,
— you  have  been  talking  about  me,  it  always  affects  me.”
As  I  was  leaving  the  room,  his  body  was  raised  up  in  the  bed
and  thrown  forward  towards  me,  so  as  almost  to  draw  him
out  of  bed.  I  had  to  make  throws  at  him  to  compel  him  to
lie  down  again,  so  conspicuously  was  the  attraction  renewed.


Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically .


19


Jan.  17th.  He  is  much  better,  and  about  as  he  was  a
fortnight  ago.  His  head  is  hotter  at  the  sides,  and  he  has  a
great  disposition  to  write  and  read  as  before  when  this  part
was  excited  :  the  back  of  the  head  was  much  better.

Jan.  18th.  He  could  only  hear  at  the  epigastrium.  I
asked  him  how  this  was.  I  then  tried  by  speaking  to  the
palms  of  his  hands,  but  without  success ;  but  he  directed  me
to  make  three  passes  along  the  palm  of  that  hand,  and  he
should  then  be  able  to  hear  at  the  face  as  usual.  I  did  so,
and  it  was  as  he  promised,  but  the  fingers  of  that  hand  became
quite  rigid  and  remained  so  for  some  minutes.

Once  a  change  came  over  him,  and  he  fell  back  and  could
only  hear  again  at  the  epigastrium.

Jan.  19th.  Still  improving.  He  can  hear  to-day  in  the
usual  way.

Jan.  20th.  He  has  been  very  ill  in  the  night.  I  mesmer¬
ised  him  ten  minutes.  He  looks  very  ill  and  has  been  in  con¬
tinual  fits  almost  since  I  left  him  yesterday.  I  was  sent  for
again  at  9  o'clock  at  night  and  found  him  in  a  fearful  state,
looking  more  like  a  demon  than  a  human  being, — his  eyes
glared,  he  champed  his  teeth,  and  made  most  hideous  grimaces,
winking  his  eyes  alternately  with  great  rapidity,  then  squint¬
ing  intensely,  casting  his  head  and  limbs  about,  and  arching
his  body  from  the  chair.

I  attempted  to  mesmerise  him,  but  failed  to  make  any
impression  on  him.  I  therefore  sat  by  him  coolly  to  wait  my
time,  and  in  about  half  an  hour,  after  my  renewing  the  attempt
from  time  to  time  as  the  violence  of  the  fit  abated,  he  suddenly
manifested  attraction  and  became  somnambulic,  his  counte¬
nance  wearing  the  calm  serenity  common  to  it  in  that  state.
He  could  only  hear  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach  and  directed  me
to  give  him  half  an  hour's  mesmerism.  His  heart  was  very
bad,  but  when  I  directed  him  to  look  at  it  he  said,  “  I  cannot
see  it,  Sir."  During  the  mesmerism,  he  twice  almost  lost  the
power  of  answering,  and  I  believe  the  fits  were  contending
with  the  mesmerism  and  almost  overpowering  it ;  but  all  at
once  he  resumed  his  usual  manner  and  position,  and  said,
“  I  am  better  now.  Sir,  it's  gone  off."

Sunday,  Jan.  21st.  Looks  better,  but  has  been  in  fits  all
night  till  eight,  but  not  so  violent  as  yesterday.  His  heart  is
much  better ;  his  head  in  front  is  also  better,  which  was  very
bad  on  Saturday.

Jan.  22nd.  He  looks  much  better,  but  he  has  been  ill  all
night  till  8  this  morning.

23rd.  Rather  better.

24th.  I  found  him  looking  very  ill  and  could  not  get  any

c  2


20


Conclusion  of  Mr.  Parsons’s  case  of


answer  from  him  for  some  time.  Dr.  K - and  Mr.  H -

had  been  to  see  him,  and  he  was  conscious  of  what  they  said,
which  appeared  to  be  to  disparage  what  had  been  done  for  the
boy, — the  former  saying  that  he  ought  to  have  been  left  alone
after  he  came  back  from  the  country.  I  mesmerised  him,
and  during  the  time  the  mother  began  one  of  her  annoying
altercations  with  me,  which  threw  the  boy  out  of  my  control.
She  will  persist  that  all  this  mischief  is  the  consequence  of
Mr.  Maitland  coming  to  see  him  with  me  and  my  trial  to  make
him  read  a  card  two  different  times  :  the  boy  himself  says
that  it  did  not  hurt  him  at  all.  His  mother  says  he  speaks
quite  different  about  it  when  he  is  awake  :  I  answered,  “  the
boy  knows  nothing  about  it  when  he  is  awake.”

On  questioning  the  boy  as  soon  as  I  could  succeed  in
restoring  him  to  a  condition  to  reply,  he  said  that  his  mother
took  what  he  said  in  his  raving *  for  truth,  and  that  she
wanted  him  to  go  mad  by  her  w  ay  of  going  on.  After  vainly
endeavouring  to  reason  with  her,  I  left  the  boy  much  dis¬
turbed.

Jan.  25th.  He  had  a  bleedingf  from  the  nose  yesterday
which  has  greatly  relieved  him,  and  to-day  he  is  much  better  :
he  has  been  without  a  fit  to-day.

26th.  Much  better;  his  nose  has  bled  again,  but  he  has
had  no  fits  ;  he  announces  that  he  shall  be  well  on  Monday.

27th.  No  fits — a  slight  faintness,  but  no  loss  of  conscious¬
ness  :  he  looks  much  better.  I  now  regularly  mesmerise  him
only  ten  minutes  each  day.

28th.  Still  better — only  five  minutes  directed.

29th.  He  says  he  is  quite  well — only  four  minutes.

30th.  His  heart  was  bad  a  little  at  two  in  the  morning.

31st.  All  well.

Deb.  1st.  Not  so  well — another  attack  of  the  heart.  He
now  says  he  shall  not  require  to  be  mesmerised  any  more
after  Monday,  but  that  he  will  not  be  able  yet  to  do  anything,

*  When  Frank  was  taken  ill  as  he  came  home  from  the  shop  on  Monday-
evening,  his  mother,  while  he  was  in  a  maniacal  state,  said  she  thought  some
bad  boys  must  have  waylaid  and  hooted  him  on  the  road,  (as  had  been  the  case
once  before  when  he  was  out  of  doors  for  a  walk,  they  believing  him  to  be  mad.)
Frank  thereupon  started  up  in  his  chair,  ground  his  teeth,  and  said  aloud,
“  Devils  !”  I  have  no  doubt  that  this  was  suggested  to  his  insane  mind  by  what
the  mother  said :  it  was  unconsciously  apprehended  and  applied,  but  it  turned
out  that  nothing  of  the  kind  had  happened  to  him  on  this  occasion.  I  have  also
no  doubt  that  what  the  mother  was  continually  saying  in  his  presence  (that  my
trials  of  his  clairvoyance  and  the  ladies  questioning  him  had  hurt  him)  during  his
mad  fits  suggested  the  theme  of  his  ravings,  which  took  the  direction  of  her  own
observations  ;  this  was  received  by  her  as  strong  and  incontestible  confirmations
of  her  views,  for  she  continually  cited  such  instances.

+  It  will  be  remembered  that  a  few  days  ago  he  said  that  his  head  was  too
full  of  blood.


Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically .  21

and  will  get  gradually  better.  It  is  surprising  to  observe  the
rapid  improvement  in  the  countenance  which  the  mesmerism
produces.  I  find  him  pale  and  haggard,  and  after  five
minute’s  mesmerism  I  leave  him  with  a  good  healthy  colour
and  his  lips  full  and  rosy.

Feb.  2nd  and  3rd.  Going  on  well.

Sunday  4th.  Mesmerised  him  for  the  last  time  for  five
minutes ;  he  will  not  require  to  be  mesmerised  again,  but  it
will  be  better  that  he  should  be  put  to  sleep  and  questioned
as  to  his  fitness  before  he  again  undertakes  any  employment.

March  7th.  The  mother  promised  to  let  me  know  if  the  boy
was  ill;  but  as  I  heard  nothing  from  her  I  sent  to  ask
about  him.  The  message  returned  was  not  intelligible.  I
therefore  wrote  a  note  to  the  boy,  requesting  a  reply  during
the  following  day  informing  me  how  he  had  been  during  the
interval,  and  how  he  was  now.  As  I  got  no  reply,  I  sent
again,  and  ascertained  the  following  important  particulars  : —

The  boy  had  gone  on  very  well  till  the  day  I  sent  this
note  with  the  exception  of  trifling  symptoms  of  liver  or  bowel
inactivity,  for  which  the  mother  had  sent  for  a  powder  to
Mr.  Wilton,  as  she  had  determined  she  would  not  send  again
to  me;  and  that  the  boy  might  not  hold  any  communication
with  me  she  had  thrown  my  note  into  the  fire,  and  concealed
from  her  son  that  I  had  written  to  him.  But  she  was  not  so
to  escape  the  punishment  of  her  ungrateful  conduct,  for  the
fact  came  to  his  knowledge  thus.  My  errand  boy  met  Frank’s
brother  in  the  street  and  told  him  that  he  had  taken  his
brother  a  letter,  and  when  the  boy  went  home  to  his  dinner
he  spoke  of  it  to  Frank,  who  immediately  started  up  and
asked  for  it ;  this  completely  disconcerted  his  mother,  and
she  refused  to  let  him  have  it,  and,  it  may  be,  made  some  dis¬
paraging  remark  about  me.  The  boy  was  extremely  excited,
accused  her  of  behaving  ungratefully,  and  got  into  a  furious
rage  which  ended  in  a  complete  fit  of  mania  and  catalepsy.
She  then  sent  for  Mr.  Wilton  and  put  the  boy  into  his  hands,
saying  that  she  would  not  have  him  mesmerised  any  more.
Thus  by  her  own  misconduct  she  brought  back  the  boy’s  dis¬
order  after  all  the  trouble  and  anxiety  it  had  cost  me  to
remove  it.  The  true  explanation  of  this  conduct  is,  that  I
told  her  plainly  that  her  conduct  was  infamous  and  ungrateful
when  she  was  so  insolent  to  me  on  the  occasion  of  the  boy’s
last  relapse,  and  she  has  never  forgiven  me.  The  last  fortnight
of  my  attendance  was  exceedingly  unpleasant  to  me,  as  I  had
to  submit  almost  daily  to  sulkiness  or  insolence  from  her,
which  never  failed  to  throw  the  boy  into  a  disturbed  state,
and  thus  hindered  the  full  benefit  of  my  visits.  She  also  spoke


22  Conclusion  of  Mr.  Parsons’s  case  of

ill  of  me  to  the  boy  in  my  absence,  but  was  compelled  to
forego  that  luxury  from  the  dreadful  effect  it  had  on  him.
She  afterwards  confessed  that  “  anything  spoken  against  me
was  like  daggers  to  the  boy this  she  could  only  have  dis¬
covered  by  making  such  observations.  Throughout  the  treat¬
ment  I  had  great  difficulties  to  contend  with  altogether  apart
from  the  arduous  nature  of  the  case  itself.

The  boy  is  a  poor  boy,  and  has  become  the  object  of  in¬
terest  to  many  charitable  persons,  who  have  kindly  assisted
the  mother  by  gifts  of  food  or  money,  and  have,  perhaps
with  the  best  of  motives,  as  unkindly  done  all  they  could  to
prejudice  her  mind  against  mesmerism.  This  dropping  water
continually  fretted  her  weak  mind,  and  kept  her  in  a  vaci-
lating  state,  so  that  if  the  boy  was  going  on  well  she  was
very  civil  and  pleasant,  but  if  contrary  symptoms  appeared
her  conduct  changed,  and  she  took  sides  with  the  opponents
of  mesmerism ;  so  that  she  would  make  observations  while  I
was  mesmerising  him,  or  engage  me  in  quieting  her  appre¬
hensions  or  combating  her  nonsense,  when  my  attention
should  have  been  exclusively  bestowed  on  the  patient.  These
interruptions  not  unfrequently  became  noisy  altercations.  I
have  asked  her  to  hold  her  tongue  for  her  own  boy’s  sake,
and  finding  her  deaf  to  quiet  remonstrance,  I  have  ordered  her
to  be  silent  imperatively.  This  she  returned  with  insolence,
so  that  I  was  many  times  on  the  point  of  abandoning  the
case  altogether  in  disgust, — an  idea  which  I  always  dismissed
with  the  reflection  that  it  would  be  very  cruel  to  make  the
poor  boy  suffer  for  the  mothers  folly.

None  but  mesmerisers  who  have  gone  through  these  dif¬
ficulties  can  understand  or  sympathize  with  them.  To  know
that  your  own  state  of  mind  reacts  very  powerfully  on  your  pa¬
tient,  and  that  causes  are  continually  operating  to  render  your
mental  condition  disturbed  and  unfit,  is  very  disheartening.

Again  there  are  many  watching  the  progress  of  the  cure
with  a  lip  interest  in  your  success,  who  yet  let  slip  from  time
to  time  enough  of  their  real  feeling  that  they  will  be  anything
but  disappointed  at  your  failure.

Another  disturbing  cause  from  the  boy’s  position  in  society
is,  that  persons  are  continually  visiting  him,  in  numberless
instances  retarding  the  case ;  each  one  leaving  as  a  legacy
some  such  remark  as  “  Ah  !  I  can’t  bear  mesmerism ;  it’s  an
unlawful  or  an  unholy  means.”  “  Well,  if  it  cures  your  boy
I  may  perhaps  alter  my  opinion,  but  at  present  I  believe  it  is
of  the  father  of  lies.*”

*  See  Dr.  Elliotson’s  contrast  of  the  enlightened  and  humane  heathen  Hindoos
with  such  ignorant  and  hard-hearted  Christians,  No.  XXII,  p.  118 .—Zoist.


Cataleptic  Insanity  treated  Mesmerically .  23

At  each  relapse,  these  suspicions  became  open  denuncia¬
tions  and  rebukes,  and  all  this  is  operating  against  the  mes-
meriser  while  he  is  away — leaving  their  crop  of  mischief  for
him  to  gather  at  his  next  visit.

If  this  boy  could  have  been  secluded,  as  would  have  been
the  case  had  he  been  the  son  of  wealthier  persons,  I  do  not
believe  he  would  have  had  a  relapse  from  the  first, — since
every  relapse  can,  in  some  sort,  be  traced  to  their  disturbing
causes.

I  bear  no  malice  to  the  poor  woman,  whose  mind  was
thus  continually  fretted.  The  fault  was  with  those  who  were
poisoning  her  mind  to  the  only  means  of  cure  which  had  any
control  over  his  disease.  But,  nevertheless,  such  a  case  is
a  sore  trial  to  the  “  patience  in  well  doing”  of  a  mesmeriser.

Have  such  cases  as  this  anything  to  do  with  the  sexual
feelings,  as  Dr.  F.  Hawkins  so  wickedly  insinuates  ?  Are
such  men  as  he  capable  of  the  self-denial  they  require  ?  What
have  we  to  gain  if  we  succeed, — Fame?  No;  “  detraction
will  not  suffer  it.”  What  do  we  lose  if  we  fail  ?  An  open-
mouthed  pack  of  malignants  are  ready  to  hunt  us  down  in  the
only  way  they  can, — by  the  most  scurrilous,  filthy,  and  ma¬
licious  language,  the  hateful  passions  of  bad  men  can  invent.

I  write  this  more  in  sorrow  than  in  anger.  I  counted  the
costs  before  I  entered  the  lists.  It  is  the  world  that  suffers
from  these  men — not  we.

No  man  or  no  set  of  men  can  be  ridiculed  or  abused  out
of  their  convictions  of  a  truth  confirmed  by  their  daily  experi¬
ence,  and  the  practice  of  what  they  know  to  be  good  amply
rewards  them ;  and  yet,  although  we  know  human  nature  has
always  acted  thus,  it  is  melancholy  to  contemplate  it  when  it
is  in  our  own  days  and  we  are  in  direct  conflict  with  it.

This  case  is  very  instructive,  as  the  variety  of  forms  it  took
on  offers  an  epitome  of  experience.  The  mesmerism  never
failed  to  subdue  the  attacks,  and  I  believe  never  will  fail  when
they  return :  mesmerism  is  essentially  the  treatment  for  this
disease.  That  the  boy  has  had  from  time  to  time  relapses  is  no
more  an  argument  against  its  efficacy  than  the  return  of  gout
or  any  other  disorder  from  the  self-indulgence  of  patients  is  a
disproof  of  the  value  of  the  medical  treatment  that  removed
such  disorders.  To  know  a  specific  remedy  for  any  specific
disease  is  all  that  the  physician  wants.  If  the  patient  or  his
friends  obstruct  the  full  efficacy  of  the  remedy,  the  fault  is
with  them  not  with  the  remedy.


W.  H.  Parsons.


(  24  )


III.  Reports  of  the  Mesmeric  Hospital,  Calcutta,  by  James
Esdaile,  Esq.,  M.  D.,  Presidency  Surgeon.  From  “  The
India  Register  of  Medical  Science.”

“‘Iam  for  teai’ing  off  every  mask,  for  managing  nothing,  for  extenuating
nothing,  for  shutting  the  eyes  to  nothing,  that  truth  may  be  transparent  and  un¬
adulterated,  and  may  have  a  free  course.’ — Luther.”

“  *  What  has  been  seen  by  one  pair  of  human  eyes,  is  of  force  to  countervail
all  that  has  been  reasoned  or  guessed  at  by  a  thousand  human  understandings.’ —
Chalmers.”

“  Sir, — It  is  now  upwards  of  three  years  since  your  prede¬
cessor*  in  the  editorial  chair  denounced  my  first  mesmeric
patients  in  his  journal,  as  ‘  a  set  of  hardened  and  determined
impostors /  but  tempering  his  justice  with  mercy,  he  was
kindly  pleased  to  admit,  that  I  was  possibly  only  a  fool.  I
felt  grateful  for  life  on  such  conditions  even,  and  as  the  only
source  of  consolation,  set  about  biting  as  many  people  as  pos¬
sible  with  my  folly,  and  such  was  the  success  of  my  rabid  zeal,
that  in  a  short  time  I  induced  Sir  Herbert  Maddock,  the
Deputy  Governor  of  Bengal,  to  order  a  ‘  Mesmeric  Committee’
to  verify  my  statements,  and  upon  their  Report,  he  deter¬
mined  to  give  me  an  experimental  hospital  for  a  year.f  At
the  end  of  this  time,  Lord  Dalhousie,  the  new  Governor
General,  was  also  pleased  to  acknowledge  f  the  success  of  my
experiments ,’  and  to  reward  me  with  your  predecessor’s  place
of  Presidency  Surgeon  (to  what  vile  purposes  may  we  come — •
an  antimesmeric  editor  to  be  converted  into  a  warming  pan
for  a  mesmerist  !)  as  a  mere  act  of  justice,  for  which  I  had  no¬
thing  to  thank  him.’%  And  to  crown  the  absurdity,  the  public
have  since  subscribed  for  the  support  of  a  mesmeric  hospital  ;§
a  report  of  whose  first  doings,  I  am  about  to  submit  to  your
readers.  The  irrational  incredulity,  cold  indifference,  and
dogged  unfair  opposition  I  encountered,  was  enough  to  dis¬
gust  and  embitter  the  mind  of  any  one  with  a  less  acute  sense
of  the  ludicrous;  but  I  remembered  how  Galileo  consoled
and  revenged  himself,  and  humbly  followed  his  example.
‘  Oh  !  my  dear  Kepler,’  he  wrote,  ‘  how  I  wish  we  could  have
a  hearty  laugh  together.  Here,  at  Padua,  is  the  principal
professor  of  philosophy,  whom  I  have  repeatedly  and  urgently
requested  to  look  at  the  moon  and  planets  through  my  glass,
which  he  pertinaciously  refuses  to  do.  Why  are  you  not  here  ?
What  shouts  of  laughter  we  should  have  had  at  this  glorious
folly !  and  to  hear  the  philosopher  of  Pisa  labouring  before
the  Grand  Duke  with  logical  arguments,  as  if  with  magical

*  See  Zoist,  No.  XIII.,  p.  41,  and  No.  XV.,  p.  294.

t  See  No.  XVI.,  p.  563  ;  No.  XVII.,  p.  50.— Zoist.
t  No.  XXII.,  p.  114. — Zoist.  §  No  XXIV.,  p.  393 .—Zoist.


Reports  of  the  Mesmeric  Hospital,  Calcutta.


PFv

stJ


incantations  to  draw  tlie  new  planets  out  of  the  sky  1’  Nothing
clears  the  mind  of  malign  vapours  like  a  hearty  guffaw,  and
having  laughed  at  my  opponents,  I  felt  myself  capable  of  in¬
finite  endurance.  If  they  can  forgive  me,  and  are  satisfied
with  the  figure  they  have  cut,  I  freely  exchange  forgiveness
with  them,  and  have  no  reason  to  be  dissatisfied.

“  Although  the  most  bitter  and  persevering  opposition  has
been  made  by  members  of  my  own  profession,  I  am  very  far
from  thinking  my  opponents  even,  and  still  less  my  medical
brethren  generally,  indifferent  to  human  suffering  and  the
progress  of  truth  and  knowledge.  The  cause  of  their  indif¬
ference  and  scepticism  lies  in  the  extraordinary  nature  of  the
subject  and  the  artful  manner  in  which  all  evidence  regarding
it  has  been  suppressed  by  those  to  whom  they  look  up  for  cor¬
rect  information.  Medical  men  in  active  practice  in  England
have  neither  the  time  nor  power  to  read  the  host  of  books
published  upon  medicine  and  the  collateral  sciences,  and  the
expense  of  books  in  this  country,  where  there  is  more  leisure,
is  so  great  that  few  can  afford  it.  The  profession  in  England
and  the  colonies  are  therefore  content  to  keep  ‘  au  courant  du
jour/  through  the  cheap  and  light  pages  of  periodicals,  and
necessarily. receive  their  impressions  of  new  subjects  of  interest
through  the  medium  (too  often  false)  of  editors.

“We  all  know  how  infallible  and  inexorable  medical  edi¬
tors  are,  from  Radamanthus  Wakley  to  Minos  Finch,*  your
predecessor,  and  that  all  the  leading  editors  declared  ‘  war  to
the  knife’  against  mesmerism  at  the  outset,  and  before  they
knew  anything  about  it.

“  A  fraction  of  the  evidence  now  available  from  this  quar¬
ter  alone,  would  have  sufficed  to  convince  all  reflecting  men,
if  it  had  been  allowed  free  circulation  by  the  professional  part
of  the  press  in  England.  For  I  venture  to  say  that  there
never  was  a  more  complete  and  unexceptional  body  of  evidence
placed  before  the  public  on  any  subject  of  scientific  enquiry.
The  utmost  publicity  was  courted  from  the  beginning,  every
case  was  published  on  the  spot  as  it  occurred,  the  patients  and
witnesses  were  always  named  and  invited  to  correct  any  error
or  mis-statement  that  might  have  been  made  by  me,  and
every  one  was  requested  to  come  and  see  for  himself.  Has  the
investigation  of  the  ‘  Mesmeric  Committee ’  or  the  ‘surveillance’
of  my  ‘  Official  Visitors’^  for  a  year,  done  anything  but  con¬
firm  the  general  accuracy  of  my  observations  and  reports, —
or  in  fact  done  anything  but  impede  the  progress  of  truth  and
knowledge  ?  I  say  not  this  boastingly,  for  there  is  no  merit


*  See  No.  XIII.,  p.  41. — Zoist.


t  See  No.  XXI.,  p.  1. — Zoist.


26  Reports  of  the  Mesmeric  Hospital,  Calcutta ,

in  having  preferred  to  see  and  understand  with  my  own  eyes
and  brain,  rather  than  through  the  spectacles  and  understand¬
ing  of  others,  who  will  not  condescend  to  use  their  senses  and
intellects  or  distrust  them  as  being  given  to  insnare  and  delude
us.  Mesmerism  in  the  search  after  truth  ‘lay  in  my  way  and
I  found  it/  and  having  some  confidence  in  the  reality  of  mat¬
ter  and  the  healthiness  of  my  senses  and  understanding,  I  as¬
sumed  the  privilege  of  a  freeman  to  speak  of  the  wonderful
things  I  had  seen,  heard,  and  believed,  although  they  were
ignored  and  disbelieved  by  medical  editors  all  over  the  world.

“Luckily,  we  had  no  medical  journals  in  India,  (the  Cal¬
cutta  Medical  Journal  having  killed  itself  and  mesmerism  with
the  same  blow,)  and  the  truth  was  therefore  allowed  to  flow
freely  over  the  land  through  the  channels  of  the  daily  press,
till  every  person  of  common  understanding  was  capable  of  re¬
turning  a  reasonable  verdict  upon  the  facts  from  the  evidence
placed  before  him.  Many  of  the  Indian  editors  having  been
imposed  upon  by  the  reckless  assertions  and  confident  dogma¬
tism  of  the  professional  part  of  the  press,  were  at  first  vio¬
lently  opposed  to  the  new  doctrines.  But  their  judgments
were  not  permanently  obscured  by  professional  bigotry  and
wounded  self-love,  and  soon  perceiving  that  they  had  been
misled,  they  not  only  professed  their  conversion,  but  indig¬
nantly  turned  upon  and  punished  their  misleaders,  and  now,
I  believe,  there  is  not  a  paper  from  Cape  Comorin  to  Simlah
that  does  not  wish  mesmerism  God  speed !  So  far  from  a
disbelief  in  the  reality  and  utility  of  mesmerism  being  now
considered  a  certain  sign  of  an  ‘  esprit  fort /  it  is  looked  upon
as  an  infallible  symptom  of  a  ramolissement  de  cerveau,’  which
the  unhappy  patient  has  usually  sense  enough  left  to  conceal
in  company.

“  There  was,  and  still  is,  an  organized  system  among  the
medical  journals  for  the  purpose  of  putting  down  mesmerism
by  persevering  silence  and  affected  contempt.  By  a  general
understanding  among  the  ‘ungentle  craft/  mesmerism  is
never  even  alluded  to,  and  the  existence  of  The  Zoist — a  quar¬
terly  journal,  in  which  mesmeric  facts  from  all  parts  of  the
world  are  recorded — is  most  carefully  concealed  from  the
readers  of  our  medical  periodicals.  ‘  Nulla  vestigia  retrorsum}
is  the  motto  of  our  editors, — ‘  we  never  alter  our  opinions  ’
The  medical  mesmerists  do  not  ask  or  expect  them  to  do  so,  all
they  demand  is  ‘  a  fair  field  and  no  favour/  and  we  invite  the
united  editors  of  the  world  to  strike ,  if  they  only  permit  their
readers  to  hear.  How  long  will  the  independent  members  of
a  liberal  profession  allow  themselves  to  be  hood-winked  and
nose-led  by  persons  whose  only  object  now  is  to  stave  off  all


by  Dr.  Esdaile.


27


knowledge  of  an  important  subject  which  they  had  ignorantly
and  rashly  prejudged,  and  who  hope  to  escape  to  oblivion
before  the  profession  and  the  public  they  have  misled  can  be
enlightened  ?  How  long  will  the  lovers  of  truth  and  justice
permit  themselves  to  be  kept  in  the  dark,  and  to  have  their
opinions  dictated  to  them  by  persons  whose  duty  it  is  to  place
evidence  and  not  unsupported  dogmas  before  them?  The
remedy  is  in  your  hands,  gentlemen  of  the  medical  profession.
The  effectual  way  to  punish  such  an  offence  against  truth  and
philosophy  is  to  withdraw  your  support  from  the  journals  which
persist  in  suppressing  all  evidence  in  favour  of  a  subject  which
is  of  the  deepest  interest  and  importance  to  the  surgeon,  phy¬
sician,  physiologist,  metaphysician,  and  natural  philosopher.
Why,  if  it  were  only  another  example  of  epidemic  insanity ,
our  mad  doings  in  India  would  be  well  worth  a  passing  record
as  an  item  of  medical  news  ;  but  who  among  the  readers  of
the  English  medical  journals  has  heard  of  the  reports  of  the
mesmeric  committee  and  mesmeric  hospital,  published  by
order  of  the  Government,  and  of  the  existence  of  a  mesmeric
hospital  in  Calcutta  at  this  moment,  supported  by  public  sub¬
scription?  Yet  such  things  were  and  are,  and  for  the  chance
of  this  falling  into  the  hands  of  some  enquiring  European
readers,  who  will  perhaps  ask  their  favourite  editors  f  how
they  never  came  to  hear  of  such  things  V  I  will  enter  here  a
‘  resume  of  our  surgical  practice.  The  operations  have  been
performed  in  public,  in  five  different  hospitals,  and  the  oc¬
casions  are  very  rare  in  which  we  have  failed  to  obtain  our
object  most  satisfactorily,  and  in  no  single  instance  has  any
disagreeable  symptom  appeared  before,  during,  or  after  the
operation  that  could  be  attributed  to  the  use  of  mesmerism.

“  Apparently,  the  indiscriminate  use  of  ether  and  chloro¬
form  in  surgery  will  prove  anything  but  a  blessing  to  Europe,
and  its  general  use  here  is  a  positive  evil  to  the  poor  Natives
who  are  generally  independent  of  such  violent  measures.


A  return  of  Surgical  operations  performed  under  the  influence  of


Mesmerism  by  Dr.  Esdaile  in  Bengal.

Abscesses  opened .  5

Actual  cautery  and  nitric  acid  applied  to  large  sores .  10

Amputation  of  thigh .  2

- of  leg .  1

- of  arm .  1

- of  breast . , .  2

- of  colis  and  testis . 1

- of  great  toe .  1

- of  colis .  1


28


Reports  of  the  Mesmeric  Hospital ,  Calcutta,


Amputation  of  one  testis .  2

- - of  scirrhous  testis .  1

—  —  of  sloughing  ditto .  1

Cancer  of  cheek  removed .  1

Cancerous  tumor  of  eve  ditto .  1

Cartilaginous  tumors  from  both  ears  ditto .  2

Cataracts  operated  upon .  3

End  of  bone  in  compound  fracture  sawn  off. .  1

- thumb  cut  off. .  1

Fistulas  laid  open .  9

Great  toe-nails  cut  out  by  the  roots .  5

Gum  cut  away .  1

Heels  flayed .  3

Hydroceles  operated  on .  12

Hypertrophy  of  colis  removed .  1

- of  prseputium .  1

- of  scrotum  of  all  sizes  from  a  few  lbs.  to  103  lbs..  .  86

Lithotomy .  1

Prolapsus  Aui,  the  size  of  a  child’s  head,  reduced  in  the  trance  .  1

Seton,  12  inches  long  introduced .  1

Straightened  contracted  knees .  3

- * - arms  . .  3

Suppurating  piles  cut  off .  1

Tapping  for  dropsy .  3

Tumor  of  large  size  in  groin  removed .  1

- antrum  maxillare  ditto .  1

- on  leg  ditto .  1

Unhealthy  sores  pared  down .  9


180

Total  number  of  deaths. ...  9


“  A  good,  as  well  as  a  bad  name,  has  sometimes  its  incon¬
veniences.  In  consequence  of  my  great  success  in  the  re¬
moval  of  scrotal  tumors,  the  great  perennial  source  of  surgery
in  Bengal,  people  afflicted  with  this  disease  have  flocked  to
the  hospital,  and  the  absurdity  has  come  to  prevail  among
the  natives,  that  mesmerism  is  chiefly  efficacious  for  such
cases.  This  is  natural  enough  among  the  poor  ignorant
people,  but  what  shall  we  think  of  the  educated  Europeans
who  try  to  perpetuate  such  injurious  nonsense,  and  of  the
doctors  who  abuse  the  confidence  of  their  hearers  by  repre¬
senting  that  these  tumors  ‘  are  naturally  insensible,  and  cutting
them  off  is  not  painful  ?’  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  such  persons
speak  in  ignorance,  for  all  who  know  anything  about  the
matter,  and  have  seen  the  operation  performed  in  the  natural
state,  are  aware  that  it  is  impossible  to  invent  a  more  terrible
torture  than  the  dissecting  out  of  the  most  sensitive  organs


by  Dr.  Esdaile.


29


of  the  human  body  from  the  centre  of  the  enormous  masses
in  which  they  are  buried ;  that  the  sensibility  of  the  skin  is
not  deadened,  and  that  it  is  cut  more  extensively  than  in  any
other  operation,  which  is  always  the  most  painful  part  of  the
process.  Did  any  one  ever  hear  of  the  insensibility  of  scrotal
tumors ,  till  the  operation  was  performed  in  the  mesmeric  trance  ?

“  It  was  only  this  very  day  that  several  medical  men  had
an  opportunity  of  judging  in  my  hospital  whether  these  tumors
are  sensitive  or  not.  Unfortunately,  I  commenced  operating
upon  a  man  without  having  tested  him  sufficiently  long  and
severely,  and  the  consequence  was,  that  he  awoke  up  about
the  middle  of  the  operation,  roared  f  comme  un  damne’  through¬
out,  and  I  had  great  difficulty  in  finishing  the  operation  on
account  of  his  struggles.  If  any  one  after  this  will  venture
to  say  otherwise,  he  is  the  boldest  and  most  impudent  man
alive,  and  will  be  admired  and  respected  accordingly.

“  Another  favourite  excuse  for  neglecting  mesmerism,  is
‘  the  loss  of  time  it  causes  to  the  surgeon’  The  real  fact  being,
that  it  would  actually  save  time  and  money  (in  this  country,
at  least,  I  only  speak  of  what  I  know)  to  the  men  who  only
value  time  and  knowledge  for  the  rupees  they  will  bring, —
it  is  thus  that  self-interest  misunderstood  is  always  out-witting
itself.  All  that  is  necessary  for  the  surgeon  to  do,  is  to  look
in  at  his  hospital  daily  at  the  most  convenient  time,  and  if
any  patient  allows  him  to  stick  a  pin  into  his  nose,  pinch  his
nipple,  or  apply  live-charcoal  to  any  part  of  his  body  without
resenting  it,  he  may  proceed  to  cut  him  up  upon  the  spot
without  any  of  the  coaxing,  coughing,  choking,  vomiting,
convulsions,  and  anxiety,  usually,  more  or  less,  attendant
upon  ether  and  chloroform  operations ;  not  to  speak  of  the
frequent  disagreeable  and  occasional  fatal  consequences.  In
this  way,  I  have  disposed  of  four  patients  in  twenty  minutes
in  one  forenoon,  and  a  few  days  ago,  I  had  three  men  all
ready  at  once  for  the  knife.  If  the  patient  is  not  ready,  you
have  only  to  call  again  to-morrow  till  he  is,  and  if  very  ob¬
stinate,  it  may  be  allowable  to  chloroform  him  as  the  last
resource.  But  so  far  from  delay  doing  any  harm,  it  will,  in
nine-tenths  of  the  operations,  do  good,  from  the  nervous  system
being  soothed  and  refreshed  by  the  process.

“  All  that  I  do,  may  be  equally  well  done  in  every  hospital
in  the  country,  and  if  any  of  my  medical  brethren  find  it
difficult  to  organize  a  mesmeric  corps  like  mine,  I  shall  be
very  glad  to  instruct  their  assistants  in  my  hospital,  provided
they  are  placed  under  my  orders  for  a  month ;  and  one  pro¬
perly  instructed  mesmeriser  can  make  a  hundred  more,  if
needed.  I  take  this  opportunity  to  repeat  my  offer  to  pre-


30  Reports  of  the  Mesmeric  Hospital,  Calcutta,


pare  patients  in  my  hospital  to  be  operated  upon  by  the
medical  men  who  send  them,  if  they  desire  to  do  so.

“  Calcutta,  10 th  November,  1848.”


“  Surgical  cases  treated  in  the  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital  in

September,  1848.

“  1st  September.  Sheik  Sakroo,  a  writer,  aged  40.  He
has  got  a  scrotal  tumor  the  size  of  a  child's  head,  and  has
been  waiting  for  many  months  for  the  expected  re-opening  of
the  hospital.  I  would  not  have  interfered  with  it  on  account
of  its  size,  but  the  pain  and  burning  in  it  is  so  distressing
that  it  destroys  his  peace,  and  prevents  him  from  following
his  occupation.

“  2nd.  He  is  indifferent  to  pricking,  &c.

“  3rd.  Insensible  to  fire  and  nitric  acid  applied  to  a  sore
on  the  colis.  He  is  quite  ready  to  be  operated  upon,  but
the  hospital  is  not  yet  in  order.

“  5th.  Operated  upon  to-day,  both  testes  saved.  He
moved  his  legs  towards  the  conclusion  of  the  operation,  but
relapsed  into  perfect  tranquillity  on  the  removal  of  the  mass.
After  securing  the  blood  vessels,  the  water  was  let  out  of  a
double  hydrocele  that  existed,  and  the  tunica  vaginalis  being
thickened  and  diseased,  it  was  leisurely  dissected  off  the  testes
and  cords.  To  all  this  he  was  quite  indifferent.  He  was
demesmerised  in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  all  was
over  to  gratify  the  spectators,  and  was  not  aware  that  any
thing  had  happened  to  him.  I  had  retired  out  of  sight,  and
on  being  questioned,  he  said  that  I  had  not  come  to  the  hos¬
pital  to-day.  I  then  stepped  forward,  and  showed  him  my
bloody  dress  and  hands,  but  even  then  he  had  no  suspicion,
and  had  to  be  informed  that  he  had  been  operated  upon.
He  thereupon  seized  my  hands,  bloody  as  they  were,  covered
them  with  kisses,  and  invoked  all  kind  of  blessings  upon
me.  Weight  of  tumor  6  lbs.

“9th  September.  Mahomed  Reza,  a  Khansamah,  aged  55.
Has  got  the  same  disease.  He  was  ready  on  14th,  and  was
operated  upon  on  the  17th.  One  testis  was  involved  in  a
hydrocele,  and  was  found  to  be  diseased ;  it  was  therefore
sacrificed,  the  other  was  kept.  A  slight  twitch  passed  across
his  countenance  when  the  cord  was  cut,  in  other  respects  he
was  perfectly  passive,  and  on  awaking  half  an  hour  after  the
operation,  was  quite  unconscious  that  anything  had  been  done
to  him.  Weight  of  tumor  8  lbs.


by  Dr.  Esdaile.


31


“  Esserchunder  Paul,  a  shopkeeper,  aged  40 ;  has  got  a
large  tumor.  He  came  to  the  hospital  on  the  6th  September,
and  was  ready  on  the  9th ;  but  the  usual  periodic  fever  coming
on,  the  mesmerising  was  stopped  for  three  days,  as  it  would
be  improper  to  operate  during  its  continuance.

“  He  was  operated  upon  on  the  17th,  and  the  dissection
was  excessively  severe  and  protracted  on  account  of  the  density
of  the  mass,  the  depth  at  which  the  testes  lay,  and  there  being
nothing  to  guide  me  to  them,  there  being  no  enlargement  or
hydrocele  on  either  side.  They  were  at  last  found,  however,
but  I  had  the  mortification  to  find  that  one  was  ossified ;  it
was  therefore  removed,  and  the  other  preserved.  The  only
sign  of  sensibility  was  a  slight  working  of  the  toes.

“  After  he  had  been  covered  with  a  clean  sheet,  he  became
restless,  and  shortly  after  vomited  a  full  meal  of  undigested
food.  His  mouth  was  cleaned,  and  drink  given  to  him,  and
he  fell  back  into  a  state  of  perfect  repose.  Half  an  hour
after  I  addressed  him,  and  he  awoke  up  in  the  full  possession
of  his  senses,  and  said  that  he  had  awoke  this  moment ;  that
he  had  not  been  sick  to-day,  or  in  any  way  disturbed  since
he  went  to  sleep,  and  that  he  had  eaten  and  digested  his
breakfast  as  usual.  Weight  of  tumor  30  lbs.

“  Pamsunder  Hey,  admitted  on  the  3rd  with  a  scrotal
tumor.  He  was  ready  on  the  15th,  but  the  mesmeric  pro¬
cess  was  interrupted  for  two  days  by  a  severe  attack  of  fever.
The  operation  was  performed  on  the  21st,  and  was  very  severe
on  account  of  the  density  of  the  mass,  and  the  testes  being
adherent  to  old  scars  made  by  the  actual  cautery  in  the  hope
of  resolving  the  tumor.  One  testis  only  was  saved,  the  other
being  enlarged  and  diseased.  The  only  disturbance  witnessed
in  his  whole  body,  was  a  slight  corrugation  of  the  eyebrows,
which  soon  passed  off.  As  he  had  lost  much  blood  and  his
pulse  was  low,  I  awoke  him  to  administer  a  cordial,  and  it  is
superfluous  to  say  that  he  knew  nothing  about  the  matter.
Weight  of  mass  16  lbs.

“  Sheik  Kyratie,  aged  40,  a  Khitmutgar.  He  has  been
suffering  for  20  years  from  a  small  tumor  that  swells  greatly
at  the  fever  time,  once  a  month,  when  it  becomes  excessively
painful  and  prevents  him  from  doing  his  work.  He  was  ad¬
mitted  on  the  17th,  was  entranced  on  the  first  day,  and  ope¬
rated  upon  on  the  23rd.  He  moved  his  legs  considerably
towards  the  end,  but  did  not  awake,  and  the  mesmerising
being  continued,  he  fell  back  into  the  coma.  After  half  an
hour,  he  was  demesmerised,  and  awoke  as  if  from  a  natural


32  Reports  of  the  Mesmeric  Hospital,  Calcutta ,


sleep :  nothing  had  disturbed  him,  he  said,  and  he  felt  just
as  usual.

“  These  five  men  were  the  only  surgical  cases  admitted
this  month,  and  were  all  satisfactorily  disposed  of  by  the
23rd.  They  are  all  doing  well  .”


“  Medical  cases  treated  in  the  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital  in

September,  1848.

“11th  September.  Sheik  Pandoo,  aged  40.  He  has  suf¬
fered  constantly  for  two  years  from  severe  neuralgia  of  the
scalp,  which  attacks  him  every  ten  days  with  great  intensity,
and  lasts  for  four  or  five  days.  The  pain  never  leaves  him  in
the  intervals  of  the  paroxysms.

“  30th  September.  He  desires  to  he  discharged  as  he  con¬
siders  himself  cured.  He  has  only  had  a  trifling  attack  of
pain  since  he  came  to  the  hospital,  which  lasted  only  a  short
time,  and  he  has  had  none  since.

“  17th  September.  Among  the  dispensary  patients  to-day,
I  recognized  Gopaul  Doss,  who  had  been  operated  upon  in
the  trance  in  May,  1847,  and  I  had  not  seen  him  since.
Although  a  very  large  powerful  man,  he  had  been  intensely
entranced  on  the  first  day,  and  recollecting  his  natural  sen¬
sibility  to  the  influence,  I  said  to  those  present,  that  I  would
try  if  he  retained  it.  He  had  come  to  the  hospital  to  get
medicine  for  a  large  foul  ulcer  on  the  calf  of  one  of  his  legs.
I  seated  him  in  a  chair,  and  placing  myself  opposite  to  him,
about  four  feet  off,  I  merely  steadily  regarded  him  without
moving  a  finger.  In  a  couple  of  minutes  his  eyes  began  to
quiver,  and  the  eyelids  to  droop  gradually.  He  had  brought
a  bottle  with  him  to  hold  the  medicine  in  which  he  expected,
and  still  held  it  in  his  hand.  Feeling  himself  getting  sleepy,
he  shook  himself  awake  with  a  sudden  effort,  and  placed  the
bottle  on  the  ground  to  prevent  its  being  broken  by  falling
out  of  his  hand  when  asleep.  In  five  minutes,  he  was  pro¬
foundly  entranced  and  cataleptic,  and  raising  his  leg,  I  deli¬
berately  sponged  the  whole  surface  of  the  sore  with  undiluted
nitric  acid.  The  wound  instantly  was  burned  ivhite,  but  he
might  as  well  have  been  a  log  of  wood  for  any  appearance  of
sensibility  that  could  be  detected.

“  I  let  him  sleep  for  about  ten  minutes  more,  and  then
awoke  him  in  a  moment  by  sudden  transverse  passes  over
the  eyes.  He  felt  no  pain  in  the  sore  or  anywhere  else,  he
said,  but  expressed  surprise  to  see  that  the  sore  had  turned
from  red  to  ivhite  since  he  went  to  sleep.  On  the  last  occa-


by  Dr.  Esdaile.


33


sion  that  I  applied  nitric  acid  to  a  sore,  (before  knowing  mes¬
merism),  the  howling s  of  the  patient  were  so  dreadful  that  1
was  driven  out  of  the  hospital  in  horror,  and  I  vowed  never
to  do  so  again.  But  I  have  repeatedly  applied  the  actual
cautery  and  nitric  acid  to  extensive  sores  when  the  patients
were  entranced,  with  no  more  effect  than  in  the  case  just
related.

“  23rd  September.  The  same  done  to-day  with  caustic.
“30th  September,  1848.”

NOTE  BY  DR.  ELLIOTSON.

In  the  last  number  of  the  India  Register  of  Medical  Science ,
p.  790,  I  found  the  following  statement.

“We  have  just  heard  of  a  death  suddenly  following  the
performance  of  an  operation  under  the  influence  of  chloroform ,
at  the  Medical  College,  Calcutta.  The  patient  was  a  child,  6
years  of  age,  who  had  a  formidable  tumor  of  the  eye-ball.
The  patient  cried  and  struggled  much  during  the  operation,
and,  almost  immediately  after  it,  the  breathing  became  gasp¬
ing,  and  the  poor  child  died  in  about  a  quarter  of  ayi  hour ,
without  ever  coming  to  its  senses.

“We  hope  to  be  favoured  by  Mr.  B.  O’Shaughnessy,  the
operator,  with  an  authentic  account  of  this  case,  as  well  as  of
every  other  in  which  any  disagreeable — not  merely  fatal —
effects  have  ensued  in  his  practice  since  the  exhibition  of
ether  or  chloroform  in  the  Medical  College  Hospital.  We
have  the  same  expectation  from  all  the  members  of  our  pro¬
fession  who  have  any  practical  knowledge  of  the  subject,  for  it
is  necessary  for  the  quiet  of  our  consciences,  our  professional
reputations,  and  the  safety  of  our  patients,  that  the  fullest
information  upon  this  important  matter  should  be  before  the
public.

“  Will  no  one  do  for  ether  and  chloroform  what  has  been
done  for  mesmerism — relate  every  case  with  its  symptoms  and
consequences  ?  It  is  clear,  that  in  this  country  the  question
will  soon  have  to  be  decided, — whether  it  is  ever  allowable  to
resort  to  what  Mons.  Flourens  calls  chloroform — f  this  mar¬
vellous  and  terrible  agent,’  when  we  can  gain  our  object  by
the  always  safe  means  of  mesmerism.

“  We  are  bound  to  say,  that  the  great  mass  of  evidence  is  on
the  side  of  mesmerism  ;  nearly  every  case  that  has  occurred  in
the  country,  having  been  minutely  recorded  with  all  its  attend¬
ing  circumstances,  while  we  have  only  heard  of  a  few  successful
cases  under  the  influence  of  the  new  agents,  and  have  few
particular  descriptions  by  which  to  guide  our  judgment  re¬
garding  their  superiority  to  the  old  anaesthetic,  mesmerism.

VOL.  VII.  D


34  Reports  of  the  Mesmeric  Hospital ,  Calcutta ,

“  The  above  remarks  were  in  type  when  we  received  from
Mr.  R.  O'Shaughnessy  a  report  of  the  fatal  case  alluded  to,
as  well  as  another,  wherein  chloroform  wa3  administered  with
perfect  success.  To  make  room  for  these,  when  the  present
issue  was  readv  to  be  struck  off,  we  have  been  induced  to
curtail  a  portion  of  our  editorial  space.  We  are  desirous  that
Mr.  (TShaughnessy  should  have  the  opportunity  of  being  heard
in  the  present  number,  since  we  have  ourselves  noticed  the
subject  editorially,  and  it  has  been  a  great  deal  written  and
commented  upon  by  our  daily  contemporaries.  It  is  true,
that  a  medical  periodical  is  the  only  legitimate  organ  wherein
a  subject  of  so  much  importance  as  the  one  in  question  should
appear  in  all  its  professional  bearings,  but  we  maintain,  not¬
withstanding  opposite  opinions,  that  the  earliest  publicity  was
imperative  on  the  part  of  the  operator  when  the  life  of  a  fellow
creature  was  sacrificed,  and  this  could  only  be  attained  through
the  medium  of  the  daily  press.

“  The  case  we  find  has  been  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Daly,
House  Surgeon  to  the  Medical  College  Hospital,  and  the
appendant  notes  by  Mr.  R.  (TShaughnessy.  The  fatal  result
is  entirely  attributed  to  chloroform  and  very  properly.  ‘  The
child  fainted,  and  owing  to  the  general  insensibility  the
attempt  at  reaction  was  imperfect.  Asphyxia  followed, — and
she  died.”  This  is  exactly  the  way  we  should  account  for
death  ensuing  in  all  similar  cases.  In  fact  it  is  an  obvious
illustration  of  cause  and  effect.  Chloroform  was  the  cause  of
asphyxia,  and  the  effect  of  asphyxia  was — death  !  Yet  Mr.
O’Shaughnessy  asserts,  ‘  that  it  was  not  from  any  poisonous
effects  of  that  valuable  drug/  If  chloroform  did  not  act  as  a
poison  in  this  instance,  verily,  it  is  something  akin  to  it !  The
difference,  if  any,  is  certainly  beyond  our  comprehension.
Further  on  we  are  told  (  I  look  upon  all  means  of  producing
insensibility  liable  to  the  same  objection,  as  in  case  of  faint¬
ing  the  insensibility  which  caused  the  patient  not  to  feel  pain
during  the  operation,  must  also  diminish  that  nervous  suscep¬
tibility  which  favours  reaction,  and  perfect  recovery  from  the
state  of  syncope/  Here  we  entirely  disagree  with  Mr.
CTShaughnessy,  for  we  know  from  practical  experience  that
the  suspension  of  consciousness  when  mesmerism  has  been
the  anaesthetic  agent,  does  not  interfere  in  the  least  with
that  susceptibility  requisite  to  favour  reaction,  but  rather
increases  it.  We  have  no  objection  to  the  use  of  chloroform
in  extreme  cases  where  life  and  death  are  in  the  scales,  and
with  due  care  to  its  proper  administration,  provided  always
mesmerism  has  been  first  tried  and  found  wanting.


by  Dr.  Esdai/e.


35


“  Fatal  Case  of  Cancerous  Tumor  of  the  Eye.  Reported  by

Mr.  Daly,  House  Surgeon,  Medical  College  Hospital.

“Juddonath,  a  Hindoo  female  child,  aged  5  years,  ad¬
mitted  to  hospital  15th  November,  with  a  large  cancerous
tumor  projecting  from  the  right  orbit,  and  covering  the  lower
half  of  the  forehead,  and  the  whole  of  the  right  side  of  the
face,  extending  outwards  and  downwards  below  the  level  of
the  chin — the  internal  margin  of  the  tumor  rests  upon  the
nose  and  covers  the  right  angle  of  the  mouth.  The  tumor  is
of  a  flattened  nodulated  form,  with  rounded  edges  and  a
broad  base  covering  the  whole  of  the  right  side  of  the  face,
from  the  angle  of  the  mouth  to  the  supra-orbital  ridge.  The
external  surface  is  in  a  state  of  foul  ulceration,  exhaling  the
foetid  odour  peculiar  to  cancerous  disease.  The  parent  of  the
child  states,  that  the  tumor  commenced  soon  after  an  attack
of  inflammation  of  the  right  eye,  about  9  months  ago,  and
gradually  increased  to  its  present  size,  but  that  within  the
last  4  months  its  growth  has  been  more  rapid,  and  the  child's
health  has  visibly  begun  to  decline.  The  child  is  particularly
timid,  and  much  alarmed,  she  screams  violently  at  the
approach  of  any  one  to  examine  the  tumor,  which  she  will
scarcely  allow  to  be  touched.  After  a  stay  of  3  days  in  the
hospital  to  reconcile  the  child  to  the  place,  and  accustom  her
to  the  attendants,  the  operation  for  the  removal  of  this  hide¬
ous  mass  of  disease  was  performed — 20  drops  of  chloroform
sprinkled  on  a  sponge  was  held  to  the  nostrils  for  a  few
seconds,  with  the  effect  only  of  producing  partial  insensibility
owing  to  the  extreme  restlessness  of  the  child — the  sponge
was  again  applied  for  a  short  time,  and,  upon  the  eye-lids
closing,  the  operation  was  commenced.  The  child  lay  per¬
fectly  still  during  the  first  few  strokes  of  the  knife,  but  again
awoke  and  cried  loudly  during  the  remaining  part  of  the  opera¬
tion,  which  was  quickly  performed  with  no  very  considerable
loss  of  blood  which  it  was  not  difficult  to  control.  A  large
sponge  was  kept  applied  to  the  orbit  and  surface  of  the  wound ;
the  child  soon  after  appeared  to  faint,  but  rallied  again  a
little,  from  the  application  of  ammonia  and  a  dash  of  cold
water ;  but  the  faintness  again  returned,  and  the  child  gra¬
dually  sunk  and  expired  about  ten  minutes  after  the  ope¬
ration.

“Remarks  by  Mr.  O’ Shaughnessy . — The  unfortunate  result
in  this  instance,  I  am  disposed  to  attribute  entirely  to  the  in¬
sensibility  produced  by  chloroform.  The  loss  of  blood  was
trifling,  the  time  occupied  by  the  operation  was  short,  and
there  was  no  important  organ  implicated  by  the  removal  of

d  2


36


Reports  of  the  Mesmeric  Hospital,  Calcutta,

the  diseased  parts.  The  child  fainted,  and  owing  to  the
general  insensibility,  the  attempt  at  reaction  was  imperfect,
asphyxia  followed,  and  she  expired.  This,  I  think,  is  the  way
in  which  most  of  those  have  lost  their  lives,  who  died  while
under  the  influence  of  chloroform,  and  not  from  any  poisonous
effects  of  that  valuable  drug.  I  look  upon  all  means  of  pro¬
ducing  insensibility  liable  to  the  same  objection,  as  in  case  of
fainting,  the  insensibility  which  causes  the  patient  not  to  feel
pain  during  the  operation,  must  also  diminish  that  nervous
susceptibility  which  favours  reaction,  and  perfect  recovery
from  the  state  of  syncope.”

There  is  one  medical  journal  now  conducted  with  intelli¬
gence  and  honesty.*  What  will  persons  of  common  sense
think  of  this  official  visitor  of  Dr.  Esdaile’s  hospital,  after
his  opinion  that,  though  the  death  was  produced  by  chloro¬
form,  it  was  not  produced  “by  any  poisonous  effect  of  that
valuable  drug  !”  What  will  they  think  of  his  opinion  that
all  means  of  producing  insensibility  are  liable  to  the  same
objection — of  lessening  the  power  of  reaction !  So  grossly,
grossly  ignorant  is  he  of  mesmerism, — the  insensibility  of
which  does  not  lessen  the  power  of  reaction  :  in  fact  large
numbers  recover  better  after  the  insensibility  of  mesmerism.
Persons  generally  wake  from  the  insensibility  of  mesmerism
rapidly,  perhaps  suddenly,  and  all  the  better,  because  they
have  been  only  in  a  calm,  beautiful  sleep,  and  not  in  the
stupefaction  of  a  poisonous  drug.  Mr.  O’Shaughnessy  is  one
for  whom  a  kind-hearted  newspaper  editor  would  have  us  build
a  bridge.f  Mercy  forbid,  that  such  heroes  should  come  over
to  our  side  and  disfigure  our  ranks.  Of  this,  however,  there
is  no  fear,  for  the  more  wonders  they  are  shewn,  the  more,
says  Dr.  Esdaile,  do  they  harden  their  hearts  like  the  wicked
Pharaoh  of  ancient  Egypt.  Be  it  remembered  that  this  Mr.
O'Shaughnessy — official  visitor — was,  originally,  perfectly
satisfied,  from  the  number  of  painless  operations  which  he
had  witnessed  by  Dr.  Esdaile,  that  the  poor  patients  “felt
pain  no  more  than  the  bed  they  lay  upon  or  the  knife  that

*  The  editorial  remarks  of  the  India  Medical  Register  have  proved  so  dis¬
tasteful  to  Messrs.  O’Shaugnessy,  Mouat,  Stewart,  &c.,  that  they  are  said  to  have
withdrawn  their  subscriptions.  Their  position  is  painful  and  ridiculous ;  they
have  gone  too  far  to  retract,  and  they  cannot  go  forwards, — no,  not  even  if  we
were  to  build  a  bridge  for  them.

I  have  seen  very  many  military  officers,  and  civilians — not  medical  men — from
Bengal,  and  they  all  agree  in  expressing  their  perfect  conviction  of  the  truth  of
mesmerism  and  the  wonders  which  they  witnessed  ;  nor  have  they  less  unanimity
of  sentiment  upon  the  perfect  truthfulness,  straightforwardness,  and  acuteness,
as  well  as  the  activity  and  courage,  of  Dr.  Esdaile.

f  Zoist,  No.  XXIV.,  p.  397.


by  Dr.  Esdaile.


37


cut  them;”  but  when  ether  and  chloroform  come  up,  aud
the  rest  of  the  medical  men  determine  to  oppose  Dr.  Esdaile,
he  ventures  “to  sneer  at  the  alleged  agent,  and  pooh  poohs
it  for  all  practical  purposes ;  and  thinks  it  never  can  be
available  for  general  surgical  purposes.”*  It  was  after  ether
came  up  and  gave  courage  to  the  envious  medical  men  at
Calcutta,  that  Mr.  O’Shaughnessy,  like  Dr.  Mouat, f  ate  his
words  and  turned  his  back  upon  mesmerism  and  Dr.  Esdaile :
and  now  the  cry  is  that  “he  has  gone  and  killed  a  poor
girl  with  chloroform,”  as  Dr.  Esdaile,  I  may  remark,  long
before  declared  he  would  do,  sooner  or  later,  if  he  and  the
rest  employed  chloroform  generally.  Dr.  Esdaile  told  them
so ;  and  he  wrote  to  this  effect  to  me  above  a  year  ago.
After  I  had  expressed  to  Dr.  Esdaile  my  regret  at  the  shock¬
ing  apostacy  of  my  former  pupil.  Dr.  Mouat,  and  asked.
How  is  this  ?  Dr.  Esdaile  thus  replied  to  me  in  a  letter,
dated  April  6th,  1848, — “I  may  well  echo  your  question,
‘  How  is  this  ?’  and  I  will  explain  it  to  you  also.  Mesmerism
is  the  same,  but  Dr.  Mouat  has  changed,  and  I  hope  to  make
him  change  again,  for  chloroform  and  ether  will  soon  be  found
to  be  violent  and  unsatisfactory  imitations  of  the  mesmeric  in¬
fluence ,  that  ought  to  be  resorted  to  only  when  the  superior
agent  has  failed.”

It  is  now  time  for  mesmerists  to  speak  without  reserve.
Ether  and  chloroform,  when  inhaled,  are  capricious  poisons,
very  uncertain  in  their  good  effects,  and  occasionally  injurious
and  even  fatal  in  spite  of  every  precaution.  Very  many  per¬
sons  have  been  destroyed  by  chloroform,  although  it  has
superseded  ether  from  being  more  manageable  and  less  dan¬
gerous.  I  know  that  very  far  more  deaths  have  occurred
through  it  than  have  been  made  known  to  the  public.  Many
a  case  has  been  paraded  forth  the  day  or  the  week  after  the
operation,  and  death  subsequently  has  happened  but  never
been  divulged.  A  surgeon  of  St.  George’s  Hospital  informed
me  that  once  he  had  scarcely  given  a  little  chloroform  to  a
patient  than  exhaustion  occurred  :  livid  spots  shewed  them¬
selves  on  the  surface,  and  in  a  few  days  the  patient  died  with
the  composition  of  his  frame  disintegrated,  the  whole  mass  of
blood  turned,  as  the  country  people  expressively  say.  A
clergyman,  the  father  of  a  gentleman  whom  I  know,  had  his
leg  taken  off  opposite  my  house,  by  Mr.  Travers,  a  surgeon  of
St.  Thomas’s  Hospital,  under  ether,  but  he  never  rallied  and
died  after  some  days.  A  Eight  Honourable  Member  of  Par-
liament,  who  has  often  dined  with  me,  had  lately  a  trifling
operation  performed  under  chloroform,  never  rallied,  and

*  Zoist,  No.  XXII.,  p.  160-1.  f  Zoist,  No.  XXII.,  p.  162,  &c.


38  Reports  of  the  Mesmeric  Hospital,  Calcutta,

perished  also  after  some  time.  A  patient  of  mine  chose,  after
he  had  left  town,  to  breathe  a  little  chloroform  sometimes
from  his  handkerchief  for  his  asthma,  and  was  one  day,  a
few  months  ago,  found  dead,  with  his  handkerchief  on  the
table  under  his  nose.  I  mention  these  few  as  being  in  my
own  circle  :  numbers  of  other  instances  have  been  whispered
to  me ;  a  few  are  known  to  the  public.*  But  the  conviction  is
now  spreading  that  deaths  are  occurring  from  time  to  time,
and  ascribed  to  the  surgical  operation,  the  bad  state  of  the
constitution,  &c.,  so  that  there  may  be  no  inquest,  no  noise
about  the  poisoning, — chloroform  in  fact  having  caused  the
mischief.

A  very  considerable  number  of  persons  who  have  consulted
me  have  mentioned  that  they  had  suffered  greatly  from  ether  or
chloroform; — some  for  many  months  and  up  to  the  time  I  saw
them, — some  for  days  or  weeks  only.  Some  of  them  were  af¬
flicted  with  various  nervous  symptoms ;  some  with  severe  head¬
ache  ;  some  with  loss  of  memory  or  power  of  attention ;  some
with  giddiness ;  some  with  hypochondriasis;  some  with  indi¬
gestion.  They  had,  perhaps,  not  suffered,  or  did  not  remember
to  have  suffered,  any  pain,  and  had  been  considered  instances
of  the  successful  inhalation  of  the  narcotic  :  the  operator, —
whether  dentist,  oculist,  or  general  surgeon, — not  knowing
their  subsequent  condition,  and  putting  them  into  his  success¬
ful  list.  In  some,  the  ill-effects  had  begun  immediately,  in
others  not  for  a  few  days.  Not  unfrequently,  the  patients
suffered  pain,  as  though  no  chloroform  had  been  administered ;
some,  though  the  pain  was  lessened  by  the  chloroform,  still
suffered  so  much  from  the  drug  that  they  declared  they
would  never  be  operated  upon  again  under  it,  and  on  a  second
operation  have  kept  their  word.  A  patient  of  Mr.  Chandler
had  her  cancerous  breast  cut  away  by  Mr.  Solly,  a  surgeon
of  St*  Thomases  Hospital :  Mr.  Chandler  would  have  tried  to
mesmerise  the  patient,  but  Mr.  Solly  fancied  the  operation
ought  not  to  be  delayed,  and  refused  to  operate  under  mes¬
merism,  saying,  in  perfect  and  not  very  praiseworthy  ignorance
of  the  subject,  that  the  agency  of  mesmerism  was  entirely
mental,f  and  therefore  (wherefore  ?)  bad  !  So  chloroform
was  administered,  and  the  patient  suffered  so  much  between

*  A  man  was  killed  lately  by  chloroform,  given  for  the  mere  amputation  of  a
toe,  and  the  verdict  was,  “  That  the  deceased  died  of  chloroform  properly  ad¬
ministered .,f — Lancet,  Feb.  24,  1849.

t  A  surgeon  to  be  so  ignorant  of  Dr.  Esdaile's  mighty  array  of  painless  and
beautifully  successful  operations  as  to  talk  thus  !  A  patient  told  me  lately  that
a  medical  professor  of  University  College,  London,  shewed,  when  mesmerism
was  mentioned,  the  same  ignorance,  declaring  that  the  agency  was  mental.  The
pupils  of  teachers  so  ignorant  of  mesmerism  are  greatly  to  be  pitied.


by  Dr.  Esdaile.


39


the  operation  and  the  chloroform,  that,  when  a  second  ope¬
ration  became  necessary  in  a  few  months  from  a  recurrence

V

of  the  disease  in  the  same  breast,  she  declined  the  aid  of
chloroform,  of  which  she  has  still  a  horror,  and  suffered  the
sole  agony  of  the  knife.  It  might  be  advantageous  to  Mr.
Solly,  his  pupils,  and  his  patients,  were  he  to  read  Dr.  Es-
daile^s  five  beautiful  operations,  given  at  p.  30-1,  2  in  the  pre¬
sent  Number.  I  would  ask  him  to  read  all  Dr.  Esdaile’s
operations  in  the  preceding  Numbers,  were  I  not  anxious  to
spare  his  nerves  the  effect  which  so  appalling,  mighty,  and
crushing  a  mass  of  evidence  might  have  upon  him.  Some  of
my  friends  have  found  great  violence  or  convulsions  induced  by
chloroform,  so  as  to  prevent  the  operation :  and  I  know  two
instances  in  which  very  indelicate  thoughts  and  conduct  were
induced  in  young  ladies,  considered  habitually  modest,  to  the
dismay  of  the  parents  who  were  present  at  the  extraction  of
their  teeth.  All  this  we  mesmerists  feared  from  the  first,  and
have  now  known  for  some  time.  But  we  held  our  peace ,  and
not  a  syllable  have  I  written,  nor  do  I  recollect  seeing  a  syllable
in  The  Zoist ,  against  the  drugs.  Much  provocation  was  given
us  :  we  were  laughed  at,  and  told  that  mesmerism  was  now  done
for,  that  ether  and  then  chloroform  must  supersede  it  :*  and
this  by  the  very  persons,  who  had  pronounced  it  mere  humbug
and  unreality,  and  therefore,  of  course,  incapable  of  being
superseded.  We  rejoiced  at  the  alleged  discovery  of  a  certain
and  safe  anaesthetic,  and  would  have  eaten  our  tongues  and
our  fingers  off  before  we  would  have  uttered  or  written  a  syl¬
lable  wrhich  would  have  tended  to  lessen  the  participation  of
mankind  in  these  new  blessings.  The  good  of  mankind  it  was
which  made  us  anxious  for  the  profession  to  believe  and  act
upon  the  facts  we  accumulated  of  painless  operations  through
mesmerism :  and  the  same  feeling  made  us  rejoice  in  the
alleged  discovery  of  equally  safe  and  more  certain  means  of
preventing  pain.  I  entreat  attention  to  the  papers  written  in
The  Zoist  from  the  time  that  ether  and  chloroform  were  made
known  as  anaesthetics. f  We  can  say  with  satisfaction  and
thankfulness  that  we  did  not  imitate  the  opponents  of  mes¬
merism.  It  was  not  for  us  even  to  cast  a  doubt  upon  the
utility  of  ether  or  chloroform.  We  were  not  weak  enough
to  wish  the  question  of  their  utility  and  safety  to  be  entered
upon  by  anything  but  experience.

Mesmerists  are  greatly  indebted  to  ether  and  chloroform.
Our  revilers  formerly  denied  the  possibility  of  insensibility
under  surgical  operations  :  and  patients  who  shewed  no  sen-


*  No.  XIV.,  P.  210-n.
t  No.  XVI.,  p.  576-82  ;  No.  XVII.,


p.  44-50;  p.  187-92  ;  p.  377-79.


40


Reports  of  the  Mesmeric  Hospital,  Calcutta.


sibility  and  declared  they  had  felt  no  pain  were  called  courage¬
ous,  self-commanding,  impostors.  Now  it  is  universally  al¬
lowed  that  temporary  insensibility  under  the  severest  operation
is  possible,  and  not  to  be  doubted  if  the  patient  declares  it,
however  loudly  he  may  moan,  scream,  or  holloo.*  Surgeons
who  scoffed  at  the  prevention  of  surgical  pain  and  denied  its
possibility,  and  ridiculed  us,  sending  forth  their  hostile  voices
as  if  they  were  oracles,  now  quietly  operate  with  chloroform,
or  stand  by  as  consulting  surgeons  while  the  operation  is
performed  by  another.  This  is  the  case  with  Sir  Benjamin
Brodie,  respecting  whose  never  to  be  atoned  for  treatment  of
mesmerism  and  us  I  refer  to  my  pamphletf  and  The  Zoist.%
This  is  a  great  triumph  for  us.  But  greater  triumphs  are  in
store.  Now  that  the  possibility,  safety,  and  duty  of  pre¬
venting  surgical  pain  are  universally  admitted, §  and  the  un-

*  See  Mr.  Parsons’s  excellent  paper  in  No.  XX.,  p.  377.

f  Surgical  Operations  without  Pain,  &c.,  p.  36-55.

t  No.  XVI.,  p.  596.

§  The  advantage  of  chloroform  on  some  other  grounds  is  well  known.  A
venomous  foe  of  mesmerism  and  me,  a  hospital  surgeon,  who  from  the  first  has
been  wildly  elated  at  the  idea  of  ether  and  chloroform  superseding  mesmerism,
lately  began  cutting  away  a  lady’s  breast  under  the  insensibility  of  chloroform.
As  he  cut,  it  turned  out  that  there  was  no  cancer,  but  a  mere  chronic  abscess.
A  surgeon  at  his  elbow  spoke  on  seeing  this,  but  the  operator  instantly  said,
i(  Hold  your  tongue,  the  patient  knows  nothing  of  it ;  we  must  keep  it  a  secret:”
and  so  he  continued  the  operation,  instead  of  desisting  and  closing  all  up  and  thus
publishing  his  blunder.  The  poor  woman  lost  her  breast  and  he  saved  his  re¬
putation.  Had  the  insensibility  been  mesmeric,  the  patient  might  have  heard  this
conversation  and  remembered  when  next  mesmerised  or  even  awake,  or  might
have  been  aroused  from  her  trance  by  deep  emotion  and  thus  her  breast  saved.
For  I  know  an  instance  of  a  singularly  excellent  young  woman  being  unavoidably
left  alone  in  the  mesmeric  sleep-waking  for  a  short  time.  A  young  man-servant
went  into  the  room,  stooped  down,  took  hold  of  one  of  her  feet  and  addressed
some  expressions  of  endearment  to  her.  She  instantly  awoke  and  rose  up,  to  his
terrible  dismay.  Had  she  been  in  the  narcotism  of  ether  or  chloroform,  the
particles  of  the  drug  still  circulating  in  her  blood  and  pervading  her  frame,  she
could  not  have  been  thus  instantaneously  roused  by  emotion  from  her  stupor  into
full  activity  and  power.  The  ignorance  in  the  servant  was  excusable  :  but  what
must  we  think  of  the  ignorance  in  medical  men  of  the  nature  of  the  mesmeric
coma  and  of  its  fundamental  difference  from  that  induced  by  a  narcotic  drug  !
Yet  the  medical  profession  know  not  the  difference.  A  very  sensible  surgeon,
Mr.  Grantham,  of  Crayford,  whom,  like  a  great  multitude  of  others,  I  had  to
meet  occasionally  in  consultation  before  I  proved  myself  a  madman  by  admitting
the  truth  of  mesmerism,  wrote  to  me,  on  receiving  my  pamphlet  on  operations
rendered  painless  through  mesmerism,  that,  in  reference  to  its  applicability  in
operations,  he  by  no  means  “  considered  it  to  be  advantageous  to  the  patients  to
be  put  into  a  state  of  coma.  The  effect  of  ether  I  am  convinced  is  dangerous.”
This  was  certainly  in  1847  :  but  I  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  he  yet  sees  the
difference  between  drugging  with  narcotic  matter  and  innocently  soothing  into
temporary  insensibility  to  pain  by  a  mere  process,  without  any  other  subsequent
effect  than  an  increase  of  comfort  and  strength.

In  1838,  Dr.  James  Johnson  thus  objected  to  mesmerism  : — “  Animal  mag¬
netism  must  either  be  true  or  false— a  fact  or  a  fiction.  Suppose  it  be  true  : — and
see  the  consequences.  By  a  single  wave  of  the  hand,  we  deprive  a  female  of  all


Mr.  Monat’s  testimony  to  the  truth  of  Mesmerism.  41

certainty  and  dangers  of  ether  and  chloroform  are  generally
admitted,  it  must  become  a  question,  not  whether  insensibility
is  to  be  induced,  but  what  means  shall  be  used  in  individual
cases  to  induce  it : — whether  the  perfectly  safe,  but  not  inva¬
riably  successful  method  of  mesmerism,  or  the  more  fre¬
quently  successful,  but  still  uncertain  and  frequently  inconve¬
nient  and  sometimes  fatal ,  method  by  narcotic  drugs.  Thus
must  mesmerism  for  surgical  operations  acquire  a  solid  footing
through  the  ardor  of  our  ether  and  chloroform  foes.  It  must
become  a  settled  point  that  mesmerism  have  as  fair  a  trial  as
the  time  will  allow  before  a  stupefying  drug  is  administered.


IV.  Testimony  to  the  reality  of  the  Mesmeric  Phenomena  in
University  College  Hospital.  By  Mr.  James  Mouat,
Army  Surgeon.

“  Seeing  is  believing.” — Old  Proverb.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Having  just  returned  to  England  with  my  regiment,  after  a
sojourn  of  some  years  in  the  East,  I  was  anxious  to  ascertain
how  the  cause  of  mesmerism  had  been  progressing;  for  which
purpose  I  waited  on  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  kindly  gave  me  every
information  on  the  subject.  In  consequence  of  what  took
place  at  our  interview,  and  some  remarks  that  fell  from  Dr.
Elliotson,  I  think  it  my  duty  to  record  my  conviction  of  the
truth  of  all  the  mesmeric  phenomena  witnessed  by  me  :  and,
though  I  have  not  yet  seen  clairvoyance,  I  am  perfectly
open  to  conviction.  At  the  period  the  original  experiments
were  performed  at  the  North  London,  now  University  Col¬
lege  Hospital,  I  was  the  greater  part  of  the  time  a  clinical
clerk  under  Dr.  Elliotson,  and  had  therefore  every  oppor¬
tunity  of  witnessing  the  fallacy  or  otherwise  of  the  experi¬
ments  ;  more  particularly  those  with  the  elder  Okey.  After
watching  with  great  care  the  whole  of  the  experiments  that
then  took  place,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  I  must  either
believe  what  I  saw,  or  disbelieve  the  evidence  of  my  own
senses,  which  I  was  not  at  all  prepared  to  do.  I  came,  I
saw,  I  believed.  The  first  and  strongest  conviction  made  on
my  mind,  was  the  fact  of  the  insensibility  to  pain,  and  this

sense,  and  throw  her  into  such  a  profound  sleep  that  the  teeth  may  be  pulled  out
of  her  head,  without  the  slightest  consciousness  on  her  part.  Should  such  a
power  on  the  one  side,  and  such  susceptiblity  on  the  other,  be  once  established,
no  female  in  the  realm,  however  high  or  low  her  station,  would  be  one  day  safe
from  the  machinations  of  the  wicked  and  licentious  !  In  short,  the  whole  foun¬
dations  of  society  would  be  broken  up,  and  every  fence  of  virtue  and  honour


42  Mr.  MouaVs  testimony  to  the  truth  of  Mesmerism,

conviction  was  induced  by  witnessing  the  introduction  of  a
seton  into  the  neck  of  the  elder  Okey.  I  anxiously  watched
her  countenance  during  the  performance  of  the  operation ;  it
did  not  betray  the  slightest  evidence  of  pain,  and  I  well  re¬
member  her  unfeigned  astonishment,  when  awakened,  on  plac¬
ing  her  hand  on  the  back  of  her  neck  and  feeling  the  seton.*
I  subsequently  saw  the  operation  of  bleeding  performed  on
the  same  girl,  and  the  introduction  of  some  sharp  instrument
under  the  finger-nail,  with  the  same  painless  result.  The
other  phenomena,  such  as  sleep,  the  extatic  delirium,  trac¬
tion,  catalepsy,  &c.,  were  witnessed  by  me  with  the  same
conviction  of  their  truth.  It  was  impossible  the  girl  could
deceive  us :  and  the  idea  of  any  collusion  on  the  part  of  such
a  man  as  Dr.  Elliotson,  is  too  preposterous  a  notion  to  be
entertained  by  the  most  illiberal  sceptic  in  existence.  I  had
known  Dr.  Elliotson  at  that  period  for  five  or  six  years,  and
from  what  I  saw  of  his  experiments  on  all  subjects,  I  should
consider  him  as  capable  of  picking  a  pocket  as  of  attempting
to  practise  any  deceit  on  the  profession.  I  have  since  that
period  been  frequently  on  duty  in  a  large  military  hospital,
containing  on  an  average  100  beds.  I  have  there  had  frequent
opportunities  of  testing  the  truth  of  the  effects  of  creosote,
Prussic  acid,  carbonate  of  iron,  &c. ;  for  most  of  our  know¬
ledge  of  the  proper  uses  of  which  substances  I  consider  Dr.
Elliotson  entitled  to  the  warmest  gratitude,  not  only  of  the
profession,  but  of  mankind  at  large.  I  mention  these  circum¬
stances,  because  I  consider  Dr.  Elliotson  has  not  been  done
justice  to  by  the  profession ;  and  I  am  sure  there  are  many  of
his  former  pupils  who  entertain  a  similar  opinion.  I  presided
at  a  large  meeting  of  the  students  of  University  College
Hospital,  on  the  occasion  of  Dr.  Elliotson's  retirement  from
the  Chair  of  Medicine, — it  was  a  subject  of  universal  regret.
After  a  warm  and  lengthy  discussion,  it  was  decided  by  a  ma¬
jority  of  votes,  (the  number  I  cannot  well  recollect,  but  think
it  was  about  40,)  that  Dr.  Elliotson  was  right  in  the  course  he
had  adopted.  I  am  aware  that  it  was  suggested  that  he  should
be  requested  to  cancel  his  resignation,  and  return  to  the  chair,
his  retirement  from  which  was  a  public  loss ;  but  it  was  over¬
ruled  at  the  time  by  some  of  the  doctor's  friends,  who  asserted
they  knew  him  too  well  to  think  he  would  change  his  reso-

would  be  levelled  in  the  dust !  Fortunately  for  society,  animal  magnetism  is  a
fiction — a  falsehood.” — Med.  Chir.  Review.  1838.  p.  635.

In  refutation,  I  refer  to  the  fact  just  recorded  from  my  own  knowledge  :
and  I  remind  all  not  only  that  chloroform  could  easily  be  used  for  bad  purposes
most  successfully,  but  that,  according  to  the  newspapers,  it  has  occasionally  been
so  employed.

*  See  Dr.  Elliotson’s  pamphlet  on  Operation s  without  rain,  p.  65. — Zoist.


as  demonstrated  in  University  College  Hospital ,  43

lution,  under  existing  circumstances ;  and  the  public  have
since  had  to  deplore  the  loss  of  his  valuable  medical  and
clinical  lectures.  I  knew  nothing  of  what  took  place  behind
the  scenes,  either  in  the  council  of  the  college  or  among  the
professors ;  but  I  have  always  been  given  to  understand,  that
ill-judged  policy  and  not  the  love  of  truth  or  interests  of
science  guided  the  professors  and  the  college  council  in  the
steps  they  took.*  I  may  be  wrong.  If  so,  I  trust  some  one
who  is  in  the  secrets  of  the  cabinet  will  set  me  right,  and
I  will  cheerfully  acknowledge  my  error,  as  my  object  is  to
speak  the  truth  and  to  do  justice  to  a  man  to  whom  the  pro¬
fession  are  under  so  many  obligations.  In  conclusion  I  may
add,  that  since  my  return  from  India,  I  have  seen  a  confirm¬
ation  of  the  phenomena  exhibited  in  the  cases  of  the  Okeys ;
also  the  excitement  of  distinct  cerebral  organs,  viz. :  Vene¬
ration,  Benevolence,  Conscientiousness,  Pride,  Destructive¬
ness,  Attachment,  Acquisitiveness,  Imitation,  and  Mirth ;
phenomena  being  sometimes  excited  in  opposing  organs  at
the  same  time  on  the  two  sides  of  the  brain,  with  very  marked
and  curious  results,  such  as  in  Attachment  on  one  side,  and
in  Pride  on  the  other.

James  Mouat,  M.B.C.S.,
Surgeon,  H.M.  9th  Regiment  Foot.

February,  1849.


NOTE  BY  DR.  ELLIOTSON.

How  different  is  Mr.  Mouat’s  conduct  from  that  of  his
brother !  They  were  fellow-pupils,  and  both  equally  con¬
vinced  of  the  truth  of  mesmerism,  as  demonstrated  on  my
hospital  patients.  Mr.  Mouat  has  stood  his  ground  like
a  man.  Dr.  Mouat,  who  praised  Dr.  Esdaile  to  the  skies,
vouching  for  the  truth  of  his  facts  (see  Zoist,  No.  XV.,  pp.
412 — 414),  professed,  when  surrounded  by  enemies  of  mes¬
merism,  to  become  dissatisfied  with  the  obvious  truth,  and
displayed  gross  ignorance  of  the  subject  and  a  bad  spirit
(No.  XXII.,  pp.  162 — 171).  His  mother  tells  me  that  she
is  much  displeased  with  him,  and  has  written  to  him  upon
his  unworthy  conduct.  I  once  knew  him  when  a  student  act

*  The  public  will  scarcely  credit  it,  but  the  two  professors  who,  through
intense  envy  and  a  disposition  to  manage  and  intrigue,  were  the  most  active
against  mesmerism  and  Dr.  Elliotson,  and  are  now  deserted  and  turned  round
upon  by  Mr.  Wakley  and  abused  by  him  weekly  as  the  cause  of  the  very  reduced
state  of  the  College,  still  affect  to  believe  that  the  mesmeric  patients  were  all
impostors  and  satisfactorily  exposed  by  Mr.  Wakley.  They  well  know  better,
and  they  do  this  in  sheer  despair  ;  one  burst  into  a  laugh,  lowering  his  face  and
raising  his  shoulders,  as  did  a  practitioner  of  Tavistock  Square,  not  a  Fellow,  at
the  Royal  Society,  when  the  Secretary  announced  the  present  of  the  history  of
Dr.  Elliotson’s  Cure  of  Cancer. — Zoist.


44


Remarks  of  a  Female  Mesmerist  in  reply  to

contrary  to  his  opinion  for  the  sake  of  supposed  interest,  and
I  marked  the  circumstance  and  wondered  whether  he  would
repeat  such  conduct  in  after  life.  Long  was  I  as  pleased
with  him  as  with  his  brother ;  but  his  ultimate  conduct  in
regard  to  Dr.  Esdaile  and  mesmerism  has  shewn,  to  my  deep
regret,  that  “  the  boy  was  father  to  the  man.”

John  Elliotson.


V.  Remarks  of  a  Female  Mesmerist  in  reply  to  the  scur¬
rilous  insinuations  of  Dr.  F.  Hawkins,  Dr.  Mayo ,  and
Mr.  Wakley.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

“Do  not  quacks  hunt  out  the  vices  or  infirmities  of  mankind  to  turn  them
to  profit,  some  selecting  one  and  some  another  for  their  purpose  ?  Among
quacks,  the  impostors,  called  mesmerists,  are  in  my  opinion  the  especial
favourites  of  those,  both  male  and  female,  in  whom  the  sexual  passions  burn
strongly,  either  in  secret  or  notoriously.  Decency  forbids  me  to  be  more
explicit.”

“  From  these  and  similar  artifices ,  the  physician  should  be  carefully  removed
and  guarded :  and  this  can  hardly  be  accomplished  except  by  a  sound  education,
which  will  teach  him  to  thoroughly  abhor  all  deceit  and  trick.” — Dr.  Francis
Hawkins’s  Harveian  Oration ,  delivered  before  the  London  College  of  Phy¬
sicians ,  June  24th,  1848.

“  With  respect  then  to  mesmeric  therapeutics,  beside  other  questions  which
would  spring  out  of  an  inquiry,  one  question  would  arise  peculiarly  appropriate
to  this  subject — namely,  whether  a  certain  measure  of  beneficial  results  being
conceded  to  mesmerism,  the  extent  of  benefit  is  commensurate  with  the  contingent
mischievousness  of  the  means  employed.  In  reference  to  this  point,  I  may  call
the  attention  of  my  readers  to  a  case  published  in  the  last  number  of  The  Zoist,
No.  XXIII.  It  is  that  of  Miss  Aglionby,  communicated  by  herself.  In  that
statement  it  appears  to  me  that  ‘  weakness  remaining  after  an  attack  of  fever,’
which  constituted  the  complaint,  is  removed  by  the  substitution  of  a  kind  of
possession,  which  any  father,  husband,  or  brother,  would  consider  far  more
undesirable  than  the  weakness  removed  by  it.  Here,  as  in  many  other  points
which  I  could  adduce,  or  which  my  reader’s  imagination  may  suggest,  it  should
be  remembered  that  the  removal  of  physical  evil  may  be  effected  byj  processes
ethically  objectionable.

“  Now  the  public  has  a  right  to  demand,  and  to  demand  of  us  some  answer
to  the  questions,  whether  the  asserted  removal  of  disorders  on  mesmeric  prin¬
ciples  has  been  truly  effected.  Whether  the  objections  above  hinted  at  to  their
removal  on  these  principles,  may  be  overruled.  Whether,  in  regard  to  this
latter  point,  a  line  can  be  drawn  between  legitimate  and  illegitimate  use  of  the
expedients  of  the  science.

“  For  great  indeed  is  the  curative  effect  held  out  by  these  practitioners,  and
held  out  with  no  slight  degree  of  proof.  The  talents  and  high  scientific  position
of  Dr.  Elliotson  are  well  known.  It  would  be  superfluous,  and,  therefore  imper¬
tinent,  to  say,  that  his  veracity  is  unimpeachable,  but  for  the  unscrupulousness
with  which  charges  of  insincerity  have  been  brought  against  professors  of  mes¬
merism.  Now  Dr.  Elliotson  has  recently  published  a  case  of  cancer,  apparently
absorbed  under  mesmeric  treatment.  Its  cancerous  nature  had  been  recognized
by  Mr.  Symes,  Mr.  Samuel  Cooper,  Dr.  Ashburner,  as  well  as  by  Dr.  Elliotson.
But  in  fact  the  cases  of  cure,  less  marvellous  in  kind  than  this,  of  various  dis¬
eases  under  mesmeric  agency,  are  too  numerous  to  be  put  aside  without  inquiry.
They  are  numerous  to  an  extent  which  will  induce  the  public  to  accept  the
methodus  medendi  with  all  its  presumable  evils,  unless  we  place  it  before  them


Dr.  Hawkins,  Dr.  Mayo,  and  Mr.  Wakley.


45


after  investigation  in  a  harmless  form,  if  such  a  form  can  be  devised,  or  convict  the
whole  system  of  vice  or  imposture. ” — Dr.  Mayo,  Medical  Gazette ,  Dec.  8th,  1848.

“  It  is  time  that  the  obscenities  of  mesmerism  should  engage  the  attention  of
the  heads  of  families,  and  all  persons  who  uphold  the  character  of  English  society
for  its  purity  and  morality.  The  statements  which  are  occasionally  sent  to  us
are  descriptive  of  scenes  which  are  highly  disgusting.  Why  do  not  its  medical
advocates  transfer  the  practice  to  the  hands  of  females,  since  nineteen  cases  out
of  twenty,  the  patient,  alias  the  victim,  alias  the  particeps  criminis,  is  a  female.
This  of  course  would  not  suit  the  object  of  the  benevolent  masculine  mesmeriser.
Whatever  may  become  of  the  delusion,  called  mesmerism,  we  are  resolved,  pro¬
vided  we  are  duly  aided  by  our  professional  brethren,  that  the  obscenities  of
mesmerism  shall  be  no  longer  practised  with  impunity.” — Mr.  Wakley,
Lancet ,  Nov.  11th,  1848.

To  Dr.  Elliotson.

Sir, — “  It  is  time,}  indeed  that  the  grossly  insulting
language  of  Dr.  Francis  Hawkins,  and  Mr.  Wakley,  should
not  only  “  engage  the  attention”  but  receive  a  check  from
female  mesmerists  themselves,  who  ought  especially  to
desire  “  to  uphold  the  character  of  English  society ,  for  its
purity  and  morality and  it  is  this  desire  which  prompts  me
to  venture  a  few  remarks  in  reply  to  the  scandalous  aspersions
of  these  gentlemen.  We  are  all  certain  that  what  is  truth
must  stand,  while  error  fails  and  falsehood  falls  as  an  evil,
envious,  ill  directed  arrow  shot  by  cowardice  itself.  Yet  while
these  latter  feelings  are  so  predominant  among  some  medical
men,  and  their  malignancy  is  not  confined  to  their  professional
brethren,  it  is  necessary  that  female  mesmerists  should  indig¬
nantly,  and  firmly  refute  this  charge  of  immorality.

That  numbers  of  ladies,  at  the  present  time,  believe  in,
approve  of,  and  practice  mesmerism,  is  undeniable ;  and  while
Dr.  Francis  Hawkins,  Dr.  Mayo,  or  Mr.  Wakley,  would  not
dare  to  breathe  a  word  against  the  pure  morality  of  ladies  like
Miss  Martineau  and  Lady  Mary  Bentinck,  though  they  are
wrell  known  to  believe  in,  and  approve  of,  animal  magnetism,
yet  these  polite  professionals  do  not  hesitate  to  brand  all
mesmerists*  as  being  instigated  by  the  basest  and  most
repulsively  disgusting  motives.  They  think  that  while  no
person  is  individually  spoken  of  as  being  immoral,  they  can,
with  impunity,  utter  their  obscene  insinuations  against  mes¬
merists  in  general;  and  flatter  themselves  by  this  artifice,  to
stay  the  torrent  of  public  opinion  in  favour  of  animal  mag¬
netism,  and  frighten  ladies  from  approving  and  practising  the
science,  by  branding  it  with  infamy.  This  is  thetr  arti¬
fice,  and  I  energetically  maintain,  in  Dr.  Francis  Hawkins’s
own  words,  that  “  from  this,  and  similar  artifices,  the  phy¬
sician  should  be  carefully  removed  and  guarded  :  and  this

*  I  presume  the  term  “  mesmerist,”  includes  every  person  whether  patient
or  operator.


46  Remarks  of  a  Female  Mesmerist  in  reply  to

can  hardly  he  accomplished  except  by  a  sound  education/7  a
moral  refinement ,  and  an  innate  love  of  truth,  “  which  will
teach  him  to  thoroughly  abhor  all  deceit  and  trick.77  If
Dr.  Hawkins  does  approve  a  doctrine  like  this,  then  shame  !
to  himself,  shame  !  to  every  medical  man,  who  presumes
so  unscrupulously  to  calumniate  mesmerists,  who  proudly
boast  among  their  number,  refined  and  educated  females,
possessing  highly  intellectual  attainments,  far  higher  perhaps
than  any  of  their  own  female  relatives.

Must  not  any  lady  whose  case  is  recorded  in  The  Zoist ,
or  any  woman  as  a  mesmerist,  on  reading  the  remarks  of
Dr.  Hawkins,  consider  them  as  an  insult  to  herself?  I  would
ask,  what  greater  opprobrium  could  be  publicly  affixed  to  the
character  of  a  woman,  (especially  an  educated  one,)  than  that
offered  by  him,  in  his  Harveian  Oration :  and  in  strict  justice
he  ought  to  be  compelled  to  retract,  and  apologise  for  those
expressions.

Dr.  Elliotson,  does  not  that  respect  which  a  gentleman
ought  to  entertain  for  a  lady7s  character,  and  that  politeness
with  which  one  gentleman  should  treat  another,  render  such
an  apology,  an  imperative  duty,  not  only  as  an  act  of  justice
towards  yourself,  and  other  gentlemen,  but  also  towards
female  mesmerists  :  unless  he  can  confirm  b  y  proof  and  argu¬
ment,  what  he  thus  asseverates  as  his  own  opinion  ?  Yet  can
Dr.  Hawkins  do  this?  Can  he  prove  to  the  public  that  he
was  not  actuated  by  the  evil  spirit  of  malicious  envy,  but
could  justify  his  words?  No  sir,  Dr.  Hawkins  knows  that
when  he  denounced  mesmerists,  as  the  “  especial  favourites77
of  depraved  sensualism,  he  was  uttering  a  falsehood  unworthy
of  a  gentleman,  stooping  to  a  meanness  unworthy  of  a  scholar,
practising  that  “  deceit  and  trick,  from  which  every  physician
should  be  carefully  removed  and  guarded,77  and  gratifying
the  vicious  inclinations  of  his  own  uncharitable,  unchristian
temper.  Surely  the  doctor  required

“  A  thousand  tongues,

A  throat  of  brass,  and  adamantine  lungs”

to  thus  publicly  proclaim  every  man  and  woman,  whether
aristocratic  or  plebeian,  religious  or  irreligious — educated  or
ignorant — every  subscriber  to  the  mesmeric  hospital — every
physician,  surgeon,  clergyman,  and  gentleman, known  as  a  mes¬
merist,  to  be  actuated  by  most  immoral  motives  :  truly  I  think
to  do  this,  Dr.  Hawkins  must  have  unblushing  effrontery
stamped  upon  his  brow,  and  are  not  the  words  of  holy  writ  pecu¬
liarly  applicable  to  him,  “  judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged?77

But  why,  and  on  what  account  and  proof,  are  mesmerists
to  be  thus  stigmatized  ?  “  Every  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits.77


Dr.  Hawkins ,  Dr.  Mayo ,  and  Mr.  Wakley.  47

Are  then  mesmerists,  as  a  class,  “  notoriously”  worse  than
other  people  ?  There  must  be  some  distinguishing  character
belonging  to  them,  if  what  Dr.  Hawkins  and  Mr.  Wakley
assert  be  true.  In  the  name  of  Christian  morality  then  I
emphatically  entreat  of  Dr.  Hawkins  and  Mr.  Wakley,  to
produce  and  prove  any  well  authenticated  case  of  immorality
or  vice,  which  has  proceeded  from  mesmerism.  Not  that
believers  in  that  science,  are  more  exempt  from  human  frail¬
ties  than  other  persons.

“  No,  no  !  we’ve  all  our  weak  as  well  as  f  angel  side,’

And  so  should  pity  those  who  fall  when  too  severely  tried.”

But  it  is  a  duty  incumbent  on  Dr.  Hawkins,  Mr.  Wakley,
and  also  Dr.  Mayo,  to  prove  and  show  to  ladies  what  is  so
“  ethically  objectionable”  in  mesmerism  ;  because,  perchance,
these  gentlemen  have  become  ethically  clairvoyant,  and  so
have  discovered  and  perceived  some  serpent  or  ignis  fatuus
hidden  or  concealed  beneath  the  mesmeric  influence,  and
which  has  not  been  observed  by  mesmerists,  who  are  supposed
to  possess  extremely  opaque  vision  combined  with  fatuity  and
obtuse  intellect.  Now  the  existence  of  any  such  ignis  fatuus
would  be  frightfully  obnoxious  to  any  female,  especially  a  poor
invalid;  and  Dr.  Hawkins,  Dr.  Mayo,  and  Mr.  Wakley,  may
rest  assured  that  every  respectable  lady  in  England  will  as¬
siduously  aid  them  in  crushing  the  delusion,  when  those  gen¬
tlemen  have  succeeded  in  “  convicting  the  whole  system  of
vice  or  imposture.”  Perhaps  they  have  also  discovered  what
difference  there  is  between  sleep  or  insensibility  produced  by
chloroform  and  that  induced  by  animal  magnetism  ?  and  why
surgeons  may  administer  chloroform  to  ladies ,  and  yet  may
not  induce  mesmeric  sleep  ?  If  one  causes  immorality,  so  must
the  other,  and  must  equally  deserve  their  censure  and  the  re¬
probation  of  every  well-wisher  to  society.*

Indeed,  to  further  the  moral  aspirations  of  Mr.  Wakley,
surely  it  must  be  desirable  to  solicit  “  the  attention  of  the
heads  of  families,  and  all  persons  who  uphold  the  character  of
English  society  for  its  purity  and  morality”  to  the  proposition,
“  that  government  be  forthwith  petitioned  to  establish  a  medi¬
cal  college,  where  ladies  may  be  professionally  educated,  and

*  A  weak  person,  signing  himself  William  Conningham,  Kemp  Town,
Brighton,  in  the  Brighton  Guardian  for  Feb.  7,  is  so  unscrupulous  as  to  declare
that  mesmerism  may  be,  and  notoriously  has  been,  subservient  to  pernicious  uses.
Now  we  call  upon  Mr.  Conningham  to  adduce  the  instances.  Possibly  he  is  only
dull.  For  Dr.  Elliotson’s  closing  remark  upon  the  conduct  of  Dr.  Paris,  who  is
at  this  moment  President  of  the  College  of  Physicians, — “that  the  matter  is
now  for  posterity,”*  Mr.  Conningham  conceives  to  be  that  the  subject  of  mes¬
merism  is  now  for  posterity.  The  air  of  Brighton  has  not  brightened  Mr.  Con-
ningham’s  wits. — Zoist.

•  No.  XXIV.,  p.  405.


48


Remarks  of  a  Female  Mesmerist  in  reply  to


diplomas  distributed  permitting  each  duly  qualified  lady  to
practise  as  lady-surgeon-oculist,  lady-surgeon-aurist,  lady-
surgeon-mesmerist,  &c.,  &c.,  &c.,  to  attend  upon  ladies  only.”
N.B.  Mr.  Waldey,  M.P.  to  present  the  petition.  And,  more¬
over,  we  propose  that  a  Wakleian-Hawkinsian  oration  be  de¬
livered  annually  in  plain  English  by  a  lady  member,  wherein
she  must  exhort  her  sister  students  not  to  study  and  search
out  the  beauties  of  nature,  but  to  follow  in  the  trodden  track
of  science,  which,  though  o’ergrown  with  many  false  theories,
will  be  the  easiest  path  to  present,  though  ephemeral,  popu¬
larity  ;  and  on  no  account  to  candidly  subscribe  to  the  truth
of  any  new  discovery,  until  it  be  recognized  by  all  the  world
beside,  and  so  become  “  fashionable.”  Also  it  must  be  sternly
and  stringently  inculcated  to  the  lady  students,  that  they
must  be  “  ashamed  to  change  their  opinions  even  when  truth
and  demonstration  make  this  their  duty  ;**  and  must  ever
“  consider  it  disreputable  to  desert  even  errors  of  the  longest
standing,”  for  they  are  taught  that  it  is  impossible  for  Wak¬
leian-Hawkinsian  “  human  nature  to  err  or  be  mistaken /*  and
quite  ridiculous  to  believe  that  “  chance  has  discovered  many
things  which  any  one  may  learn  from  another, — an  old  f  wo-
man*  from  a  f  girl/  a  clever  ‘  woman*  from  a  fool/**

An  initiation  into  the  noble  art  of  pseudology  will  likewise
be  absolutely  necessary  to  qualify  the  lady  students  to  deliver
this  Wakleian-Hawkinsian  oration,  or  to  become  editresses  of
medical  journals ;  for  Hawkinsian-Wakleian  example  proves,
that  to  “  rail  with  a  torrent  of  f  ribbald  street*  expressions  will
never  be  discreditable  to  them,  though  often  spiteful,  insolent
and  abusive,  and  by  which  they  will  only  display  their  own
emptiness,  absurdity,  bad  habits,  and  want  of  argument
(which  results  from  sense),  thereby  showing  themselves  mad
with  sophistries  opposed  to  reason,**  and  which  “  emptiness,
absurdity,*’  &c.,  &c.,  will  endow  them  with  courage  to  pro¬
nounce  anathemas  and  ostracism  against  the  pioneers  of  any
new  discovery :  and  cunning  sufficient  to  malign  such  without
subjecting  themselves  to  the  legal  proof  of  libelling,  or  the
danger  of  having  to  pay  £350  damages  !

Modern  experience  demonstrates  that  such  advice  is  requi¬
site  to  produce  that  “  professional  humiliation**  which  so  often
disgraces  the  talent  of  medical  journals,  and  betrays  that  their
editors  possess  that  abject  meanness  of  intellect  which  suc¬
cumbs  to  editorial  popularity  rather  than  to  truth ;  and  do  not
the  papers  of  the  18th  instant  prove,  that  no  one  is  more
ready  to  prosecute  for  slander  than  Mr.  Wakley,  while  the
pages  of  the  Lancet  exhibit  the  fact  that  no  one  possesses  a

*  Harvey’s  Works.  See  Zoist,  No.  XXIV,,  p.  401.


Dr.  Hawkins ,  Dr.  Mayo ,  and  Mr.  Wakley.


49


more  willing  spirit  to  craftily  employ  it.  The  editor  of  the
Dispatch  might  have  included  others  besides  Messrs.  Cooke
and  Healey,  as  having  exhibited  “  mean  and  pitiful  motives,”
and  have  admonished  them,  that,  were  they  “  influenced  by
conscientious  reasons,  they  would  clothe  their  sentiments  in
another  and  far  different  garb.”  “  Be  well  assured,”  he  says,
“  that  where  savage  malignity  and  detestable  jealousy  peep  out
in  such  cases,  there  is  no  sterling  honesty  of  purpose  at  the
bottom.”  The  commandment — “  Do  unto  others  as  ye  would
they  should  do  unto  you,”  is  suggested  as  an  appropriate
theme  of  reflection  for  Mr.  Wakley.

We  now  pass  on  to  another  more  gentlemanly,  candid,
and  reasonable  opponent  to  mesmerism, — one  who  can  gene¬
rously  appreciate  and  acknowledge  merit  where  it  is  due,  and
whose  investigations  will,  I  sincerely  hope,  convince  him
eventually  that  “  vice  or  imposture”  does  not  generally  exist
among  mesmerists,  or  arise  from  the  practice  of  animal  mag¬
netism.  Its  use  may  be  abused,  and  what  beneath  the  sun
may  not  ?  The  singular  phenomena  observable  in  sensitive
subjects,  perhaps  have  been  employed  by  priests  in  times  of
mental  darkness,  to  awe  an  ignorant  multitude  and  extort
money  from  them  :  this  was  an  abuse,  but  when  the  cause  of
such  phenomena  is  reasonably  accounted  for  and  generally
understood,  no  such  abuse  would  or  could  occur.  A  light  is
beginning  to  dawn  on  the  cause,  through  the  medium  of  clair¬
voyance  and  other  sources  of  investigation,  and  which  must
show  to  humble  and  admiring  minds  how  exquisitely  compli¬
cated  and  adjusted  are  those  particles  of  matter  which  compose
our  frames,  and  that  instead  of  being  “  sinful  and  corrupt
flesh,”  we  are  microcosms  “  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,”
capable  of  being  influenced  by  extremely  subtile  sympathies,
and  of  receiving  impressions  of  good  as  well  as  evil;  and  when
the  moral  light  of  Christianity  shall  more  practically  illumine
the  intellect  of  man,  and  elevate  his  character,  subduing  and
controlling  his  animal  propensities,  then  he  will  ascend  in  pro¬
gressive  advancement  to  a  purely  ethic — a  spiritualized  state
of  society.  And  how  is  this  desirable  object  to  be  attained  ?
Surely  by  man  animating  his  fellow  man  to  upward  and  holy
aspirations,  prompting  him  to  good  works,  aiding  him  by  the
force  of  example  and  precept ;

“  Calling  his  fellow  man,

With  the  eager  voice  of  youth.

From  the  gloom  of  error's  ways
To  the  sun-lit  paths  of  truth.”

Oh  !  thus  can  the  intellect  of  man  be  raised  by  man  to  that
scale  of  moral  excellence,  which  shall  fit  him  fully  to  appre-

VOL.  VII.  E


50


Remarks  of  a  Female  Mesmerist  in  reply  to


ciate  the  promised  bliss  of  moving  'mid  the  spheres  of  light
around  the  throne  of  the  Everlasting  King,  and  which  in¬
spiring  thought  must  ever  urge  him  to  live  here  below  as  be-
cometh  an  aspirant  for  immortality,  and  incite  him  to  use  his
increasing  endeavours  to  promote  “  peace  on  earth,  good-will
towards  man,  and  glory  to  God  in  the  highest  !"  Each  must
possess  a  generous  spirit  of  emulation  in  promulgating  truth,
nor  suffer  his  mind  to  be  so  warped  by  preconceived  and,
perhaps,  mistaken  ideas  of  original  and  inherent  sin,  as  to  be
disqualified  for  believing  that  human  nature  is  incapable  of
aught  but  what  is  evil,  vicious,  and  immoral.  Dr.  Fossati
has  ingeniously  shewn  the  “  art  of  making  madmen  at  plea¬
sure," — may  not  men  be  made,  to  a  certain  degree,  moral  at
pleasure  ?  Certainly  not  by  continually  telling  them,  there
is  vice  in  one  and  imposture  in  another  person,  thus  creating
a  species  of  miasmatic  jealousy  and  distrust, — not  by  exciting
degrading  and  sensual  thoughts,  which  would  never  have  had
existence,  or  would  have  lain  dormant,  but  for  evil-disposed
persons  continually  calling  them  into  play, — not  by  “  sug¬
gesting"  to  the  “  imagination"  “  presumable  evils,"  and  rous¬
ing  angry  emotions  by  unjustifiable  censure  and  suspicions. — •
No,  it  is  not  by  these  means  that  morality  and  Christian  love
will  abound;  and  yet  how  perseveringly  are  such  devices
adopted  by  Pharisaic  propounders  of  ethic  laws  !  It  is  evident
they  forget  the  saying  of  Cicero,  that  “  It  is  as  hard  for  the
good  to  suspect  evil,  as  it  is  for  the  evil  to  suspect  good."

Dr.  Mayo  acknowledges  “  the  cases  of  cure  of  various
diseases  under  mesmeric  agency,  to  be  so  numerous,  as  to
induce  the  public  to  accept  the  methodus  medendi ,  with  all
its  presumable  evils,  unless  he  can  place  it  before  them  after
investigation,  in  a  harmless  form, — if  such  a  form  can  be
devised ;  or  convict  the  whole  system  of  vice  or  imposture."
Oh,  tremble  all  ye  mesmerists !  for  the  hour  of  investigation
is  verily  approaching ;  but  mark  well !  that  the  verdict  of
“  guilty"  is  not  returned  before  any  investigation  has  taken
place ;  such  a  farcial  mistake  is  likely  to  be  committed  by
medical  judges.  Again  Dr.  Mayo  says,  that  “  the  public,  the
fathers,  husbands,  and  brothers  of  England  have  a  right  to
demand,  and  to  demand  of  him,  ivhat  is  desirable  or  undesir¬
able  for  their  female  relatives.”  Oh!  groan  ye  fathers,  hus¬
bands,  and  brothers,  for  ye  are  all  demented,  and  your  sense
transferred  to  the  more  capacious  intellect  of  Dr.  Mayo  !
And  is  it  not  usual,  Dr.  Elliotson,  for  competent  judges  to
be  consulted,  respecting  the  solution  of  any  query  ;  and  the
opinion  of  those  requested,  who  have  spent  years  in  the  in¬
vestigation  of  the  truth  of  any  discovery?


Dr.  Hawkins ,  Dr.  Mayo ,  and  Mr.  Waldey.  51

Besides  it  is  the  fashion  now,  for  surgeons  to  inquire  and
learn  from  their  patients  (as  in  the  case  of  Miss  Aglionby  and
Mr.  Nixon)  the  wonders  of  mesmerism.  I  can  bear  my  humble
testimony  that  this  is  often  the  case,  and  that  many,  though
convinced  of  the  reality  of  mesmeric  influence,  lack  that
moral  courage  to  avow  themselves  believers,  or  fear  it  might
clash  with  their  interests.  I  am  happy  to  perceive  that  Mr.
Wakley  has  distrust  sufficient  to  say  he  will  crush  mesmer¬
ism,  “ provided  he  is  duly  aided  by  his  professional  brethren.”
There  are  signs  of  fear  expressed  in  that  sentence.  Within
the  last  few  weeks  I  have  had  the  gratification  of  seeing  the
deep  and  insensible  mesmeric  trance  induced  upon  a  surgeon,

Mr.  W - ,  who  has  contributed  some  cases  to  the  Lancet ,

besides  being  a  “  constant  reader”  of  that  paper ;  and  who
has  since  readily  acknowledged,  that  it  would  be  much  more
professional  and  just  of  Mr.  Wakley,  were  he  to  investigate
rather  than  so  rashly  censure  and  abuse.  However,  I  believe

Mr.  W -  considers  the  (t  time”  necessary  to  effect  some

mesmeric  cures,  will  be  a  hindrance;  forgetting  the  “time”
that  invalids  have  to  swallow  disagreeable  medicines.  And
now,  what  is  the  modus  operandi  involving  such  “  presumable
evils  ?”  Simply  passing  the  hands  slowly  from  the  coronal
part  of  the  head,  before  the  face,  to  the  chest,  or  down  the
arms,  without  contact,  and  sometimes  allowing  the  thumbs
and  tips  of  the  fingers  to  rest  on  the  forehead  lightly ;  or
another  method  of  passing  the  hands  from  the  coronal  part
of  the  head  to  the  shoulders  and  blade-bones :  in  both  cases
using  concentrated  attention.  I  merely  enumerate  the  com¬
mon  modes  of  inducing  the  trance,  because  Dr.  Mayo  says,
“  if  a  harmless  form  of  mesmerising  can  be  devised.”  Of  course
Dr.  Mayo  could  not  be  aware  of  these  “  harmless  forms,”  or
he  would  not  speak  of  more  harmless  ones  being  devised ;  by
such  passes  I  have  succeeded  in  producing  the  different  stages
of  coma,  with  clairvoyance,  rigidity,  catalepsy,  attraction,  mental
sympathy,  (the  last  four  phenomena  in  my  dear  mother,  who
is  sensitive;)  and  once,  unfortunately,  I  produced  a  condition
on  a  young  woman,  which  lasted  for  50  hours,  and  caused
me  extreme  mental  agony ;  therefore  I  know  from  experience,
that  “  mesmerism  ought  not  to  be  trifled  with :”  but  I  have
also  had  the  pleasure  of  relieving  head-ache,  rheumatic  pains,
and  severe  tooth-ache,  even  when  it  caused  delirium.  What
can  the  sternest  upholder  of  morality  discover  as  wrong  in
such  harmless  forms  of  curing  the  “  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to  ?”
Where  exist  the  “  presumable  evils,”  except  in  the  mind  of
the  evil-thinker  and  evil-speaker?  With  regard  to  Dr.  Mayo’s
ideas  of  “  possession,”  they  would  exactly  suit  such  ancient

e  2


52  Remarks  of  a  Female  Mesmerist  in  reply ,  tyc.

dames  who  believe  in  witchcraft ;  but  are  extremely  ludicrous
in  a  respectable  physician  of  the  nineteenth  century.  When
I  first  commenced  mesmerising  my  mother  about  three  years
ago, — one  afternoon  I  was  compelled  to  leave  her  in  the  trance
for  ten  minutes,  and  on  my  returning,  I  found  her  shivering,
crying,  and  almost  reduced  to  a  state  of  fatuity,  though  per¬
fectly  sensible  that  it  was  my  absence  which  caused  these
unpleasant  and  uncontrollable  sensations ;  I  immediately  made
some  passes,  which  soon  warmed,  soothed,  and  restored  her
to  her  usual  comfortable  half-comatose  condition.  It  was
really  laughable  to  see  how  the  expression  of  her  countenance
was  altered.  She  described  her  feelings  afterwards,  and  said,
that  when  I  had  left  the  room,  she  appeared  surrounded  by  a
very  unpleasant  and  icy  atmosphere,  and  though  quite  sen¬
sible,  could  not  resist  crying  and  appearing  foolish.  Of  course
she  was  “  possessed.”  I  can  now  leave  her  with  safety,  some
change  having  apparently  taken  place  in  her  sleep ;  though
she  is  always  more  warm  if  I  sit  with  my  hand  placed  in  hers.
Assuredly,  if  Dr.  Mayo  will  investigate  the  subject,  the  re¬
sults  will  amply  repay  him  ;  and  most  likely  there  are  mem¬
bers  of  his  own  family  susceptible,  and  from  whom  he  will
not  fear  imposture.

Far  be  it  from  me  to  be  thought  presumptuous  in  intruding
remarks,  Dr.  Elliotson,  upon  your  notice;  but  I  have  ven¬
tured  to  do  so,  in  the  hope  of  assisting  to  prevent  a  repetition
of  insults,  offered  to  the  character  of  female  mesmerists,  and
also  to  add  my  humble  testimony  to  the  truth  of  mesmeric
science ;  the  evidence  of  even  one  helps  to  form  a  mountain
mass.  Allow  me,  sir,  to  conclude  by  expressing  my  unfeigned
admiration  of  your  benevolent  and  philanthropic  endeavours
to  promote  the  happiness  and  welfare  of  mankind;  for  that
delicate  kindness  which  often  accompanies  your  gratuitous
services  towards  sufferers  in  the  lowly  walks  of  life ;  and  for
your  “  love  of  truth  and  justice,”  which  Demosthenes  says,
“  is  what  we  have  in  us  of  the  image  of  God.”  I  would  also
add  my  ardent  and  heartfelt  wishes  for  your  health  and  feli¬
city,  and  trust  you  may  be  long  spared  to  enjoy  a  living  as
well  as  a  “  sepulchral  fame.”

I  have  the  honour  to  remain,  Sir,

Your’s,  most  respectfully,

Maidstone,  Elizabeth  - .

February  28th,  1849.

NOTE  BY  DR.  ELLIOTSON.

The  preceding  communication  was  sent  to  me  with  the  fol¬
lowing  note ;  but  from  whom  I  have  not  the  most  distant  idea.


Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development.  53


“  Miss - begs  to  present  her  respectful  compliments  to  Dr.

Elliotson,  and  has  taken  the  liberty  of  addressing  the  accompanying
remarks  to  him,  and  should  he  deem  them  worthy  of  a  place  in
The  Zoist ,  she  will  feel  herself  honoured  ;  having  read  with  much
indignation  the  very  unjust  accusations  brought  against  believers  in
mesmerism

I  am  rejoiced  to  see  that  such  persons  as  Dr.  Francis
Hawkins,  Mr.  Wakley,  and  Dr.  Mayo,  are  appreciated  by
women  as  they  deserve.  They  ought  all  to  blush ;  but  espe¬
cially  Dr.  Mayo,  from  whom  better  things  might  by  many
have  been  expected.  There  is  no  more  noble  sight  than  a
virtuous,  clever,  and  courageous  woman  roused  into  indignant
action  against  those  of  my  own  sex  whom  she  justly  despises.

John  Elliotson.


VI.  Notes  on  the  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  De¬
velopment.  By  Mr.  James  Straton,  Aberdeen.

Guided  by  the  instructions  and  following  the  example  of  Dr.
Gall,  we  find  it  easy, — very  easy  indeed,  to  distinguish  the
common  from  the  uncommon,  the  ordinary  from  the  extraor¬
dinary,  in  the  size  and  shape  of  heads,  casts,  and  crania.

If  we  examine  any  dozen  or  more  of  ordinary  cases  so
attentively  and  repeatedly  as  to  retain  in  the  memory  a  mode¬
rately  accurate  mental  picture  of  the  figure,  shape,  or  outline
of  the  various  parts,  we  shall  then  understand  at  a  glance  that
there  is  an  unusual  hollow  near  the  centre  of  the  moral  region
in  the  head  of  It.  B.  Boy,  and  an  unusual  prominence  in  the
corresponding  part  of  the  head  of  Greenacre  the  murderer,
that  there  is  an  unusual  fulness  just  above  the  ears  in  the
casts  of  Tardy,  Gotfred,  and  Linn,  and  an  unusual  flatness
in  the  corresponding  parts  of  many  of  the  Hindoo  skulls ;  in  a
word,  it  is  very  easy  to  distinguish  the  cases  which  are  in  any
part  or  parts  markedly  prominent  or  deficient,  from  those  form¬
ing  the  great  mass  of  cases  which  are  in  no  part  remarkable.

Gall  confined  himself  to  marked  cases. — “Jamais  je  n'ai  pre-
tendu  distinguer  des  modifications  peu  prononcees  des  formes
du  crane,  ou  de  legeres  nuances  du  caractere.”  Should  we,
his  followers,  continue  to  do  so  ?  Marked  cases  have  peculiar
advantages,  but  there  are  also  disadvantages  attending  them  :
their  evidence  is  decided  of  its  kind,  so  far  as  it  goes,  but  it
can  hardly  be  said  to  be  decisive.  Organs  markedly  prominent
in  one  case  and  markedly  deficient  in  another,  the  manifesta¬
tions  being  equally  marked  in  excess  and  deficiency,  are  evi¬
dence  of  the  localities  and  functions  of  particular  parts  of  the
brain,  to  which  most  minds  will  accord  great  weight :  but  such


54  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development,

cases  are  rare — very  rare  indeed.  So  uncommon  are  they,  that
of  the  37  or  38  organs,  which,  according  to  some,  or  the  42  or
43,  which,  according  to  others,  compose  the  entire  brain,  the
localities  of  only  25  or  26  of  these  can  be  held  as  determined
with  a  tolerable  degree  of  precision.  The  variety  of  opinion
which  obtains  at  the  present  moment,  regarding  the  localities
of  so  many  organs,  is  decisive  proof  alike  of  the  paucity  of
marked  cases  and  the  impotency  of  ordinary  observation  and
record  to  produce  unanimity.  The  localities  of  so  many  organs
being  undecided,  the  supposed  function  can  be  received  in
no  other  way  than  as  mere  conjectures.  All  this  is  fact,  after
phrenology  has  been  known  and  cultivated  over  the  civilized
world  during  half  a  century.  How  very  few  and  far  between
the  cases  must  be  which  are  of  a  marked,  decided,  and  un¬
mistakable  character;  and,  to  a  corresponding  extent,  how
broad  and  firm  is  the  basis  for  the  opinion,  that  such  cases
are  the  exceptions  to,  and  not  the  exponents  of,  the  rule.

The  question  of  confining  ourselves  to  cases  of  extreme
preponderance  and  deficiency  of  individual  organs  is  answered
in  the  negative  by  almost  every  phrenologist  in  the  world,
perhaps,  at  the  present  moment.  Every  active  observer  of
medium  talents  pretends  to  distinguish  the  most  prominent
and  deficient  organs  of  every  head  which  he  passes  his  hands
over.  V ery  different  degrees  of  proficiency  may  be  professed
by  different  observers  :  some  pretend  to  nothing  more  than
distinguishing  the  most  prominent  and  defective  organs  in  all
ordinary  cases, — and  even  this  much  with  becoming  diffidence,
whilst  others  again  offer  "notes  of  development  for  Is.,  ditto
with  verbal  description  of  disposition  and  character  for  2s.  6d.,
and  ditto  ditto,  with  full  particulars  for  5s.”  to  all  comers ;
and  it  may  be  noticed  to  obtain,  as  a  very  general  rule,  that
the  more  humble  the  proficiency  the  greater,  in  the  same
ratio,  is  the  degree  of  pretension.  A  glance  of  the  eye  and
a  touch  of  the  fingers  are  all  that  is  necessary,  according  to
some,  to  distinguish  six,  seven,  eight,  or  more  degrees  of  de¬
velopment  of  the  organs,  in  the  most  common  cases.  Leav¬
ing  these  extreme  pretenders  to  run  riot  in  their  own  absurd¬
ities,  we  may,  nevertheless,  admit  safely  that  the  peculiarities
both  of  cerebral  development  and  character  are  sufficiently
marked,  either  individually  or  in  classes,  to  afford  legitimate
evidence  of  cerebral  physiology.  In  thus  raising  our  preten¬
sions  so  far  above  those  of  our  master,  it  is  necessary  to  be
well  assured  of  possessing  the  pre-requisites  for  the  degree  of
precision  which  we  profess  to  have  attained.  Some  of  these
I  have  already  discussed  very  briefly.

In  the  previous  Number,  Yol  VI.,  pp.  291 — 301,  while


by  Mr.  James  'St  rut  on.


maintaining  that  the  human  head,  cast,  or  cranium,  presents
the  same  facilities  for  accurate  measurement  as  any  similar
cubic  mass  of  inert  matter  does,  and  that  our  system  of  ob¬
servation  and  record  should  embrace  all  the  essentials  for  ap¬
preciating,  preserving  and  transmitting  definite  ideas  of  size
and  development,  of  capability  and  tendency,  I  have  shown,

I.  That  the  ordinary  series  of  measurements  both  by  line
and  by  callipers  are  inappropriate  and  deceptive.

II.  That  the  ordinary  instructions  for  observation  and
record  followed  in  this  country  are  imperfect,  unintelligible,
and  contradictory,  in  some  particulars.

III.  That  unanimity,  in  regard  to  what  constitutes  the
equal  balance  proportion  of  organs,  is  indispensable  to  una¬
nimity  in  all  the  subsequent  steps  of  estimating  development :
nevertheless  that,

IV.  A  great  and  increasing  diversity  of  opinion  exists  at
this  moment,  as  to  what  the  equal  balance  proportions  really
are ;  and  that  the  results  of  the  exertions  made  to  obtain  the
requisite  knowledge  are  conclusive  of  the  want  of  unanimity,
and  the  impossibility  of  ever  attaining  it  by  the  ordinary
system  of  observation  and  record.

Judging  from  some  specimens  before  me,  I  must  conclude
that  the  parties  who  produced  them  had  scarcely  a  single  idea  in
common,  of  either  what  is  required  or  how  it  may  be  obtained.

Supposing  the  respective  parties  to  be  correct  and  con¬
sistent  in  estimating  development  of  parts,  the  anterior  region
which  the  one  calls  medium ,  the  other  should  call  large , — the
posterior  region  which  the  one  calls  full,  the  other  should  call
small, — the  coronal  region  which  the  one  calls  full,  the  other
should  call  large, — and  so  on.  The  only  or  chief  idea  guiding
each  author  seems  to  have  been  to  obtain  the  smooth  rounding
off  over  the  surface,  which  he  regarded  as  indicative  of  nothing
peculiar  or  appreciable  in  either  excess  or  deficiency  of  indi¬
vidual  organs.

The  general  smoothness  may  often  be  found  where  great
deviations  from  the  equal  balance  exist  between  the  regions,
groups,  or  clusters  of  organs.  In  this  fact,  we  have  the  most
fruitful  source  of  errors  in  estimating  development,  and  the
variety  of  opinion  which  exists  regarding  both  the  equal  and
unequal  balance  proportions.

At  a  farther  advanced  stage  of  our  inquiries  we  shall  be
much  better  prepared  to  judge  of  the  subject  in  all  its  bearings.
I  therefore  leave  it,  in  the  mean  time,  wTith  one  or  two  re¬
marks.

The  equal  balance  and  the  average  heads  are  generally
spoken  of  as  one  and  the  same ;  and  I  have,  hitherto,  followed


56  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development,

the  use  and  wont  in  speaking  of  them  as  the  same,  not  with¬
out  doubts,  however,  of  the  propriety  of  so  doing :  but  sup¬
posing  them  still,  for  a  moment,  to  be  synonymous,  the  ques¬
tions  present  themselves,  What  is  an  average  head  ?  What
average  do  we  mean,  and  speak,  and  write  about  ?  Is  it  an
average  from  a  series  of  inductions  embracing  all  nations,
tribes,  and  people  ?  or,  is  it  the  average  of  any  one  nation  or
tribe  ?  Has  the  average  of  any  one  nation,  tribe,  or  class  of
people  ever  been  ascertained  with  a  moderate  degree  of  care
and  accuracy?  We  must  answer  in  the  negative.  Some
little  progress  has  been  made  in  ascertaining  average  size,  but
as  to  average  shape,  figure,  form,  outline,  or  development
of  parts,  the  scientific  evidence  is  neither  collected  nor  collated
yet ;  even  what  may  be  called  the  “  previous  questions”  have
scarcely  been  mooted — far  less  discussed.  Suppose  we  were
to  undertake  the  discovery  of  the  average  head  of  this  or  any
other  nation,  how  should  the  inquiry  or  investigation  be  con¬
ducted  ?  Is  each  observer  to  choose  “  by  the  estimate  of  the
eye  and  the  hand”  what  he  thinks  is  an  average  head  ?  This
is  obviously  what  has  been  hitherto  done,  and  we  have  glanced
at  the  results.  In  determining  the  average  head,  should  both
or  only  one  of  the  sexes  be  taken  into  account  ?  A  very
general  opinion  seems  to  prevail,  that  the  male  head  either
chiefly  or  wholly  should  be  considered.  Again,  should  all
ages  be  included  in  the  average?  No,  will  perhaps  be  the
most  general  answer  to  this  question, — only  the  mature  head.
But  again,  when  does  the  human  head  reach  maturity  ?  do  all
parts  reach  maturity  at  the  same  time  ?  Supposing  all  these
and  many  other  questions  fully  answered,  and  supposing  the
average  heads  of  twenty,  thirty,  or  forty  different  nations  as¬
certained  and  recorded  in  intelligible  terms,  it  is  well  known
that  national  peculiarities  are  as  marked  as  those  of  individuals
are.  It  follows,  that  the  average  head,  when  accurately  ob¬
tained,  must  embody  the  peculiarities  of  the  nation  which  it
represents  ;  if,  then,  the  average  head  of  any  one  nation  give
precisely  the  equal  balance  proportions  (something  very  im¬
probable  to  say  the  least  of  it),  all  the  others  must,  as  a  matter
of  course,  be  over  or  under  the  truth  in  some  one  or  more
particulars.  How,  then,  are  we  to  know  which  is  which  ?

These  are  questions  much  easier  asked  than  answered.
Their  magnitude  and  importance  will  be  seen  at  a  glance,
however ;  and  this  is  all  that  I  am  anxious  to  press  in  the
mean  time.  Enough  has  been  said  to  show  that  the  produc¬
tion  of  an  equal  balance  model  is  a  much  more  serious  matter
than  it  appears  at  first  sight  to  be, — that,  instead  of  being
one  of  the  easiest  as  many  seem  to  think,  it  is  really  one  of


by  Mr.  James  Straton.


57


the  most  difficult  problems  waiting  solution, — and  that  we
may  well  doubt  whether  any  of  the  many  model  heads  now
in  existence  (produced  we  know  neither  when,  where,  how,
nor  by  whom,  except  in  two  or  three  cases)  will  stand  the
tests  to  which  they  must  be  subjected.  All  the  while,  the
fact  must  be  kept  in  view,  that  a  clear  and  definite  knowledge
of  what  constitutes  the  equal  balance  proportion  is  indispen¬
sable  to  an  accurate  estimate  of  any  and  all  degrees  of  unequal
balance  of  organs, — that  to  whatever  extent  a  diversity  of
opinion  exists  among  phrenologists  regarding  the  equal  balance
proportion,  a  similar  diversity  must,  as  certainly,  exist  between
them  (granting  that  each  observer  is  always  consistent  with
himself — truly  a  difficult  part  of  the  process)  in  estimating  the
development  of  every  individual  case, — and  the  record  of  deve¬
lopment  cannot  convey  the  observer’s  meaning  to  others,  who
are  ignorant  of  wffiat  he  holds  to  be  the  equal  balance  of  organs.

Estimating . — As  long  as  estimating  development  is  ex¬
clusively  the  work  of  the  eye  and  the  hand,  there  will  natu¬
rally  and  necessarily  exist  as  great  a  difference  of  proficiency
as  difference  of  observing  talents  and  training  can  produce,
but  the  existing  diversity  is  even  greater  than  these  will  ac¬
count  for.  Some,  as  I  have  already  hinted,  attempt  nothing
beyond  estimating  three  or  four  degrees  of  development ;
others  pretending  to  estimate  hairbreadth  differences — find
six,  seven,  or  eight  degrees  of  development  in  every  ordinary
head, — a  degree  of  precision  which  may  be  within  the  grasp
of  a  first  rate  painter,  sculptor,  or  other  highly  trained  artist,
but  is  certainly  altogether  beyond  any  inferior  attainments.
But  the  chief  point  to  be  noticed  in  this  department  is  the
fact  that  any  approach  to  uniformity  in  estimating  degrees  of
development  is  not  expected — not  even  considered  necessary
by  many  phrenologists.

Scales. — Many  scales  of  terms,  words,  or  figures  are  in
use  by  phrenologists  to  express  the  degrees  of  development  of
the  cerebral  organs.  These  scales  differ  from  each  other  in
no  essential  particular  except  the  number  of  terms  of  which
they  are  composed ;  the  shortest  which  I  have  seen  extends  to
five,  and  the  longest  to  twenty  terms :  the  whole  may  be
classed  under  two  scales,  viz.,  the  short  and  the  long.  All
the  remarks  which  I  made  in  the  previous  paper  on  the  terms
which  are  used  to  designate  different  sizes  of  heads,  apply
with  equal,  or  rather  with  increased  force,  to  the  terms  used
to  indicate  development  of  organs.  All  the  scales  are  conven¬
tional  :  they  bear  no  relation  whatever  to  any  known  or  sci¬
entific  standard.  None  of  the  terms  of  any  of  the  scales  have
a  defined  meaning  or  permanent  value  :  each  observer  uses


58  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development,

the  scale  which  he  considers  on  the  whole  most  convenient,
and  attaches  the  meaning  which  he  thinks  most  appropriate
to  the  terms  of  the  scale  which  he  uses.  Those  who  use  the
short  scale,  include  all  the  terms  in  expressing  the  develop¬
ment  of  every  case  which  they  record,  and  many  who  use  the
long  scale  follow  a  practice  wffiich  is  essentially  the  same  as
using  a  short  one,  that  is,  they  acquire  a  habit  of  using  a
range  of  favourite  terms  for  all  sizes  of  heads,  whilst  other
observers  again,  in  using  the  long  scale,  attempt,  in  a  general
sort  of  way,  to  choose  the  most  appropriate  terms  for  the  size
of  the  head  in  hand.  This  is  obviously  the  best  way  of  using
the  best  scale  in  use,  but  it  is  also  the  most  difficult, — so  dif¬
ficult  is  it  that  it  may  unhesitatingly  be  pronounced,  not  only
impracticable,  but  impossible  in  the  present  state  of  this  de¬
partment  of  phrenology ;  for  admitting  that  the  long  scale  is
extensive  enough  in  its  range  to  embrace  all  degrees  of  de¬
velopment  from  the  lowest  in  the  smallest  head  to  the  highest
in  the  largest  one,  the  observer  who  could  accurately  use  the
appropriate  terms  for  every  degree  of  development  in  all  sizes
of  heads,  would  always  state  the  development  of  the  same
head  in  the  same  terms,  and  every  observer  who  used  the
same  scale  in  the  same  way  would  state  the  development  of
the  same  head  in  the  same  terms  (always  supposing  of  course
that  they  are  unanimous  regarding  the  equal  balance  propor¬
tions),  the  same  observer  would  be  uniform  with  himself  at
all  times,  and  with  all  others  at  the  same  time.  Now  this
uniformity  is  never  seen — never  expected,  yet  the  very  want
of  it  is  decisive  of  the  want  of  accuracy  also.

Uniformity . — We  sometimes  see  uniformity  mentioned  in
phrenological  works  as  something  desirable,  but  at  the  same
time  as  quite  unattainable ;  and  so  indeed  it  is  in  the  use  of
a  long  scale  (with  a  short  scale  uniformity  is  as  easy  as  it  is
useless)  by  eye  and  hand  estimate.  No  phrenologist  would
undertake  to  give  the  development  of  the  same  head  in  the
same  terms,  with  an  interval  of  a  week,  a  month,  or  a  year  be¬
tween  ;  and  no  two  or  more  phrenologists,  going  over  the  same
case,  would,  by  any  chance,  use  the  very  same  terms.  Hence
it  happens,  that  we  more  frequently  hear  uniformity  spoken
of  as  something  that  can  be  easily  and  safely  dispensed  with —
as  a  degree  of  precision,  in  a  word,  which  is  not  required  in
phrenology.  It  is  held  to  be  “  sufficient  for  all  practical  pur¬
poses”  if  the  terms  used  to  express  development  range  always
in  the  same  order  for  the  same  case :  if,  for  example,  one
observer  repeat  his  estimate  of  the  same  case  several  times,
or  if  several  observers  go  over  the  same  head,  and  it  is  found
that  the  terms  in  which  they  express  the  degrees  of  develop-


by  Mr.  James  Straton.


59


ment  exhibit  the  same  “  relative  positions” — say  4,  3,  5,  6,  or
14,  13,  15,  16,  or  7,  6,  8,  9,  or  any  similar  series, — it  is  held
to  be  quite  a  successful  estimate,  and  exhibiting  all  the  uni¬
formity  which  the  nature  of  the  subject  admits  of.  It  is  cer¬
tainly  a  degree  of  uniformity  very  rarely  attained  even  by
observers  who  frequently  practise  together,  and  much  more
rarely  by  completely  independent  observers,  notwithstanding
they  may  be  unanimous  regarding  the  equal  balance  pro¬
portions.

If  they  are  at  variance  on  that  particular,  uniformity  in
any  other  particular  is  altogether  hopeless.  Let  us  suppose
now  for  a  moment,  that  ten  or  a  dozen  observers  have  gone
over  the  same  case,  and  that  their  notes  of  development  ex¬
hibit  all  the  uniformity  which  is  generally  held  to  be  necessary,
what  is  the  amount  of  information  which  the  record  conveys  ?
Simply  this, — the  medium  organs,  the  more  powerful  and  the
less  powerful  organs  are  pointed  out  by  either  name  or  number,
and  so  far  as  the  localities  of  the  organs  are  known  and  their
functions  ascertained,  we  have  in  the  note  of  development  a
key  to  the  tendency ,  or  rather  I  should  say,  to  the  direction
of  the  tendency ;  for  regarding  the  force  or  power  of  the  ten¬
dency — viz.,  the  capability  of  the  organs — we  are  left  com¬
pletely  in  the  dark.  It  is  not  considered  necessary,  or  at
any  rate,  it  is  expressly  stated  and  distinctly  understood,  that
the  terms  in  which  the  development  of  the  individual  organs
are  given,  do  not  give  information  of  the  power  or  capability.
The  size  of  the  head  is  stated  to  be  the  proper  index  of  the
power  of  the  organs,  both  individually  and  collectively.  Now
the  size  of  the  head  (supposing  that  to  be  correctly  ascertained)
is  an  index  of  the  power  of  the  medium  organs,  those  which
are  in  equal  balance  proportion — if  any  such  there  be ;  but
there  may  be  none,  as  frequently  happens  in  unequally  ba¬
lanced  heads ;  in  such  cases,  and  in  all  cases  the  size  of  the
head  and  the  note  of  development  leave  us  uninformed  of  the
power  or  capability  of  one  and  all  of  the  organs  which  rise
above  and  sink  below  the  equal  balance  development.  The
range  of  power  indicated,  or  intended  to  be  indicated,  may  be
from  the  force  of  genius  to  the  feebleness  of  idiocy,  or  any
of  the  many  intermediate  degrees  of  development  between
these  extremes.

I  might  notice  other  sources  of  uncertainty,  or  it  may  be
of  error,  which  undoubtedly  exist.  How  few  observers  pre¬
pare  themselves  by  a  judicious  course  of  training, — a  training
which  should  be  the  same  in  kind  and  very  much  in  degree
also,  as  that  of  the  painter,  the  draftsman,  the  modeller,  or  the
sculptor.  Again,  how  few  are  fully  aware  of  the  many  pecu-


60  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development ,


liarities  of  development  calculated  to  mislead  even  a  well-
trained  eye.  If  the  posterior  portion  of  the  cerebellum,  in  a
given  case,  be  under  medium,  and  Philoprogenitiveness  in
medium  proportion,  at  least  nine  observers  in  every  ten  will
call  the  latter  more  than  medium  ;  and  if  it  so  happen  that  in
a  similar  case,  Concentrativeness,  Adhesiveness,  and  Self¬
esteem,  are  also  below  medium,  ninety-nine  of  every  hundred
observers  will  estimate  a  medium  Philoprogenitiveness  as  large.
Taking  another  case,  in  which  Acquisitiveness  is  medium  or
even  less,  and  Alimentiveness  much  below  medium,  the  for¬
mer  will  most  frequently  be  over  estimated,  and  still  more
frequently  if  tune  also  be  under  medium  development.  The
group  peculiarities,  as  I  may  call  them,  of  cerebral  develop¬
ment  are  numerous  and  often  perplexing :  but  I  pass  over  these
and  other  particulars,  being  anxious  to  confine  my  notes  to
imperfections  which  clearly  and  obviously  exist,  and  require
immediate  attention,  with  a  view  to  their  removal,  in  order
that  our  science  may  advance  with  the  intelligence  of  the  age
and  keep  pace  with  the  rapid  progress  of  other  departments  of
knowledge.

Let  us  now,  by  way  of  summing  up,  consider  for  a  moment
the  bearings  of  the  foregoing  remarks  on  a  note  of  development.


NOTE.


Name  and  Age,  P.  G - ,  10  years.

Native  of  Scotland.

Education.  Parish  School.

Station.  Farmer's  Son.  Parents  comfortable  in  circumstances ,  and
intelligent.

Temperament.  Mixed  ;  Sanguine-nervous  preponderating.


M  easurements .

Round . 214  12  to  12 . 5.3  Ear  to  10 . 5.4

Over .  13$  9  to  9 . 4.4  „  to  15 .  5.5

3  to  34  . 6.8  19  to  19  . 4’4  „  to  13 . 5  4

6  to  6 . 5'5  Ear  to  3  . 4'9  „  to  22 . 4’6


No.

1.  Amativeness . 11

2.  Philoprogenitiveness..  14

3.  Concentrativeness  ....  11

4.  Adhesiveness  .  11

5.  Combativeness .  11

6.  Destructiveness  . 11

t  Alimentiveness  . 10

7.  Secretiveness .  12

8.  Acquisitiveness  .  11

y.  Constructiveness .  10

10.  Self-esteem  .  12

11.  Love  of  Approbation  ..  10


Development.

No.

12.  Cautiousness  .

13.  Benevolence  .

14.  Veneration  .

15.  Firmness .

16.  Conscientiousness  ....

17.  Hope .

18.  Wonder  .

19.  Ideality .

20.  Wit  .

21.  Imitation .

22.  Individuality  .

23.  Form .


10

No.

24.  Size  .

12

25.  Weight .

13

26.  Colour .

13

27.  Locality  .

11

28.  Number  .

11

29.  Order  .

12

30.  Eventuality .

12

31.  Time .

10

32.  Tune .

13

33.  Language  .

14

34.  Comparison .

14

35.  Causality  .

Scale.


1.

6.  Small

11.

2.

7.

12.  Rather  Full

3.

8.  Rather  Small

13.

4.  Very  Small

9-

14.  Full

5.

10.  Moderate

15.

16.  Rather  Large

17.

18.  Large
19-

20.  Very  Large


61


by  Mr.  James  St?' at  on.

The  subject  selected  is  a  boy  at  the  earliest  age  recognized,
as  suitable  for  phrenological  investigation, — viz.,  10  years.
What  does  the  note  enable  us  to  predicate  of  the  boy  and  pre¬
dict  of  the  man  ?

Absolute  size  of  the  head. — The  series  of  measurements
given,  does  not  enable  us  to  discover  by  any  specified  rules
what  the  size  of  the  head  is :  it  may  be  either  the  average
size,  or  above  or  below  the  average  of  the  male  head  at  10
years  old.  We  neither  know  the  truth,  nor  the  possible  or
probable  extent  of  error.

Comparative  size  of  head. — Not  knowing  the  positive,  it  is
impossible  to  know  the  comparative  size ;  but  although  we
knew  the  positive,  being  ignorant  of  the  average  size  of  the
male  head  at  the  given  age,  we  should  still  remain  in  ignorance
of  the  comparative  or  relative  size.

Size  at  maturity. — We  know  with  tolerable  certainty  what
the  average  size  of  the  male  head  is  at  maturity ;  but  knowing
neither  the  absolute  nor  the  relative  size  of  the  head  given,  we
cannot  say  what  it  will  be  when  it  reaches  maturity.

Balance  of  regions. — As  conditions,  essential  to  render  the
series  of  measurements  taken  useful  in  judging  of  the  balance
of  regions,  are  uniformly  omitted,  the  whole  value  of  the  esti¬
mate  rests  on  the  skill  of  the  observer,  and  this  again  turns,
first  on  his  notions  of  what  the  equal  balance  proportions
are,  and  secondly,  on  his  proficiency  in  estimating  the  de¬
grees  of  deviation  from  the  equal  balance.  Again,  he  may  legi¬
timately  adopt  either  the  London,  the  Edinburgh,  the  Paris,  the
New  York,  or  any  other  model,  without  saying  which,  or  he
may  reject  the  whole,  and  select  or  invent  some  other  which
he  thinks  a  more  accurate  guide :  there  is  no  specified  provi¬
sion  for  a  common  understanding  in  this  particular.  Without
pretending  to  either  superior  skill,  accuracy,  or  honesty,  I
think  it  proper  to  state  this  much ;  that  if  other  phrenologists
consistently  carry  out  in  practice  the  ideas  of  equal  balance
proportions  which  are  embodied  in  the  model  busts  used  in
their  locality,  some  would  estimate  the  anterior  region  higher,
others  lower ;  some  would  estimate  the  posterior  region  higher,
others  lower ;  some  would  estimate  the  moral  region  higher,
and  others  the  lateral  region  lower  than  I  have  done  in  the
given  case.  If  the  regions  are  inaccurately  estimated,  that
inaccuracy  influences  to  a  corresponding  extent  the  estimate
of  the  organs  as  a  matter  of  course.

Balance  of  organs. — Though  I  have  chosen  the  numbers
10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  to  represent  the  development  of  the  indi¬
vidual  organs,  I  do  not  pretend,  in  the  mean  time,  to  be  able
to  select  with  accuracy  and  uniformity  the  terms  of  the  scale


62  Ordinary  Method  of  estimating  Cerebral  Development ,

most  appropriate  for  each  size  of  head,  and  the  development
of  each  organ.  The  terms  chosen  must  be  regarded  in  the
usual  way,  as  very  much  more  a  matter  of  taste,  whim,  or
chance  than  anything  else.  Let  it  be  taken  for  granted  for
the  moment,  that  both  the  regions  and  the  organs  have  been
estimated  and  recorded  with,  at  least,  an  ordinary  degree  of
care  and  skill;  what  amount  of  information  does  the  note
convey  of  capability  and  tendency  ?

Capability. — The  organs  marked  “12”  may  fairly  be  re¬
garded  as  of  the  medium  capability,  power  or  manifestation,
value  indicated  by  the  size  of  the  head.  If  we  knew  the  one,
we  should  also  know  the  other ;  but  being  left  in  ignorance  of
the  one,  we  are  equally  so  of  the  other.  It  is  also  certain,
that  the  organs  marked  “13”  and  “14”  are  above,  and  those
marked  “10”  and  “11”  below  the  medium  power,  whatever
that  may  be ;  but  how  much  or  how  little — either  the  one
may  be  above  or  the  other  below  the  medium — we  have  no
means  of  knowing.

Tendency . — The  direction  of  the  tendency  is  seen,  but  the
force  or  power  is  not.  The  organs  marked  “  14”  are  the  most
powerful ;  those  marked  “10”  the  least  so,  and  the  other
organs  are  of  intermediate  degrees  of  power  corresponding
to  their  respective  marks ;  this  much  we  can  affirm  with  cer¬
tainty  :  but  how  much  the  strongest  exceeds  the  weakest,  or
any  of  the  intermediate  organs  in  power,  we  have  no  means
of  knowing.

This  much,  or  rather  this  little,  we  can  say  of  the  boy ;
of  the  man  we  can  say  nothing ; — knowing  neither  the  size
of  the  head  given  in  the  note,  nor  the  average  alteration  in
either  size  or  form,  which  takes  place  between  ten  years  old
and  maturity.

The  note  of  development  which  we  have  reviewed  is  as
explicit  in  every  essential  particular  as  such  notes  usually  are.
Every  specified  condition  is  fulfilled,  and  the  only  orthodox
means  whereby  to  convey  additional  details  is  to  furnish  each
reader  with  a  cast  of  the  head.  If  this  were  conveniently  prac¬
ticable,  then  each  party  would  find  the  phrenology  of  the  case
for  himself, — would  reach  the  conclusions  which  he  thinks
most  proper,  and  believe  these  to  be  the  conclusions  which
every  other  phrenologist  either  has  reached,  or  might,  could,
would,  and  should  reach.  If  it  were  farther  practicable  to
collect  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  notes  from  as  many  phrenolo¬
gists,  practising  in  widely-separated  fields  of  observation,  and
to  submit  these  to  one  who  never  saw  the  head  in  question,
and  knew  not  what  was  meant,  it  appears  to  me  extremely
improbable  he  would  ever  suspect  that  any  considerable  nnm-


by  Mr.  James  Straton.


63


bers  of  the  notes  referred  to  tlie  same  head.  Some  would
give  one  series  of  measurements,  some  another;  some  would
call  the  head  one  size,  some  another;  some  would  use  one
scale,  some  another;  and  the  estimated  development  of  the
regions  and  organs — modified  partly  by  conflicting  ideas  of
the  equal  balance  proportions,  and  partly  by  the  talents  and
acquirements,  the  proficiency  and  the  pretensions  of  the  indi¬
vidual  observers — would  in  all  probability  be  variable  to  an
extent  only  limited  by  the  number  of  notes  compared.  But
granting  that  the  whole  hundred  or  thousand,  or  any  larger
number  of  notes  were  unanimous  in  every  particular,  more
definite  information  would  not  be  obtained  from  the  whole
than  from  one.

We  have  seen  what  the  sum  total  of  that  information
amounts  to.  It  is  as  infinitessimally  microscopic  as  the  active
elements  in  a  homoeopathic  prescription,  but  it  is  precious
withal ;  precious  as  all  pearls  of  truth  are,  and,  unlike  other
“  pearls  of  great  price,”  would  be  much  more  precious  if  they
were  more  abundant,  and  much  more  prized  if  the  workman
executed  the  “  setting”  with  the  skill  necessary  to  let  the  real
size  and  beauty  of  the  pearls  be  seen.  Yet  our  system  of
observation  and  record  “  is  sufficient  for  all  practical  purposes”
we  are  told ;  and  for  some  pernicious  purposes  also,  it  might
be  added;  as  the  warm  embraces  of  the  unprincipled  quack,
and  the  cold  neglect  of  quandom  friends  abundantly  testify.
But  how  are  matters  to  be  mended?  is  the  next  question.
How  can  practical  phrenology  be  improved  ?  By  colleges,
councils,  boards,  and  seals,  we  are  often  answered.  Yes,
truly,  it  is  “  small  by  degrees”  that  improvements  come  from
such  quarters.

The  Morisons  and  St.  John  Longs  might  then  rejoice  at
their  lengthened  prospects  of  lucrative  practice.  They  are
powerful  enough  to  impede  the  progress  of  popular  knowledge,
and  numerous  enough  to  keep  each  other  in  countenance  for  a
long  time  to  come  yet ;  little  need  is  there  to  swell  their  ranks
by  masses  of  fashionable  indolence,  aristocratic  imbecility,  and
“  vested  interests  in  things,”  as  they  are  made  “  respectable”
by  pieces  of  parchment  “  signed  and  sealed  before  witnesses.”
Could  a  college  of  cardinals  have  extinguished  astrology  before
Copernicus,  Galileo,  and  Kepler  lived  and  laboured?  It  is
in  the  progress  towards  perfection  by  the  active  industry  of
its  honest  notaries,  that  phrenology  will  be  freed  from  prosti¬
tution.  Imperfections  cannot  be  removed  till  they  are  seen.
It  is  the  sole  aim  and  object  of  these  notes  to  make  some  of
these  imperfections  more  obvious  than  they  have  hitherto
been,  hoping  thereby  to  attract  the  attention  of  those  who


64


Original  Letter  by  Gall.


are  able  and  willing  to  remove,  but  who  may  have  hitherto
ovei’looked  them.  I  only  regret,  though  I  can  hardly  blame
those  who  saw  these  imperfections  very  clearly  long  ago,  that
they  preferred  to  labour  in  other  departments  where  precision
is  more  appreciated,  and  of  course  more  aided  and  encouraged.

Aberdeen,  December,  1848.


VII.  Original  Letter  by  Gall.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Rosawitz,  near  Bodenbach,  Bohemia,
Mav  27th,  1848.

Dear  Sir, — It  was  my  intention  ere  this  to  have  sent  you  a
paper  on  the  newest  psychological  theories  of  certain  German
physiologists,  but  the  extraordinary  excitement  in  the  political
world,  the  revolutions  which  are  taking  place  around  me,
have  so  occupied  my  thoughts,  and  indeed  my  pen  too,  for
the  last  three  months,  that  I  have  been  unable  to  devote
myself  to  purely  scientific  subjects.  I  hope,  however,  before
long,  to  return  to  old  occupations,  and  to  redeem  my  pro¬
mise.  In  the  mean  time,  I  forward  you  a  translation  of  an
original  letter  from  Dr.  Gall,  which  was  placed  in  my  hands
last  winter  by  the  gentleman  to  whom  it  was  addressed.  Dr.
Hoser  was  for  a  very  long  period  of  time  private  physician  to
the  late  Archduke  Charles,  and,  as  the  letter  plainly  shews,
was  an  intimate  friend  of  Gall.  He  now  resides  in  Prague,
and  though  80  years  of  age,  I  found  him  last  winter — in  con¬
firmation  of  Gaiks  estimate  of  his  sense  of  locality — occupied
with  making  a  beautiful  and  correct  model  of  the  Riesen-
gebirge.  Dr.  Hoser,  like  all  those  friends  and  acquaintances
of  Gall  whom  I  have  met  with  in  Germany,  preserves  a  warm
recollection  of  the  latter's  love  of  scientific  research,  and  of
the  uncompromising  truthfulness  of  his  character.  The  letter
to  Dr.  H.,  though  written  in  a  playful  tone,  and  containing
nothing  of  importance,  seems  to  me  still  worthy  of  a  place
in  The  Zoist , — of  being  put  on  record  in  case  a  biography  of
the  great  man  should  ever  be  attempted.

Yours  very  truly,

R.  R.  Noel.

“  Potsdam,  16th  May,  1805.

“Dearest  friend, — I  ought  to  have  returned  you  my  thanks
long  ago,  for  the  letter  of  recommendation  for  Prague.  I
was  overwhelmed  with  politeness  there.  But  you  know  how
much  I  am  occupied,  day  and  night,  and  if  one  has  a  moment


Original  Letter  by  Gall,


G5


to  spare, — you  know,  yes,  that  you  know,  too, — to  whom  it
is  devoted.  I  have  thought  of  you,  however,  many  hundred
times,  and  indeed  I  find  almost  as  much  pleasure  in  thinking
of  you,  as  of  a  beloved  fair  one.  I  am  glad  to  know  that
you  go  so  often  to  Okels ;  they  are  excellent  people,  are  they
not  ?  and  what  does  the  clever  amiable  grumbler  say  to  all
the  stuff  about  me  in  the  newspapers  and  journals?  Tell
him  that  if  he  says  and  thinks  of  it  otherwise  than  I  do,  I
shall  cease  to  point  to  his  head  when  I  wish  to  speak  of  some¬
thing  rational.  Walter's  pamphlet  you  may  let  him  read,
too ;  I  allow  him  to  laugh  over  it  with  all  his  heart,  and  to
indulge  in  a  little  malicious  pleasure.  But,  as  to  the  rest, —
I  repeat  it  to  him  once  more, — he  must  hold  it  in  high  re¬
spect.  If  now  and  then  we  may  indulge  in  talking  nonsense,
it  is  as  well,  at  least,  to  have  our  nonsense  paid  for.  Spurz-
heim  is  converted,  and  highly  delighted  with  the  gold  snuff
box  which  he  has  received  from  the  queen.  What  passes
within  you,  my  dear  Hoser,  when  you  hear  of  my  journey  ?
You  would  like  to  be  with  me,  is  it  not  so  ?  Often  do  I  wish
you  this  pleasure.  Why  have  I  not  the  sense  of  locality  as
strongly  pronounced  as  you  have  ?  To  what  parts  of  the  world
should  I  then  not  wander.  As  it  is,  heaven  only  knows  where
I  may  not  yet  come  to.  With  Germany,  at  least,  I  shall  not
have  done  so  soon.  If  I  shall  follow  all  the  invitations  I
receive,  I  must  become  a  bird  of  passage,  ubipanis,  ibi  patria;
this  to  be  sure  is  not  my  motto ;  but  at  47  years  of  age,  thanks
to  the  shrinking  of  the  organs,  one  can  do  much  for  a  hand¬
some  round  sum  of  ducats.  Besides,  this  is  the  only  way
to  give  my  doctrines  (lehre)  a  firm  footing ;  they  would  other¬
wise  have  been  disseminated  only  piecemeal.  People  must
see  and  touch ;  is  it  not  so  ?  What  results  from  eternally
platonizing  and  arguing  a  priori  ?

“  The  head-surgeon,  Harlass,  who  has  given  you  this  letter,
is  a  man  worthy  of  being  recommended.  He  is  a  friend  of
Weibel,  the  military  surgeon  in  ordinary  to  the  king;  a  man
who  has  shewn  me  every  possible  kindness  in  Potsdam.  I
hope  you  will  allow  him  to  visit  you  every  now  and  then,  and
introduce  him  to  Well  and  Nord.  I  hear  he  is  very  skilful,
and  thoroughly  honest.  If  you  will  amuse  yourself  with  him
a  little  in  talking  about  me,  make  a  sign  in  the  heavens  that
I  may  join  in  your  pleasure.  I  should  like  to  know  what
people  say  of  the  devil,  now  that  he  has  crept  out  of  his  hole.
What  are  the  opinions  in  different  quarters,  in  the  lower,  in
the  middle,  and  in  the  highest  ?  Properly  speaking,  I  wish
only  to  know,  if  my  doctrines  (lehre)  are  treated  now  with
more  respect.  How  did  people  look  when  it  was  known  that

VOL.  VII.  F


66


On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal,


I  was  lecturing ;  was  this  expected  of  me  ?  Pray  enquire  if
I  am  bound  to  send  to  the  Vienna  censors  a  trifling  work
(guide  to  my  lectures)  which  I  have  been  obliged  to  promise
to  publish.  I  will  not  present  an  ‘  humble  petition/  for  I
must  continue  independent,  to  follow  my  bent  as  I  like.
Will  you  have  the  kindness  to  write  to  me  soon  on  this  head?
To-morrow  I  start  for  Leipzig,  to  which  place  I  ought  to  have
gone  long  ago,  if  the  king  and  queen  had  not  detained  me.
However,  this  has  caused  me  a  vast  deal  of  pleasure.  You
cannot  conceive  how  correctly  the  king  has  seized  upon  every¬
thing,  nor  what  a  heavenly,  lovely,  and  dear  creature  the
queen  is  !  Well,  I  am  not  surprized  at  myself,  for  speaking
with  such  enthusiasm.  I  have  even  dissected  the  brain  before
them,  for  the  king  wished  to  see  with  his  own  eyes  the  value
of  Walter’s  assertions,  and  the  queen  is  just  as  much  in  love
with  my  system,  as  I  am  with  her.  Now  you  can  judge  how
well  I  have  explained  all.  But  forget  Kant’s  saying,  that  he
who  falls  in  love  with  a  queen  is  a  fool ;  the  poor  fellow  had
probably  never  seen  Louisa  of  Prussia.  Give  a  kiss  from  me
to  your  little  wife,  and  with  greetings  to  all  friends,

“  Yours,

“  Gall.

“  Spurzheim  sends  his  compliments.”

***  Dr.  Hoser’s  remarks  on  the  persons  mentioned  in  the
above  letter :  OJcel,  a  counsellor  of  state,  and  a  patient  of
Gall’s,  transferred  by  him  to  Dr.  Hoser  on  leaving  Vienna.
Well,  a  rich  apothecary  in  Vienna,  at  whose  table  Gall  and
Hoser  often  dined.  Nord,  director  of  the  public  hospital  in
Vienna,  distinguished  for  his  extraordinary  tact  in  the  reading
of  disease.  Walter,  the  celebrated  oculist  and  physician  to
the  late  king  of  Bavaria ;  author  of  two  pamphlets  on  Gall’s
discoveries.

B.  R.  N.


VIII.  On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal,  and  its  probable  Connexion

with  Mesmerism.

Every  one  has  heard  of  the  crystal,  by  means  of  which  pre¬
tenders  to  magical  powers,  &c.,  formerly  asserted  that  they
could  call  up  and  render  visible  the  forms  of  angels,  demons,
the  spirits  of  the  dead,  distant  or  otherwise  invisible  scenes,
the  absent  and  their  occupations  at  the  time,  &c.,  &c.

The  famous  Dr.  J ohn  Dee,  or  rather  his  coadjutor,  Edward
Kelly,  gave  out  that  he  could  not  only  cause  spiritual  beings


and  its  probable  Connexion  with  Mesmerism.


67


to  appear  in  his  crystal  (which  is  said  to  be  preserved  in  the
British  Museum),  but  could  also  constrain  them  to  answer
whatever  questions  might  be  put  to  them.  However  clear  it
may  be  that  these  were  simply  the  pretensions  of  a  person
who  found  it  profitable  to  take  advantage  of  the  well-known
credulity  of  the  British  public  in  matters  of  this  as  well  as
of  many  other  descriptions,  still  the  appearance  of  “  visions”
(as  they  were  called)  in  a  crystal,  may  perhaps  deserve  a  little
impartial  investigation.

It  has  been  proved  beyond  doubt,  by  Mr.  Braid  of  Man¬
chester,  and  other  highly  respectable  authorities,  that  by  ear¬
nestly  regarding  any  small  object  in  such  a  manner  as  to
fatigue  the  muscles  and  nerves  of  the  eye,  the  mesmeric  sleep
or  trance  may  be  induced  without  the  co-operation  of  a  second
person  or  magnetizer.  Now,  let  us  apply  this  fact  to  the  case
of  the  (so  called)  magical  crystal.

Previously  to  looking  into  this  mysterious  instrument,  a
vast  number  of  superstitious  rites  required  to  be  observed.
These  were,  the  preparation  of  two  concentric  circles  on  the
ground,  between  which  a  variety  of  mystical  words  and  cha¬
racters  were  chalked.  In  the  interior  or  centre  of  these  circles
the  operator  was  to  stand  while  invoking  demons,  angels,  spirits
of  the  dead,  or  the  appearance  of  distant  scenes,  and  the  occu¬
pations  of  the  absent.

These  circles,  as  also  a  plate  of  gold,  or  piece  of  vellum,
inscribed  with  certain  cabalistical  signs,  letters,  names  of  the
Deity,  &c.,  and  suspended  round  the  neck,  were  intended  to
prevent  any  attacks  from  evil  demons,  who,  it  appears,  did
not  approve  of  invasions  on  the  spiritual  world ;  and  this  will
not  seem  surprising,  when  we  state  that  the  magician’s  spells
were  said  to  be  so  potent  as  to  force  those  summoned  to  reveal
even  their  own  family  secrets  and  modes  of  living ;  and  they,
no  doubt,  were  as  averse  to  having  their  private  concerns
exposed  and  commented  upon  by  human  beings,  as  the  latter
are  to  any  interference  on  the  part  of  the  unseen  world  with
the  occupations  and  other  circumstances  connected  with  our
daily  life.

In  order  to  obtain  a  command  over  the  beings  of  the  invi¬
sible  world,  a  certain  form  of  address  to  them,  or  incantation,
is  specified  in  works  upon  magical  and  cabalistic  matters  ;
and  the  most  approved  modern  author  on  these  occult  sub¬
jects,  viz.,  Barrett,*  gives  a  prayer  to  God,  which  is  to  be
repeated  previously  to  invoking  the  “  vision,”  and  which,  from
its  solemnity,  shews  that  he  must  have  been  either  a  thorough

*  The  Magus.  By  Francis  Barrett,  F.R.C.,  &c.,  quarto.  London,  1801.

F  2


08


On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal ,


believer  in  the  science  (as  it  was  termed),  or  one  of  the  most
impious  blasphemers  that  it  is  possible  to  conceive.  Indeed,
the  introduction  of  any  form  of  address  to  the  Almighty,
under  such  circumstances,  must  lead  to  one  or  other  of  these
conclusions.

A  number  of  other  ceremonies  were  to  be  observed,  both
before  and  during  these  invocations ;  such  as  the  assumption
of  a  particular  style  of  dress ;  the  use  of  consecrated  water
and  tapers ;  a  magic  wand  or  staff  covered  with  characters,
words,  symbols,  &c. ;  fumigations  with  different  kinds  of
spices  and  perfumes ;  wearing  the  great  seal  of  Solomon,
&c.,  &c. ;  but  one  chief  observance  must  be  particularly
noticed,  viz.,  strict  previous  fasting.

It  was  said,  that  the  longer  and  more  rigidly  this  had
been  adhered  to,  before  using  the  crystal,  the  more  free  did
the  operator  become  from  the  grossness  of  humanity,  and,
therefore,  the  more  likely  to  be  obeyed  by  the  shadowy  forms
which  might  appear.  The  crystal  was  placed  at  a  certain
distance  from  the  eye,  and  contemplated  attentively  until
the  desired  vision  appeared.  It  was  necessary  that  the  whole
attention  and  powers  of  mind  should  be  concentrated  on  the
subject  of  the  expected  apparition  or  vision,  and  that  perfect
silence  and  stillness  should  be  observed  after  repeating  the  in¬
troductory  prayers,  incantations,  &c.,  unless  a  demon  proved
refractory,  and  refused  to  appear;  when  a  more  urgent  and
powerful  formula  was  to  be  had  recourse  to.

Without  entering  on  the  much  disputed  ground  of  the
reality  of  mesmeric  phenomena,  as  extending  to  clairvoyance ,
or  the  perception  during  the  mesmeric  trance  of  what  is,
either  from  distance  or  other  causes,  invisible  to  others,  or
wholly  beyond  the  ken  of  the  waking  senses, — let  us  assume
their  truth,  supported  as  it  is  by  a  large  and  respectable  body
of  evidence.

We  have  seen  that  one  principal  preparation  for  the  seeing
of  visions  in  the  crystal  was  fasting.  This  practice  is  well
known  to  produce,  in  those  whose  health  is  not  injured  by  it,
an  improvement  in  the  intellectual  powers,  or,  at  least,  an
increased  capability  of  application  to  studies  requiring  much
reflection  and  a  clearness  of  mind,  along  with  a  vividness
and  flow  of  ideas  which  we  find  it  impossible  to  command
when  the  stomach  contains  a  certain  portion  of  aliment.

According  to  writers  on  the  use  of  the  crystal,  the  success
of  the  experiment  varies  very  much  in  different  individuals.
A  steady,  immovable  contemplation  of  the  object,  and  a  con¬
centration  of  the  whole  mind  upon  the  subject  on  hand,  are  said
to  be  absolutely  requisite  in  all.  It  is  stated,  that  some  indivi-


and  its  probable  Connexion  with  Mesmerism.  69

duals  are  favoured  with  the  expected  phantasm,  or  with  a  view
of  the  situation  and  employment  of  their  absent  friends,  in  ten
or  fifteen  minutes,  while  in  other  cases,  one,  two,  or  more  hoars
elapse  before  anything  is  seen.  Those  who  assert  that  they
have  succeeded  in  bringing  scenes  and  other  objects  into  view,
state  that,  immediately  before  the  apparition  is  beheld,  the
crystal  becomes  clouded  or  darkened,  and  that  this  appear¬
ance  is  accompanied  by  an  indescribable  feeling  of  awe  and
faintness  on  their  part,  which  vanishes  as  the  glass  gets
brighter.  The  crystal  is  said  then  to  become  exceedingly
bright,  as  if  it  were  illuminated  by  an  effulgence  pervading
its  interior,  in  the  midst  of  which  the  vision  appears.  Nowr,
the  fixed  and  earnest  gaze  directed  to  a  particular  object,  and
the  concentration  and  abandonment  of  mind  to  one  idea,  are
precisely  analogous  to  one  of  Mr.  Braid’s  methods  of  inducing
the  mesmeric  trance.  The  mental  or  psychical  perceptions
may  fairly  be  supposed  to  be  in  a  highly  acute  condition  from
the  previous  fasting;  and,  although  long  abstinence  from  food
is  well  known  to  have  occasionally  the  effect  of  actually  creating
imaginary  appearances  or  baseless  phantasms  in  some  persons,
yet,  giving  this  objection  all  due  weight,  and  of  course  reject¬
ing  all  the  superstitious  observances  and  rites  attending  upon
the  ancient  use  of  the  crystal  as  only  worthy  of  the  knaves
who  employed  them,  let  us  just  hazard  the  idea,  that  some
at  least  of  those  who  used  this  agent  actually  fell  into  a
mesmeric  condition  unconsciously ,  and  that  they  not  only  did
see  certain  distant  scenes  and  occurrences,  such  as  the  occu¬
pations  of  absent  friends,  &c.,  but  also  that  they  themselves
were  deceived  as  to  the  nature  of  the  phenomena  which  they
witnessed,  and  conscientiously  attributed  to  supernatural
agency  what  was  in  fact  merely  the  now  familiar,  although
little  understood,  mesmeric  clairvoyance.

If  the  accounts  are  to  be  depended  on  which  Messrs.  Spencer
Hall,  Braid,  Dove,  Lang,  Dr.  Elliotson,  Bev.  Chauncey  Town-
shend.  Miss  Martineau,  and  others  have  given,  (and  no  one
surely  would  doubt  the  veracity  of  these  individuals,  neither
is  it  at  all  probable  that  imposture  could  have  been  successful
in  all  the  cases  which  they  report  as  having  witnessed,)  we
must  believe  that  there  are  certain  conditions  of  the  human
constitution  which  are  denominated  mesmeric,  and  in  which
the  spirit  or  power  of  perception  becomes,  for  a  time,  to  a
certain  degree ,  a  separate  existence,  or  partially  detached  from
the  material  or  corporeal  part  of  the  individual,  and  is  actu¬
ally  present  at,  and  cognizant  of  places  and  circumstances  at
indefinite  distances  from  the  bodv.

.  V

A  young  woman  (whose  exhibitions  of  clairvoyance  are


70


On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal ,


mentioned  in  Mr.  Langes  work  on  the  subject,*  and  several
of  which  exhibitions  the  writer  of  these  observations  witnessed
himself,)  was  observed  to  become  more  clear  in  her  descrip¬
tions  of  distant  (and  to  her  utterly  unknown)  localities,  when
desired  by  her  mesmeriser  to  “  look”  steadfastly  into  a  tumbler
of  water.  To  look  is  here  a  wrong  expression,  at  least  as  far
as  the  bodily  eyes  were  concerned,  as  she  was  at  the  time
completely  blindfolded ;  but  certainly,  whatever  was  its  effect
upon  her  mental  vision,  her  answers  to  the  various  queries
put  were  more  distinct  and  minute  while  she  seemed  to  regard
the  glass  steadily.  If  the  writer's  memory  does  not  deceive
him,  she  said  that  she  saw  in  the  glass  the  objects  which  she
described.

The  conclusion,  therefore,  is,  that,  if  there  be  truth  in
clairvoyance,  it  is  probable  that  there  was  the  same  degree
of  truth  in  “  divining”  (as  it  was  termed)  by  the  crystal ;
and  that  certain  objects  appeared  in  it  in  consequence  of  the
experimenter's  having  induced  a  mesmeric  condition  of  his
owff  system,  by  the  intense  and  immovable  gaze  with  which
he  regarded  it,  and  by  the  concentration  of  his  mind  upon
the  subject  on  hand.

I  subjoin  a  description  of  the  crystal,  as  given  by  Barrett
in  his  Magus.  The  latter  may  be  acceptable  to  some  one  of
your  readers  who  may  wish  to  try  the  experiment  for  himself.
I  should  suppose  that  no  one  would  go  to  the  expense  of  a
rock  crystal,  as  a  sphere  of  flint  glass,  free  from  air-bubbles
and  well-polished,  must  answer  the  purpose  quite  as  well.
It  should  be  set  in  a  frame  of  black  wood.  The  symbols,
words,  &c.,  to  be  engraved  on  a  plate  of  gold,  of  course
belong  to  the  superstitions  connected  with  the  ancient  use  of
this  (it  may  be)  mesmeric  agent.

“  Of  the  making  of  the  Crystal ,  fyc.,

(From  Barrett’s  Magus.)

“  Procure  of  a  lapidary  a  good,  clear,  and  pellucid  crystal,
of  the  bigness  of  a  small  orange,  i.e.  about  one  inch  and  a
half  in  diameter ;  let  it  be  globular  or  round  every  way  alike ;
then,  when  you  have  got  this  crystal,  fair  and  clear,  without
any  clouds  or  specks,  get  a  small  plate  of  pure  gold  to  en¬
compass  the  crystal  round  one  half ;  let  this  be  fitted  on  an
ivory  or  ebony  pedestal ;  let  there  be  engraved  a  circle  round
the  crystal  with  characters  around  inside  the  circle  next  the
crystal ;  afterwards  the  name  e  Tetragrammaton .'  On  the

*  Mesmerism;  its  History ,  Phenomena ,  and  Practice.  Fraser  and  Co.,
Edinburgh.  1843.


and  its  probable  Connexion  with  Mesmerism.


71


other  side  of  the  plate  let  there  be  engraved,  ‘  Michael,
Gabriel,  Uriel,  Raphael/  "

Barrett  goes  on  to  describe  various  other  mysterious  sym¬
bols,  &c.,  which  are  to  be  engraved  upon  the  table  on  which
the  crystal  is  to  be  placed,  but  the  above  will  serve  to  shew
the  wretched  superstitious  absurdities  which  were  believed  in
by  many  of  our  forefathers.

It  might  be  interesting  to  examine  more  into  the  relative
effects  of  a  fixed  gaze  upon  lucid  or  bright  objects,  and  upon
those  which  are  opaque  and  without  lustre,  in  producing  the
mesmeric  sleep.

Edinburgh,  1 848.  T.


NOTE.

The  incident  mentioned  at  p.  68  curiously  corresponds
with  the  ancient  account  of  the  divinations  of  the  Emperor
Didius  Julianus,  quoted  in  the  paper  on  Traces  of  Mesmerism
in  Antiquity ,  Zoist,  No.  XI.,  p.  313,  in  which  a  speculum  is
mentioned,  although  the  divining  agent  was  a  blindfolded
boy.  “  Fecit  quae  ad  speculum  dicunt  fieri,  in  quo  pueri  prae-
ligatis  oculis,  incantato  vertice,  respicere  dicuntur.  Aelian.
Spart.,  c.  7.”

Divination  by  means  of  crystals  is  referred  to  as  employed
in  antiquity,  to  compel  the  appearance  of  gods  or  spirits,  as
Ulysses  is  said  by  Tzetzes  (ad  Lycophron,  813)  to  have  evoked
Teiresias  by  the  XeKavopavrela,  described  as  of  the  same  nature
as  the  KpocrraWopavrela :  on  this  subject  the  learned  article,
Magia ,  in  Pauly's  Encyclopedia,  refers  to  Psellus  de  Daem,
p.  359 ;  apparently  the  treatise  referred  to  by  egregious  Tom.
Taylor,  the  platonist,  in  Appendix  to  his  Bacchic  and  Eleu-
sinian  Mysteries.  Nothing  is  to  be  found  on  the  subject  in
the  short  dialogue  of  Psellus  on  the  influence  of  demons,
though  much  else  that  is  illustrative  of  the  process  by  which
the  natural  vagaries  of  a  disordered  nervous  system  were  of
old  interpreted  as  demoniacal  agency.

One  of  the  interlocutors  relates  the  phrensy  of  his  bro¬
ther's  wife,  who,  when  delirious  from  a  difficult  confinement,
became  excessively  violent,  and  muttered  sounds  which  were
unintelligible,  but  assumed  by  the  witnesses  to  be  language.
All  were  at  a  loss,  but  some  of  the  women,  “  with  the  natural
readiness  of  the  sex  at  an  emergency,"  (a cac  yap  eiac  y eVo?
evperucov ,  teat  7rpo?  to  (jvpnri'Krov  avvaipwrarov,)  brought  a
hideous  Armenian,  who  scolded  her  violently  in  his  own  lan¬
guage,  at  the  same  time  threatening  her  with  a  naked  sword.
The  sick  woman,  to  the  wonder  of  all,  answered  him  in  Ar¬
menian,  a  language  of  which  she  had  no  previous  knowledge,


7 2  Clairvoyant  comprehension  of  unknown  Languages,

at  first  boldly,  but  at  last  more  and  more  submissively,  until
she  fell  asleep.  She  awoke  recovered,  and  could  give  no  other
account  of  her  sufferings  than  that  she  had  been  alarmed  by
a  female  spectre  with  loose  hair.  Very  puzzling  indeed,  says
the  sage  narrator,  for  this  would  seem  to  imply  that  demons
are  male  and  female  like  mortal  beings  of  the  earth ;  and  then
do  demons  differ  amongst  themselves  in  language  as  well  as
sex,  speaking  some  Greek,  some  Chaldee,  some  Persian,  &c. ;
and  lastly,  how  came  the  demon  to  be  alarmed  at  the  naked
sword  of  the  magician  (70779)?  It  could  scarcely  be  suscep¬
tible  of  mutilation,  &c.,  &c.

Perhaps  the  comments  of  the  Greek  are  not  fuller  of  false
assumptions  than  those  of  many  a  modern  physiologist  on
the  phenomena  of  the  same  class  of  disorders,  and  at  least
he  is  modest  enough  to  admit  the  existence  of  difficulties,
and  does  not  hold  himself  bound  to  deny  or  ignore  everything
which  he  finds  it  beyond  him  to  explain.  Instances  are  on
record  of  the  recovery  in  delirium  of  languages  forgotten  since
childhood,  and  others  that  come  still  nearer  to  our  anecdote,
in  which,  however,  it  will  be  observed,  that  we  have  only
the  word  of  the  worthy  exorciser  that  the  answers  he  received
were  really  intelligible  and  Armenian.

L.  L.  D.

London,  March,  1849.


IX.  Clairvoyant  comprehension  of  unknown  Languages.  By

Mr.  Alfred  Roffe.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — In  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst,  Dr.  Kerner  relates  that  “  the
seeress,  in  her  sleep-waking  state,  frequently  spoke  an  un¬
known  language,  which  seemed  to  bear  some  resemblance  to
the  Eastern  tongues.  .  .  .  She  was  perfectly  consistent  in  her
use  of  it,  and  those  who  were  much  about  her  gradually  grew
to  understand  it.  .  .  .  She  knew  nothing  of  it  when  she  was
awake.  The  names  of  things  in  this  language,  she  said,  ex¬
pressed  their  properties  and  qualities.  Philologists  discovered
in  it  a  resemblance  to  the  Coptic,  Arabic,  and  Hebrew ;  for
example,  the  word  Elschaddai,  which  she  often  used  for  God,
signifies,  in  Plebrew,  the  self-sufficient,  or  all-powerful.*

It  occurred  to  me,  that  it  might  interest  some  readers  to
compare  the  above  extract  with  the  following  passage  from
the  life  of  the  celebrated  mystic  writer,  Jacob  Behmen.  If
the  testimonies  are  worthy,  an  additional  case  is  shewn  of

*  See  pp.  116,  117,  Mrs.  Crowe’s  translation.


by  Mr.  Alfred  Roffe.


73


the  spontaneity  in  one  person,  of  what  was  mesmerically  in¬
duced  in  another.  May  not  the  phenomena  of  the  “  unknown
tongues”  have  a  relation  to  those  of  the  seeress  and  J acob
Behmen  ?

Alfred  Eoffe.

48,  Ossulston  Street,  Somers  Town.

"Amongst  the  former  friends  of  Jacob  Behmen,  mentioned
by  me,  there  was  one  in  particular  whose  intimacy  I  have  fre¬
quently  enjoyed;  who  was  able  to  acquaint  me  how  that  one
Tobias  Koeber,  a  doctor  of  physic  here,  and  whom  I  also  still
remember,  has  often  put  Jacob  Behmen  to  the  test  with  his
Language  of  Nature.*  For  as  they  would  be  taking  a  walk
out  together  as  intimate  friends,  and  shewing  the  flowers,
herbs,  and  other  productions  of  the  earth  one  to  another,
J.  B.  would,  from  their  outward  signature  and  formation,
immediately  intimate  their  inward  virtues,  effects  and  Qua¬
lities,  together  with  the  letters,  syllables,  and  words  of  the
name  inspoken  and  ascribed  to  them.  It  was,  however,  his
custom,  first  of  all,  to  desire  to  know  their  names  in  the
Hebrew  tongue,  as  being  one  that  had  the  greatest  affinity  to
that  of  nature ;  and  if  its  name  was  unknown  in  that  language,
he  enquired  what  it  was  in  the  Greek.  Now  then,  if  the  phy¬
sician  had  told  him  a  wrong  name,  the  other,  upon  comparing
its  property  with  that  of  the  plant,  and  its  signature,  viz.,  its
form,  colour,  &c.,  soon  discerned  the  deception ;  avering  that
it  could  not  possibly  be  the  right  name  :  for  which  he  was
able  to  allege  a  sufficient  proof.  And  from  hence  I  dare  ven¬
ture  to  say  it  has  come,  that  the  report  was  spread  about  con¬
cerning  him,  that  he  was  able  to  speak  foreign  languages ;
which  was,  however,  not  the  case,  nor  did  he  ever  boast  of
any  such  ability.  Indeed,  he  was  able  to  understand  such
languages  in  others,  if  he  heard  them  speaking  in  them,  ac¬
cording  to  the  testimony  of  Mr.  David  De  Schweinich,  Lord
Intendant  General  of  the  Principality  of  Lignitz, — which  he,
a  little  before  his  end,  gave  some  to  understand; — for  this
worthy  gentleman  being,  together  with  several  other  gentlemen
of  eminence  and  literature,  at  an  entertainment  in  Lignitz,
had  it  in  his  power  to  relate  several  remarkable  things  about
J.  B.,  wliom  he  had  one  time  sent  for,  and  entertained  at  his
own  village  or  estate :  which  things  were  afterwards  told  me
again  by  a  person  of  veracity,  who  was  there  at  the  same
time.  Amongst  other  stories  related  by  Mr,  De  Schweinich,
in  reference  to  the  languages,  he  dropped  these  words,  that
he,  viz.,  J.  B.,  knew  every  thing  we  talked  about,  although

*  The  seeress  said  of  her  language  that  it  was  natural  to  all  men.


7  4


Cure  of  Vomiting  with  Mesmerism ,


we  spoke  in  Latin  or  French ;  assured  us  also,  that  we  might
talk  in  what  languages  we  pleased,  he  should  understand  us
nevertheless  :  which  he  could  do  by  the  mediation  or  help  of
the  language  of  nature,  which  he  understood,  &c."* *

***  I  have  transcribed  this  from  “  Memoirs  of  J.  B.  Now
first  done  at  large  into  English,  &c.,  &c.,  by  Francis  Okely,
formerly  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.  Published  at
Northampton,  1780." — A.  R.


X.  Cure  of  Vomiting  with  Mesmerism)  attended  by  interesting
mesmeric  Facts.  By  Mr.  Chandler,  Surgeon.

“  Our  readers  will  smile  when  they  consider  that  all  this  implicit  belief  in
miracles  by  touch  was  in  a  state  of  activity  at  the  beginning  of  the  century  in
which  some  of  them  were  bom.  However,  the  soft  white  hand  of  the  regal  lady,
beneath  which  Dr.  Johnson  bowed  his  suffering  body  in  childhood  to  receive  the
royal  prayer  and  benediction,  was,  at  least,  as  good  as  the  passes  of  the  modern
mesmerism ;  and  many  a  brow  that  has  not  submitted  to  the  cross  in  baptism  ‘  as
too  superstitious,’  has  bent  beneath  the  sway  of  a  mesmeriser .” — Agnes  Strick¬
land’s  Lives  of  the  Queens  of  England,  vol.  xii.,  p.  109.f

The  following  case  of  hysteria  is  at  your  service  for  publica¬
tion,  if  you  deem  it  worthy.

Elizabeth  C - ,  aged  19,  of  fair  complexion  and  lym¬

phatic  temperament,  had  been  falling  gradually  out  of  health
for  the  last  three  years.  The  catamenia  were  very  irregular
and  her  appearance  was  becoming  chlorotic.  She  suffered
from  severe  pains  in  the  back  and  left  side,  with  great  lassi-

*  From  a  letter  written  by  a  Member  of  the  Council  at  Goerlitz,  contained
in  “  The  Faithful  Narrative  of  Cornelius  Weissner,  M.D.”

f  We  happen  to  know  that  Mr.  Chandler,  on  reading  this  tit  bit  of  conceit
and  nonsense,  wrote  politely  to  Miss  Strickland  nearly  a  year  ago,  offering  to
shew  her  some  mesmeric  cases,  if  she  would  do  him  the  favour  of  appointing  her
own  time  for  a  visit  to  his  house.  She  has  never  condescended  to  notice  that
gentleman’s  invitation.  Dr.  Elliotson  begged  some  friends  of  his,  who  are  ac¬
quainted  with  her,  to  ask  her  reason  for  such  conduct ;  and  she  replied,  like  an
underbred  woman,  that  she  could  not  answer  every  letter  that  was  sent  to
her.  She  not  to  condescend  to  reply  to  every  note  sent  her,  and  especially  a
note  offering  her  what,  were  she  not  as  ignorant  as  she  is  ill  bred,  she  would  have
regarded  as  a  very  great  kindness  and  as  a  fine  opportunity  of  seeing  the  greatest
of  nature’s  wonders,  while  Miss  Martineau  and  even  the  Duke  of  Wellington  find
time  to  reply  to  the  humblest  persons  who  write  to  them  !  We  have  never  opened
any  of  her  compilations,  but  one  critic  thus  speaks  of  her,  and  shows  that  the  same
want  of  intellect  which  makes  her  reject  mesmerism  leads  her  to  swallow  absur¬
dities.  “  Miss  Strickland  cannot  find  it  in  her  heart  to  reject  any  authorities,  she
may  have  fallen  in  with.  f  All’s  fish  that  comes  to  net,’ — from  an  old  ballad,  a
remote  genealogical  fact,  or  some  very  questionable  gossip,  up  to  a  state  paper  ;
and  she  does  not  always  penetrate  the  meaning  of  what  she  thus  takes  without
discrimination.  ‘  This  princess  of  antiquarian  penny-a-liners  ’  has  a  e  deficiency
in  critical  acumen  that  prevents  her  from  selecting  what  is  necessary  and  rejecting
the  rest.’  Her  book  is  ‘  an  olla-podrida  of  anecdotes,  curious  gossip,  and  ques¬
tionable  conjectures .’  ” — Spectator,  1842,  p.  907,  Review  of  Miss  Strickland's
“  Queens  of  England.  ” — Zoist.


by  Mr.  Chandler.


75


tude  and  debility.  For  the  last  two  months  she  had  vomited
her  food  at  every  meal  immediately  after  taking  it ;  at  the
same  time  her  appetite  was  so  good  that  no  sooner  had  the
stomach  rejected  its  contents  than  she  was  quite  ready  to  eat
again.  It  was,  in  fact,  a  clear  case  of  hysterical  vomiting.

I  saw  her,  for  the  first  time,  on  the  6th  of  June  last,  and
of  course  commenced  treating  her  secundum  artem ,  with  steel
in  various  forms.  But  the  disease  proved  as  intractable  as
this  disease  usually  does.  The  poor  girl  beginning  to  get  tired
of  medicines  which  afforded  her  no  relief,  I  ventured  to  pro¬
pose  mesmerism,  as  I  knew  the  parents  to  be  sensible  peopley
and  I  found  no  difficulty  in  persuading  them  to  allow  it.

I  commenced  on  the  1st  of  July,  and  mesmerised  half  an
hour  without  any  perceptible  effect.

2nd.  Ditto  ditto.

3rd.  The  eyelids  drooped  for  a  few  seconds  occasionally.

6th.  Ditto  ditto.

7th.  Her  eyes  closed  after  half  an  hour  and  remained  so
a  few  minutes.

8th.  No  visible  effect.

10th  and  11th.  Ditto.

18th.  Ditto.  Having  been  absent  from  home,  the  mes¬
merism  has  been  omitted  since  the  11th.

19th  and  20th.  No  effect.  The  symptoms  of  the  disease
have  remained  the  same  without  the  least  mitigation.

21st.  (12th  time  of  mesmerising.)  There  was  more  effect
than  there  had  been  before.  The  peculiar  mesmeric  drooping
of  the  eyelids  was  very  apparent,  and,  had  I  not  been  suddenly
interrupted,  I  have  no  doubt  she  would  have  fallen  asleep.

22nd.  Mesmerism  was  unavoidably  omitted.

23rd.  She  has  kept  down  all  her  food  yesterday  and  to-day ,
though  she  has  not  retained  a  meal  before  for  nearly  three
months.  Here  is  a  triumph  for  mesmerism.  No  sooner  is
my  patient  even  slightly  affected,  than  her  most  intractable
symptom  ceases.  Hear  this,  ye  steel-hearted  and  iron-brained
scientific  physicians,  and  still  continue  to  cram  your  patients
with  mistura  ferri  composita,  &c.,  &c.,  in  true  empirical  style:
for  I  challenge  you  to  give  any  better  reason  for  your  steel
treatment  than  the  veriest  quack  can  for  using  his  nostrums,
viz.,  they  appear  to  have  done  good  sometimes.  Now  mes¬
merism  never  fails  to  cure  hysteria.  In  the  course  of  the  last
ten  years,  I  have  attacked  many  cases, — some  of  them  of  long
standing, — and  have  not  had  one  failure,  and  I  think  mes¬
merists  in  general  will  be  able  to  make  the  same  bold  assertion.

I  no  sooner  commenced  the  passes  to-day  than  the  eyelids
began  to  droop,  and  in  ten  minutes  she  went  into  the  mes-


76  Cure  of  Vomiting  with  Mesmerism,

meric  coma.  After  a  short  time  I  awoke  her,  and  mesmerised
her  by  three  slow  passes.  On  repeating  the  same  process,
she  went  off  with  two  passes,  and  afterwards  with  one.  There
was  perfect  catalepsy  and  insensibility  to  pain.  She  an¬
swered  me  any  questions  readily,  though  she  did  not  appear
to  hear  when  her  mother  spoke  to  her ;  and  she  remained
perfectly  unconscious,  when  awake,  of  all  that  had  been  done
or  said  during  her  sleep.  The  suddenness  of  the  effect  in  this
case  was  most  extraordinary.  She  jumped  all  at  once  into  a
somnambulic  state,  and,  if  any  one  will  have  the  hardihood
to  tell  me  it  was  collusion,  he  must  also  admit  that  the  three
months  vomiting  was  feigned ;  or  why  did  it  leave  at  the  exact
time  of  the  patient  being  affected  by  mesmerism?  A  curious
coincidence ,  I  suppose.  Mesmerism  has  great  luck  in  curious
coincidences.  Diseases  constantly  give  way  just  as  the  pa¬
tients  begin  to  feel  its  effects.  It  is  really  very  obliging  of
them, — they  appear  determined  to  support  us.

Aug.  1st.  She  has  been  mesmerised  daily  since  last  report,
and  with  one  or  two  trifling  exceptions,  she  has  kept  down  all
her  food.  Her  appearance  is  much  improved,  and  she  is  very
much  stronger  and  better.  The  catamenia  have  appeared,
and  much  more  profusely  than  for  the  last  two  years.

12th.  Not  quite  so  well  these  two  days.  She  retains  only
two  meals  a-day,  and  suffers  again  with  an  occasional  pain  in
the  back  and  side.

20th.  Finding  the  unpleasant  symptoms  to  continue,  I
thought  mesmerised  water  might  be  useful.  Without  making
any  remark,  I  mesmerised  a  tumbler  of  water  before  her,  and
asked  her  to  drink  about  half  of  it.  I  continued  talking  to
her  mother  who  was  with  her,  and,  in  about  twenty  seconds,
my  patient's  eyes  closed  just  as  they  do  by  passes.  Wheu  I
awoke  her  she  appeared  quite  conscious  that  the  water  had
sent  her  to  sleep,  but  declared  that  she  had  not  the  least  ex¬
pectation  that  it  would  have  done  so.  I  mesmerised  a  bottle
of  water  for  her  to  take  with  her,  requesting  her  to  take  one
sip  after  each  meal  to  enable  her  to  retain  it,  but  told  her  not
to  go  to  sleep  :  and  I  directed  her  to  take  a  good  draught  at
10  in  the  morning,  in  order  to  have  a  second  nap  in  the  day ;
and  I  requested  her  mother  to  awake  her  in  about  half  an
hour.  I  may  remark  that  no  other  person  can  mesmerise  her
but  myself,  although  any  one  can  awaken  her  by  making
transverse  passes.

21st.  My  plan  did  not  quite  succeed.  She  had  her  nap
at  10  o'clock,  and  awoke  much  better  for  it,  but  the  sip  after
her  meals  had  no  effect  in  keeping  them  down.  I  therefore
desired  her  to  take  the  sip  of  water  before  each  meal.  This


by  Mr.  Chandler.


77


succeeded  admirably,  and  she  continued  to  improve  until —
Sept.  3rd,  when  the  vomiting  again  returned,  and  con¬
tinued  in  spite  of  the  water  taken,  not  only  before  and  after
but  even  during  the  meal.  As  she  expressed  herself  always
much  more  benefited  by  coming  to  me  to  be  mesmerised  than
by  her  having  her  nap  at  home,  I  thought  it  might  be  bene¬
ficial  to  mesmerise  her  twice  a  day,  and  accordingly  told  her
to  come  at  ten  in  the  morning  as  well  as  at  four  in  the  after¬
noon.  This  soon  told  well.  She  kept  down  at  least  two
meals  a  day,  and  her  appearance  was  soon  much  improved.
But,  unfortunately,  shortly  after  this,  two  of  her  younger
sisters  died  of  malignant  scarlatina,  and  her  mother  took  the
disease  in  its  worst  form,  so  that  my  hysterical  patient  was
obliged  to  be  chief  nurse  for  nearly  a  month,  during  which  time
it  was  found  impossible  to  continue  the  mesmerism  with  any
regularity  :  and,  what  with  the  anxiety  and  the  neglect,  she
relapsed  very  considerably.  I  commenced  mesmerising  her
again  about  the  middle  of  November.  She  began  to  improve
after  a  few  days,  and  in  three  weeks  she  was  again  quite  re¬
lieved  from  all  her  unpleasant  symptoms.  Up  to  the  end  of
January  she  would  occasionally  complain  of  pain  in  the  side
and  back,  but  it  was  always  immediately  relieved  by  a  mes¬
meric  nap.  She  has  not  returned  a  meal  since  Christmas.
The  catamenia  are  now  quite  regular ;  her  appetite  is  good,
and  her  general  health  better  than  it  has  been  for  several
years.  She  is  now  talking  of  emigrating  to  Australia,  and  I
have  signed  a  certificate  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  her  a
passage,  so  thoroughly  do  I  consider  her  health  re-established.
I  continue  to  mesmerise  her  for  a  few  minutes  once  a  week,
merely  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  an  eye  upon  her.

I  will  just  mention  the  principal  phenomena  that  have
occurred  in  this  case.  I  named  that  she  was  not  affected
until  the  twelfth  time  of  mesmerising,  and  that  her  disease
then  immediately  received  its  death-blow  ;  and  that  she  all
at  once  fell  into  a  state  of  great  susceptibility.  I  may  now
state  that  she  did  not  appear  to  advance  much  in  phenomena
after  this  time.  Had  I  tried  the  water,  &c.,  I  have  no  doubt
it  would  all  have  succeeded  immediately.  Having  observed
the  unpleasantness  and,  I  may  add,  danger  of  patients  be¬
coming  so  very  susceptible, — so  as  to  go  off  with  one  pass  or
even  a  nod, — I  desired  her  in  her  sleep,  during  one  of  her
first  mesmeric  naps,  not  to  go  to  sleep  until  I  had  made  three
passes.  This  she  always  strictly  adhered  to,  except  on  one
occasion,  when  I  had  told  her  the  day  previously  (during  the
sleep)  to  go  off  on  the  following  day  with  two  passes.  I  also
requested  her  not  to  go  to  sleep  if  any  one  else  attempted  to


78


Cure  of  Vomiting  with  Mesmerism.


mesmerise  her.  This  she  strictly  obeyed,  even  though  I  were
present  and  told  her  whilst  awake  to  submit  to  be  mesmerised
by  another.  I  have  no  doubt  if  another  person  were  to  mes¬
merise  her  several  times  for  some  minutes  each  time,  that  he
would  succeed.  I  made  this  arrangement  with  my  patient,
in  order  to  quiet  the  fears  of  her  friends  and  the  tongues  of
our  officious  enemies,  who  are  ever  ready  to  preach  of  danger
and  immorality ;  and  I  shall  always  do  the  same  when  prac¬
ticable,  and  would  recommend  the  plan  for  adoption  by  mes¬
merists  in  general.  I  also  make  it  a  rule  never  to  mesmerise
a  female  patient  in  the  least  degree  susceptible  without  a  third
party  being  present.  This  rule  ought,  I  think,  to  be  most
rigidly  adhered  to  by  all  who  have  the  interest  of  mesmerism
at  heart.  It  would  so  completely  disarm  our  would-be-moral
enemies,  who  perhaps  measure  our  corn  by  their  own  bushel.
Let  them  once  become  acquainted  with  mesmerism,  and  they
will  feel  ashamed  of  ever  having  harboured  such  foul  ideas.

The  catalepsy  in  this  case  is  perfect,  that  is,  the  head,
body,  or  limbs  may  be  placed  in  any  position,  and  may  be
moved  at  pleasure,  there  being  no  rigidity ;  and  yet,  if  the  pa¬
tient  is  awakened,  she  retains  the  exact  position  she  was  placed
in,  until  transverse  passes  are  made  or  the  parts  are  blown
upon ;  for,  if  an  arm  be  raised  and  again  put  down  by  the  side,
or  if  a  part  be  touched  during  the  sleep,  there  is  neither  power
nor  feeling  in  that  part  when  she  is  awakened,  until  it  be  demes-
merised.  Finding  the  waking  process  by  passes  more  tedious
than  usual,  I  adopted  a  fresh  plan :  I  told  her  in  the  sleep  always
to  awake  when  I  clapped  my  hands  three  times.  This  suc¬
ceeded  admirably,  and  she  was  more  comfortable  when  awak¬
ened  by  this  plan.  I  can  mesmerise  the  floor  by  making  passes
over  it,  and  she  will  instantly  fall  asleep  when  her  foot  rests
on  the  part  of  the  floor  I  have  touched.  I  can  also  make  any¬
thing  invisible  to  her  by  telling  her  (whilst  in  the  mesmeric
coma)  that,  when  she  awakes  such  a  thing  is  to  be  so.  But
as  these  two  experiments  are  disagreeable  to  her,  I  never
repeat  them ;  for,  as  I  think  I  have  observed  on  one  or  two
former  occasions,  I  mesmerise  for  the  cure  of  disease  and  not
for  amusement,  and  I  find  by  experience  that  anything  un¬
pleasant  tends  materially  to  retard  the  cure.

I  wish  some  mesmerist,  who  has  the  time  and  opportunity,
would  institute  a  series  of  experiments  with  the  crystals,  and
publish  the  result  of  his  experience.  I  feel  deeply  interested
in  the  subject,  but  cannot  devote  the  time  necessary  to  the
carrying  it  out  in  that  systematic  way  which  it  demands.

My  friend — Mr.  Holland,  has  in  hand  a  beautiful  case  of
benefit  without  visible  effect,  but  it  is  not  yet  sufficiently


Remarkable  Mesmeric  Phenomena .


79


advanced  for  publication.  The  patient  is  a  boy  who  suffered
from  the  most  horrible  convulsive  fits, — I  suppose  hysteria,
— and  has  been  discharged,  incurable,  from  several  institu¬
tions.  The  benefits  of  mesmerism  have  been  most  marked
and  rapid.

Thomas  Chandler.

58,  Paradise  Street,  Rotherhithe,

March  12th,  1849.


XI.  Remarkable  Mesmeric  Phenomena.  By  Mr.  Adams,
Surgeon.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Ashburner.

Lymington,  Feb.  12th,  1849.

My  Dear  Sir, — -I  beg  to  send  you  the  particulars  of  the
case  of  mesmerism  of  which  I  spoke  when  I  had  the  pleasure
of  seeing  you  in  Hampshire,  a  few  weeks  ago.  Although
there  may  be  nothing  novel  or  surprizing  in  it  to  those  who
like  yourself  have  devoted  great  attention  to  mesmeric  pheno¬
mena  for  many  years,  yet,  perhaps  you  may  think  it  useful
to  obtain  its  publication  in  The  Zoist ;  for  it  is  only  by  the
reiteration  of  well  authenticated  facts,  that  the  truth  of  mes¬
merism  will  ever  be  adequately  impressed  on  the  public  mind.

I  remain,  my  dear  Sir,  yours  faithfully,

Dr.  Ashburner.  N.  Adams.

In  the  month  of  October  last,  Mr.  Maule,  a  medical
pupil  of  a  friend  of  mine  (Mr.  Good,  Surgeon,  of  Stur-
minster,  Newton,  Dorset)  came  to  reside  with  me  for  a  few
weeks  at  Lymington.  Mr.  Maule  informed  me  that  some
months  previously  he  had  attended  a  lecture  on  mesmerism,
at  Blandford,  given  by  Mr.  Davey ;  knowing  nothing  before
on  the  subject.  Mr.  M.  submitted  himself  to  Mr.  Davey’s
manipulations,  and  proved  to  be  a  very  susceptible  subject.
He  was  soon  completely  influenced,  and  manifested  phreno-
mesmeric  phenomena.  Mr.  Maule,  on  his  return  to  Stur-
minster,  tried  his  hand  on  Mr.  Good’s  man-servant,  William
Thorn,  and  he  also  was  readily  put  into  the  mesmeric  state,
and  manifested  phreno-mesmerism  as  perfectly  as  it  is  possible
to  conceive.  Mr.  Maule  observed  to  me,  that  the  facility
with  which  he  could  put  Thorn  to  sleep  led  him  to  believe  that
he  might  do  so  at  this  or  any  other  distance.  Lymington  is
about  46  miles  from  Stur minster.  I  encouraged  him  to  try,
and  suggested  that  he  should  first  write  to  Mr.  Good,  and
state  to  him  his  intention,  in  order  that  Thorn,  though  not
apprized  of  it,  might  be  out  of  harm’s  way.  Half-past  seven
o’clock  in  the  evening  was  the  time  fixed  on,  and  at  that


80


Remarkable  Mesmeric  Phenomena.


time  Mr.  Good  ordered  him  to  sit  down  in  the  kitchen  and
mind  the  house  whilst  he  was  absent.  On  returning,  in  about
twenty  minutes,  Mr.  Good  found  Thorn  in  a  state  of  profound
coma,  from  which  he  had  much  difficulty  in  arousing  him,
and  not  at  all  resembling  natural  sleep,  which  with  him  is  of
a  very  light  character.  Thorn  moreover  told  Mr.  Good  that,
before  he  fell  asleep  he  had  lost  the  use  of  his  legs ;  he  had
endeavoured  to  kick  the  cat  away  and  could  not  do  so.

This  experiment  seemed  conclusive  enough,  but  we  thought
it  as  well  to  have  another ;  and  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Good  myself,
stating  that  Mr.  Maule  wTould  mesmerise  Thorn,  at  half-past
nine  the  next  morning,  about  the  time  he  would  be  returning
from  breakfast,  being  an  out-door  servant.  I  requested  Mr.
G.  to  take  no  notice  whatever  to  Thorn  of  what  was  intended,
and  not  to  put  him  out  of  his  routine  work  in  any  way,  so
that  not  the  slightest  suspicion  or  thought  on  the  subject
might  be  raised  in  his  mind.  It  appears  that  on  the  morning
in  question,  and  at  the  hour  specified,  Thorn  was  going  across
the  meadow  with  a  bucket  in  his  hand  to  feed  the  pigs,  when
he  was  taken  in  such  a  sort  of  way,  as  he  afterwards  expressed
himself,  as  if  he  were  drunk.  He  could  not  proceed  with
what  he  was  about,  but  put  down  the  bucket  and  went  into
an  adjoining  barn  and  lay  down;  he  was  there  half  an  hour
in  a  state  of  unconsciousness.

Mr.  Maule  conducted  his  operations  in  the  following
manner.  He  went  into  a  room  by  himself  and  was  engaged
about  half  an  hour  in  the  mesmeric  process  :  he  used  passes
for  about  ten  minutes,  and  then  sat  down  in  a  chair  and
looked  very  steadfastly  as  if  the  patient  were  before  him,
keeping  his  mind  on  him  alone  and  exercising  his  volition
towards  accomplishing  his  object.

William  Thorn,  is  24  years  of  age,  of  sanguineous  tem¬
perament  and  temperate  habits.  He  has  a  full  development
of  the  intellectual  and  moral  organs,  and  of  Firmness  and
Self-Esteem.  His  education  does  not  extend  beyond  the  bare
capability  to  read  and  write.


Lymington,  Hants.


N.  Adams.


.  (  SI  )


XII.  Mesmeric  Cure  of  Blindness  of  twenty-six  years ’  duration.

By  a  Lady.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

“Dr.  Elliotson  feelingly  and  somewhat  indignantly  deplores  the  indifference
which  the  profession  has  shewn  to  the  miracles  of  mesmerism.  He  says  they
are  as  indifferent  to  mesmeric  facts  ‘  as  the  cattle  grazing  in  the  meadows  are  to
the  wonders  of  the  steam -carriages  passing  by  them  on  the  railroads.’  The
simile  is  more  applicable  than  Dr.  Elliotson  supposes.  When  the  trains  first
began  to  run,  the  cattle  scoured  away  in  all  directions,  as  if  some  demons  or
supernatural  beings  were  thundering  along  the  road.  But  time  generally
removes  the  film  from  our  mental  as  well  as  our  material  optics,  and  this  seems
to  have  been  the  case  with  the  cattle,  who  soon  found  out  that  there  were  no
giants  or  hobgoblins  in  the  trains ;  and  probably  the  bipeds  will  ultimately
discover  that  there  is  neither  magic  nor  magnetism  in  the  mesmeric  passes,  but  a
precious  lot  of  humbug,  credulity,  and  delusion.”* — Dr.  James  Johnson,
Medico -Chirurgical  Review,  p.  596;  Oct.  1842.

The  following  is  one  of  the  mightiest  triumphs  of  mesmer¬
ism.  The  disease  was  not  nervous  or  invisible,  nor  was  the
cure  an  effect  upon  imagination.  The  whole  history  is  as¬
tounding.  The  absorption  effected  by  mesmerism  was  not,  it
is  true,  of  a  malignant  mass;  but  it  was  of  a  deposit  which
had  lain  in  the  eye  not  a  few  years,  like  the  cancer  which  I
cured,  but  six  and  twenty  years !  and  it  is  to  be  remembered
that  the  mesmeriser  was  not  like  myself  a  medical  man,
likely  to  gain  useful  reputation  by  the  labour,  but  a  lady,
who  could  gain  nothing  but  the  gratification  of  benefiting
a  fellow-creature,  and  whose  name  is  not  to  be  printed.  I
venture  however  to  state  that  the  lady  is  the  wife  of  one
who  is  among  the  very  highest  in  virtue,  talent,  and  rank
in  our  country .f

John  Elliotson.

The  following  letter  and  the  history  were  sent  me  by  the
lady.

“ - ,  March,  1849.

“  To  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Dear  Sir, — Your  benevolence  will,  I  am  sure,  be  in¬
terested  in  a  short  statement  of  the  case  of  a  poor  blind
woman,  whose  circumstances  I  have  mentioned  to  you  in
conversation  ;  and  as  our  attention  to  the  important  subject
of  animal  magnetism  was  very  much  stimulated  and  directed
by  the  interesting  and  remarkable  cases  we  have  seen  at  your


*  The  shallowness  of  this  poor  man  is  as  self-evident  here  as  in  all  his
writings :  for,  though  the  cattle  are  now  accustomed  to  the  wondrous  trains,  and
behold  them  without  madly  scampering,  and  the  trains  have  proved  not  to  be  un¬
real  hobgoblins,  these  have  proved  to  be  realities  of  stupendous  and  hourly  advan¬
tage  to  mankind;  and  so  has  mesmerism.  For  him  to  have  made  his  point,  the
trains,  when  turning  out  not  to  be  hobgoblins,  should  have  turned  out  to  be,  in  his
elegant  language,  “  a  precious  lot  of  humbug  and  delusion.” — J.  Elliotson.

YOL.  VII.  G


82  Cure  of  Blindness  of  twenty-six  Years’  duration ,

house,  I  am  glad  to  offer  to  you  in  this  account  some  of  the
fruits  of  those  advantages  which  we  have  derived  from  you.

“  I  am,  dear  Sir,

“  Truly  and  faithfully  yours,

“E.  W.

“  If  you  think  it  worth  while  to  publish  this  case,  I  will
beg  of  you  not  to  introduce  my  name ;  the  initials  will  be
sufficient,  though  The - has  no  objection  to  your  pri¬

vately  giving  our  names  to  any  one  who  really  cares  about
the  subject.”


December,  1848.

It  is  now  more  than  three  j^ears  since  one  of  the  mem¬
bers  of  my  family  undertook  to  mesmerise  a  poor  blind
woman  in  our  village,  with  a  view  of  attempting  to  restore
her  sight ;  but  with  the  professed  and  immediate  design  only
of  relieving  severe  pain  in  the  head  and  shoulder,  with  con¬
fusion  and  giddiness  of  the  brain,  which  had  long  distressed
her.  She  was  aged  about  45  years,  and  had  been  blind
twenty-six  of  these.  She  was  born  and  bred  in  our  village,
and  when  I  first  noticed  her  sixteen  years  ago,  as  “  the  blind
woman,”  she  was  led  about  by  a  little  girl,  one  of  her  nieces.
She  could  with  one  eye  faintly  discern  light  from  darkness,
so  far  at  least  as  to  perceive  shadows  passing  before  her ;  but
she  could  not  judge  of  their  distance,  or  walk  without  stum¬
bling  over  every  object  in  her  way,  neither  could  she  discern
colour  or  form.  She  would  mistake  a  donkey  for  a  man,  the
undefined  shade  being  all  that  she  saw.  The  disease  was
called  opacity  of  the  cornea.

She  became  blind  three  or  four  months  after  the  birth  of
her  first  child,  partly  she  thinks  through  a  cold  caught,  partly
through  the  painful  remedies  which  some  wise  women  in  the
neighbourhood  had  recommended  to  her.  In  the  course  of  a
few  years  after  she  became  blind  she  underwent  three  opera¬
tions  ;  one  eye  “  was  cut,”  to  use  her  own  expression,  three
times ;  and  on  one  of  these  occasions  she  saw  a  flash  of  light
before  the  bandage  was  put  on.  When  the  last  operation
was  performed  (which  took  place  she  thinks  about  twenty
years  ago),  the  surgeon  advised  her  never  to  undergo  another,
for  that  her  sight  was  quite  gone.

She  had  two  children  after  she  became  blind.  The  ap¬
pearance  of  the  eyes  was  this ;  a  thick  opaque  greyish-white
substance  rested  upon  them,  but  in  one  eye  there  was  a
small  spot  less  opaque,  or  at  least  thinner  than  the  rest,
through  which,  when  she  held  her  head  in  a  particular  direc¬
tion,  she  could  perceive  the  shadows  I  have  alluded  to.


by  a  Lady.


83


When  her  case  was  undertaken,  the  intention  of  operat¬
ing  for  the  benefit  of  the  eyes  was  not,  as  I  have  said,  made
known  to  her :  the  expectation  of  relieving  severe  rheumatic
pain  in  the  head  and  shoulders,  and  giddiness  and  heaviness
of  the  head,  under  which  she  had  suffered  for  many  years,
was  the  only  one  held  out  to  her.  Of  mesmerism,  it  may  be
supposed,  she  knew  nothing :  but,  having  implicit  confidence
in  us,  and,  being  told  that  we  thought  we  could  relieve  pain
by  placing  a  hand  on  her  head  and  then  drawing  it  down  to
her  feet,  she  willingly  consented  to  sit  down.

At  first  she  felt  only  “  a  cold  trill  run  down  her  arms  •”
soon  she  expressed  her  surprise  that  she  could  sit  so  still,
being  habitually  very  restless ;  by  degrees  she  became  sleepy,
and,  while  apologizing  for  feeling  so  drowsy,  and  striving  for
a  few  minutes  to  resist  the  influence,  she  fell  asleep.  It  was
apparently  a  natural  sleep.  On  awaking,  she  said  that
“  a  great  weight  had  been  ris  from  her  head,”  and  that  “  the
pain  was  gone.”

The  mesmerism  was  continued  daily;  but  still  with  the
professed  intention  of  improving  her  health.  Nothing  was
said  about  the  sight,  lest  expectation  should  lead  to  disap¬
pointment.  In  the  course  of  a  little  time,  however,  during
one  of  her  sittings,  she  said  that  she  saw  something  bright
and  coloured  pass  before  her.  It  was  found  to  be  her  mes-
meriser’s  ring ;  and  this  circumstance  encouraged  us  to  feel
and  to  make  known  to  her  a  strong  hope  that  her  eye-sight
might  be  partially,  at  least,  restored.

She  was,  at  this  time,  mesmerised  daily  (with  several  in¬
terruptions  of  a  day  or  two)  for  four  months,  and  then  three
times  a  week  for  about  two  or  three  months  longer,  using
mesmerised  water  also  to  wash  the  eyes.  At  this  period  the
strength  of  her  mesmeriser  became  exhausted  by  her  exer¬
tions,*  so  that  she  was  obliged  to  discontinue  them,  and  I
took  up  the  case.  By  this  time,  however,  the  poor  woman’s
sight  was  partially  restored ;  she  could  see  colours  in  the  shop
windows  and  walk  into  town  unassisted.  Her  sleep  became
less  like  natural  sleep  at  this  time.  She  saw  vivid  colours  in
the  dark  when  I  passed  my  hand  before  her  eyes,  and  light
seemed  to  stream  from  them.  She  also  conversed  freely  in
her  sleep.


*  She  suffered  exceedingly  in  consequence  of  her  exertions  ;  and  I  mention
the  circumstance  with  a  view  of  cautioning  young  persons  against  undertaking
chronic  cases  before  they  are  arrived  at  the  possession  of  their  full  growth  and
strength.  She  was  herself,  however,  restored  to  health  by  mesmerism,  which
the  skilful  physician  who  attended  her  was  wise  enough  to  prescribe  and  kind
enough  to  afford.

G  2


84


Cure  of  Blindness  of  twenty-six  Years’  duration,

Since  the  above  period,  health  and  other  circumstances
have  somewhat  interfered  with  the  treatment  of  our  patient.
I  mesmerised  her  at  first  three  times  a  week,  and  afterwards
twice,  with  the  exception  of  about  three  months  in  each  year,
(during  which  I  was  absent,)  down  to  the  present  time — Dec.,
1848;  the  whole  period  being  about  three  years  and  five
months  since  the  case  was  undertaken, — two  years  and  eight
months  of  which  the  mesmerism  was  going  on  only  twice  a
week.  During  this  period  the  outward  manifestations  of
change  in  the  symptoms  of  the  eyes,  were,  first  that  she  could
close  them,  whereas  she  had  never  since  her  blindness  been
able  to  close  the  lids  over  them,  even  during  natural  sleep  :
secondly,  that  water  frequently  poured  from  them  after  mes¬
merising,  whereas  they  used  to  be  perfectly  dry  :  and  thirdly,
that  the  opaque  substance  which  covered  them,  first  became
thinner  over  the  upper  part  of  the  eye  and  thicker  beneath  ;
and  gradually  a  small  portion  of  the  pupil  became  visible.

The  present  state  of  the  eyes  (dated  Dec.,  1848)  is  this, —
the  opacity  of  the  cornea  in  one  eye  has  disappeared,  leaving,  at
least,  only  a  slight  cloudiness  in  one  spot,  which  does  not
prevent  her  seeing  with  it  as  well  as  other  women  of  her  age  ;
in  the  other  eye,  the  opacity  is  very  much  contracted  and  oc¬
cupies  only  a  small  space  in  the  bottom  part  of  the  eye,  leav¬
ing  the  upper  part  clear.  She  surprised  us  about  eight  months
ago,  by  spelling  out  the  letters  stamped  on  a  glass  bottle,
which  a  person  present,  not  much  older,  could  not  read  with¬
out  glasses ;  and  this  is  the  more  remarkable,  because  she  had
never  been  a  good  scholar  and  had  been  23  years  without
seeing  a  letter  until  a  short  time  previously,  when  she  had
begun  to  amuse  herself,  first,  with  reading  the  large  letters
on  the  printed  bills  fixed  to  the  walls,  and  afterwards  in  a
hook.  She  can  now  work  in  the  common  way,  but  not  thread
her  needle,  though  she  can  see  the  eye  of  it  perfectly,  which
I  attribute  partly  to  want  of  practice,  and  that  it  is  a  habit
so  early  acquired  that  we  are  not  aware  of  its  difficulty  when
attempted  at  a  later  age.  She  cuts  out  her  caps,  walks  into
town  (four  miles)  alone  to  make  her  little  purchases,  and  per¬
forms  all  the  ordinary  occupations  of  life.  And  these  things
are  the  more  remarkable  in  her,  seeing  that  she  was  extremely
awkward  in  everything  she  attempted,  and  had  never  per¬
formed  for  herself  any  of  those  little  offices  which  blind  people
are  usually  taught  to  accomplish,  and  had  always  a  child  to
assist  and  lead  her  about  excepting  in  her  own  immediate
locality,  where  the  people  knew  her  and  got  out  of  her  way.

The  face  of  her  original  mesmeriser  was  the  one  she  first
saw ;  she  spelt  out,  as  it  were  by  degrees,  feature  after  feature,


by  a  Lady.


85


then,  when  in  a  particular  direction  and  under  a  proper  light,
taking  a  view  of  the  whole.  She  has  great  pleasure  in  ob¬
serving  the  outline  of  a  face,  and  is  a  very  good  judge  of  the
beauty  of  outline.  When  she  became  acquainted  with  the
features  of  her  daughter,  who  was  an  infant  of  about  four
months*  when  she  lost  her  sight,  they  seemed  to  disappoint
her ;  she  expected,  I  believe,  to  have  seen  a  face  less  homely ;
and  the  little  portrait  of  her  son  which  had  been  much  prized
by  her  when  she  could  just  discern  colours,  was  no  longer
pleasing  to  her  when  she  could  see  more  distinctly.  She  has
the  greatest  delight  in  looking  at  people,  especially  the  young
people  of  the  family,  and  notices  the  smallest  change  in  their
dress  or  way  of  doing  their  hair.  The  sight  of  colours  affords
a  never-failing  source  of  delight ;  she  loves  to  walk  in  the
streets  that  she  may  look  at  the  coloured  ribbons  suspended
in  the  windows.  Strongly  coloured  flowers  and  a  glowing  sky
excite  in  her  intense  admiration.

She  is  thrown  into  a  sleep-waking  state,  though  she  is
not  clairvoyant.  In  it  she  always  supposes  herself  in  her
own  cabin,  and  she  takes  her  magnetizer  or  any  one  who  is
put  into  communication  with  her  (for  she  is  not  sensible  of
the  presence  of  any  one  not  in  communication),  for  the  niece
who  is  usually  with  her,  or  some  neighbour  who  has  lately
been  talking  with  her ;  and  every  question  put,  she  answers
as  to  that  person,  and  therefore  of  course  in  a  perfectly  un¬
constrained  manner,  often  scolding  us  for  putting  silly  ques¬
tions,  for  conceit,  &c.

In  her  normal  state,  she  never  remembers  what  has  passed
in  the  sleep-waking,  excepting  so  far  as  this,  that  if  I  tell  her
and  impress  strongly  on  her  mind  that  she  ought  to  do  or  say
something,  and  can  convince  her  reason  that  it  would  be
right  or  advisable,  she  will  try  almost  instinctively  to  do  or
say  it  when  she  awakes.  She  is  insensible  to  pain,  having
been  pinched,  pricked,  and  tickled,  as  is  usual,  by  believers
and  unbelievers  to  test  her  insensibility.  She  loses  taste  also  :
a  quantity  of  salt  was  put  between  her  lips,  when  asked  what
she  had  in  her  mouth,  she  replied,  “Nothing  at  all;”  on
awaking,  however,  she  said,  “  I  do  not  think  I  can  be  well,
I  have  such  a  salty  taste  in  my  mouth.”  She  sleeps  two  or
three  hours,  and  her  natural  sleep,  which  was  very  bad,  has
been  much  improved  by  the  mesmerism.  She  wakes  from
the  magnetic  sleep  of  herself,  but  no  noise  rouses  her.

As  far  as  I  can  make  out,  she  is  about  47  or  48  years  of

*  The - ,  the  husband  of  the  lady,  informs  me  that,  when  the  patient

first  saw  her  grandchild,  it  happened  to  be  of  the  very  age  her  daughter  was  when
she  last  saw  her  before  the  blindness  took  place. — J.  Eljliotson.


86  Cure  of  intense  Tooth-ache,  with  remarkable  effects ,

age ;  and  I  mean  to  continue  the  treatment  a  few  months
longer,  though  I  do  not  expect  that  much  more  will  be  gained.
She  is  deeply  grateful  to  her  mesmerisers  and  to  God,  though
she  cannot  be  persuaded  that  it  is  not  a  peculiar  gift  which
He  has  vouchsafed  to  us ;  while  we  are  deeply  grateful  to
Him  for  this  successful  result  in  the  application  of  one  of  the
most  wonderful  and  beautiful  restorative  resources  of  his
providence.* *

March  15  th,  1849.

Illness  and  other  causes  prevented  my  forwarding  this
account  at  the  time  I  wrote  it — in  December  last.  I  have
only  now  to  add,  that  the  sight  has  become  still  clearer  and
stronger.  I  have  taken  the  opinion  of  a  somnambulist  on  the
case,  who  declares  that  our  patient  will  never  lose  the  sight
she  has  regained,  though  we  must  not  expect,  at  her  age,  to
obtain  more  than  she  has  already  gained  in  point  of  clearness
of  vision.  I  had  forgotten  to  mention  that  she  has  always
seen,  and  continues  to  see,  when  in  perfect  darkness,  the
most  brilliant  colours  stream  from  my  hand  during  her  mag¬
netic  sleep.f


XIII.  Mesmeric  Cure  of  intense  Tooth-ache ;  with  some  re¬
markable  effects.  By  the  Bev.  George  Sandby,  jun.
Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

u  Look  at  the  chosen  audience  and  instruments  of  this  mesmeric  leader  (Dr.
Elliotson).  Does  he  himself  treat  the  harlotry  which  he  dares  to  call  science
with  any  respect  ?  Let  the  profession  consider  his  allies  and  assistants,  taken
from  the  pert  folly  of  the  nobility,  the  weakest  among  the  literary  people,  high
and  low  ladies,  quacJc  clergymen ,  itinerant  lecturers  and  exhibiting  buffoons.’ ’ —
Mr.  Wakley,  Lancet,  July  4,  1846,  p.  17.

Flixton,  Suffolk,  January  29,  1849.
My  dear  Elliotson. — A  friend  of  mine,  a  robust  athletic  man,
much  more  so  than  myself,  of  strong  nerves  and  tempera¬
ment,  a  great  rider  and  hunter,  and  who  is  constantly  in  the
open  air  and  in  exercise,  lately  caught  a  cold,  which  flew  to
his  face,  and  affected  a  tooth.  The  pain  became  severe,
spreading  all  over  the  left  cheek  and  partaking  of  the  cha¬
racter  of  tic  or  of  acute  rheumatism.  The  agony  was,  at
times,  intolerable,  and  lasted  several  days,  but  at  length

*  See  also  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson’s  case,  No.  XIX.,  p.  290. — Zoist.

t  I  trust  that  Dr.  Mayo  will  wait  upon  the  family  as  soon  as  they  come  to
town  for  the  season,  and  inform  them  whether  he  regards  the  cure  as  “  ethically
objectionable or  the  “  form”  of  mesmerism  u  harmless  and  whether  he  still,
saintly  man !  is  disposed  to  ask  “  if  such  a  form  can  be  devised.”  It  was  the
husband  of  this  most  benevolent,  enlightened  and  indefatigable  lady,  that  performed
the  complete  and  almost  instantaneous  cure  recorded  in  No.  XII.,  p.  514. —
J.  Elliotson.


by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.


87


yielded  to  blisters  and  other  remedies.  My  friend,  consider¬
ing  himself  cured,  ventured  out  of  doors  in  a  sharp  wind,
caught  a  fresh  cold  and  suffered  a  relapse.  The  pain  again  be¬
came  intense,  but,  when  I  saw  him,  was  confined  to  the  tooth.

I  mesmerised  him  for  half  an  hour :  at  the  end  of  the
first  ten  or  twelve  minutes  he  was  feeling  somewhat  drowsy,
when  suddenly  a  sort  of  shock  or  sensation  passed  over  the
top  of  his  head  and  he  roused  up  in  a  most  vigilant  and  active
state.  He  said  that  he  felt  much  more  wakeful  than  when  I
began,  and  that  all  the  mesmerism  in  the  world  could  not  now
send  him  to  sleep.  I,  however,  finished  my  half-hour ;  when
my  patient  allowed  that  the  acuteness  of  the  pain  was  decidedly
abated,  though  the  pain  itself  was  anything  but  gone.  I  have
often  succeeded  at  a  first  trial  in  cutting  off  the  acute  character
of  a  pain,  without  removing  the  pain  altogether,  as  happened
in  this  instance.  I  believe,  however,  that  my  attempt  on
this  occasion  was  regarded  as  a  failure ;  partly,  because  there
was  no  sleep,  and  paitly  because  the  pain  was  not  more  sub¬
dued.  I  should  add,  that  the  abatement  of  the  pain  took
place  at  the  same  moment  that  the  shock  was  experienced.

When  I  called  the  next  day,  I  found  my  friend  in  a  most
uncomfortable  state,  and  suffering  much ;  still  he  admitted
that  the  pain  had  not  been  once  acute  since  the  mesmerism,
that  I  had  done  him  some  good,  and  that  he  would  let  me
try  again.  I  mesmerised  him  for  another  half-hour.  Again,
at  the  end  of  about  ten  minutes,  he  felt  overpowered  with
sleep,  again  he  experienced  the  same  sort  of  sensation  at  the
top  of  his  head,  and  again  he  roused  up  more  wakeful  than
at  the  beginning,  but  exclaiming  at  the  same  time,  “  The  pain
is  gone, — I  have  no  more  tooth-ache  than  you  have.  I  am
quite  well.”  And  he  afterwards  observed,  that  he  was  able
to  close  his  teeth,  which  he  dared  not  attempt  before,  and
only  felt  a  slight  tenderness  when  he  touched  the  tooth  with
his  tongue.  From  that  moment  the  pain  never  returned ,  and
when  I  saw  my  friend  the  next  day,  he  laughed,  and  said
that  he  had  been  as  well  as  ever  he  was  in  his  life ;  but  he
mentioned  in  addition,  one  singular  fact,  viz.,  that  the  j Ungers
and  toes  of  his  left  hand  and  foot  had  suffered  considerable
numbness  and  pain  for  a  long  time  after.  The  fact  was,  that
while  I  was  mesmerising  him,  I  endeavoured  to  draw  the  pain
out  at  the  extremities  by  making  downward  passes  over  the  left
arm  and  leg,  and  the  plan  perfectly  succeeded.  When  the
sitting  was  over,  and  the  patient  rose  up,  he  said,  “  What  a
strange  feeling  I  have  in  my  left  hand  and  foot, — quite  a
numbness.”  Knowing  what  it  proceeded  from,  I  endeavoured
to  draw  the  pain  from  the  limbs  also,  but  as  an  engagement


88  Cure  of  intense  Tooth-ache ,  with  remarkable  effects.

called  me  away  I  was  compelled  to  leave  the  house  without
succeeding ;  and  I  now  learnt  that  the  sensation  in  the  foot
had  lasted  the  whole  evening,  and  that  in  the  hand  the  whole
night  and  more  than  12  hours,  and  at  length  gradually  died
away.  In  short,  I  had  transferred  the  toothache ,  in  a  modi¬
fied  type,  to  the  fingers  and  toes.

In  addition  to  the  complete  removal  of  all  pain  from  the
tooth,  and  that  too  most  suddenly,  it  strikes  me  that  there
are  three  noticeable  points  in  this  case.

1st.  So  far  was  the  patient  from  going  to  sleep  under  the
passes,  that  he  became  more  and  more  wakeful  every  moment ,
and  yet  a  full  and  clear  effect  was  produced.  I  have  observed
this  in  other  cases.  It  would  seem  that  the  passes  conveyed
a  tone  and  stimulus  into  the  system.

2nd.  The  ^^si-electric  shock  at  the  top  of  the  head.  My
friend  declares,  that  nothing  could  be  more  unmistakeable
than  this — that  he  felt  the  shock  distinctly  on  the  two  occa¬
sions,  and  that  in  a  moment  a  change  occurred  in  the  pain.
Surely  this  is  a  fact  for  a  philosophic  student  to  reflect  upon.
Does  it  not  strongly  harmonize  with  some  of  Faraday's  recent
discoveries,  as  to  the  great  diffusiveness  of  electric  action  and
matter  ?

3rd.  The  numbness  induced  at  the  extremities.  This,  you
well  know,  is  by  no  means  uncommon,  but  I  do  not  remem¬
ber  to  have  heard  of  the  sensation  continuing  for  so  many
hours,  as  it  did  in  this  case,  the  patient  being,  moreover,  a
hale  and  powerful  man,  and  not  a  priori,  I  should  imagine,
peculiarly  susceptible  to  this  sort  of  action.

So  many  tooth-aches  have  been  removed  by  mesmerism,
that,  perhaps,  you  will  scarcely  consider  the  above  case  as  de¬
serving  of  admission  into  The  Zoist,  unless,  like  myself,  you
regard  the  points  to  which  I  have  adverted  as  rather  uncommon.

Believe  me  to  remain,  my  dear  Elliotson,

Yours  faithfully,

To  John  Elliotson,  Esq.,  M.  D.  George  Sandby.

Dr.  Mayo  cannot  suppose  that  clergymen  of  the  Church
of  England,  whatever  mode  of  mesmerism  they  devise,  can
ever  cause  “ possession :” — patients  at  any  rate  mesmerised  by
them  run  no  risk  of  becoming  possessed.  As  Mr.  Sandby  so
completely  cast  out  the  pain,  it  is  clear  indeed  that  the  cure
was  by  dispossession :  and  since  the  gentleman  mentioned  in
the  last  article  and  Mr.  Sandby  both  received  the  (C  sound”
education  of  Oxford,  what  can  Dr.  Hawkins  now  think  of  that
University,  seeing  that  it  has  produced  two  such  “  quacks,
impostors,  and  especial  favourites,”  &c.  ? — J.  Elliotson.


(  89  )

XIY.  Cure  of  Deafness.  By  Mr.  Evans,  Dentist.

Sunny  Hill,  Tenby,  Feb.  29  th.
Sir. — I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  sending  a  few  things  for
The  Zoist.  Should  you  have  space  and  think  the  cases  worthy
of  inserting,  of  course  you  can  make  any  alterations  you  deem
necessary.

During  a  professional  visit  to  Brecon,  last  year,  I  mesmer¬
ised  a  young  lady  for  the  first  time,  and  threw  her  into  the
sleep  sufficiently  deep  to  extract  a  tooth  without  her  being  at
all  conscious  of  it.  The  same  day,  Oct.  26th,  I  mesmerised
her  brother,  and  extracted  three  teeth  without  any  pain  :  his
surprise  on  awaking  was  great ;  until  informed  of  it,  he  had
not  the  slighest  idea  of  the  operation  having  been  performed.
The  friends,  who  were  present,  were  quite  astonished.

The  case  of  deafness  is  that  of  Colonel  Wedgwood,  of
Tenby.  I  shall  enclose  his  own  statement.  This  gentleman
was  a  colonel  in  the  Foot  Guards  :  he  is  likely  to  do  great  good
to  the  cause  in  the  country,  being  universally  respected,  and  I
should  be  very  glad  to  have  his  case  inserted  in  The  Zoist.

Yours  respectfully,

Thomas  Evans,  Dentist.

“  In  January,  1848,  I  had  an  attack  of  influenza,  after
which  I  became  very  deaf  in  the  left  ear,  with  a  constant  noise
or  singing  in  my  head.  I  tried  various  means  under  medical
advice,  without  any  benefit.

“In  December  last,  Mr.  Evans  mesmerised  me  nearly
every  day  for  a  fortnight.  Afterwards  I  could  hear  quite  as
well  with  my  left  ear  as  with  my  right,  although,  when  I
began,  I  could  not  hear  the  ticking  of  a  small  watch  when
pressed  against  the  ear.

“  T.  Wedgwood.”


XY.  Severe  Case  of  Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.

By  Dr.  Storer.

“  We  believe  Earl  Ducie  to  be  an  honourable  man;  and  if  he  knew  the  cha¬
racters  of  some  of  the  parties  with  whom  he  is  associated,  he  would  shrink  in
disgust  from  being  connected  with  them.  There  is  one  mesmerising  fellow  who
has  long  figured  at  Bristol,  whom  we  are  resolved  to  expose;  that  is,  should  we
learn  that  he  has  sufficient  influence  to  be  mischievous  in  deluding  and  defrauding
any  portion  of  the  public.” — Mr.  Wakley,  Lancet,  Jan.  13,  1849.

“  How  could  such  a  man  as  Lord  Ducie,  with  his  honourable  and  pure  mind,
connect  himself  with  a  such  crew  as  the  mesmerising  gang  at  Bristol  ?” — Mr.
Wakley,  Lancet,  Jan.  20,  1849.

Ann  Nokes,  a  young  person,  aged  18,  residing  at  Walcot,
Bath,  was  brought  to  me  by  her  mother  in  March,  1846.
She  stated  that  her  daughter  had  been  suffering  from  severe


90  Severe  case  of  Epilepsy  cured  by  Mesmerism.

fits  for  the  last  three  years.  They  were  considered  to  be
epileptic  by  the  different  medical  men  who  had  attended  her.
The  attacks  were  preceded  by  head-ache,  with  a  sense  of
confusion  which  was  compared  to  the  noise  of  a  railway :  she
then  lost  all  sensibility,  and  most  frequently  became  con¬
vulsed.  These  attacks  at  first  came  on  every  second  week,
but  during  the  last  year  they  had  been  much  more  frequent
and  severe,  rendering  her  quite  unable  to  continue  her  occu¬
pation  as  a  dress-maker,  as  the  fits  seized  her  whilst  at  work,
and  when  out  of  doors.  Every  variety  of  means  had  been
tried,  but  without  effect.  The  mother  considered  the  case
hopeless,  until  she  accidentally  heard  of  some  cases  which  I
had  cured  by  mesmerism  at  Bath  (see  Zoist).  There  had
also  generally  existed  a  great  irregularity  of  the  natural
periods,  but  even  when  there  was  regularity  the  fits  did  not
appear  to  abate.  I  recommended  a  steady  trial  of  mes¬
merism  :  and  the  mother  readily  assented.

I  then  mesmerised  her  daily  for  the  first  month,  after¬
wards  three  times  a  week  for  the  next  month,  and  then  about
twice  a  week  for  the  following  six  weeks.

The  results  were  most  satisfactory.  The  fits  during  the
first  month  became  much  moderated,  in  the  second  month
less  frequent  also,  and  during  the  last  six  weeks  they  quite
altered  in  their  character,  assuming  more  the  appearance  of
simple  hysteria,  and  sometimes  fainting,  and  then  occurred
only  under  any  particular  excitement.  Up  to  the  end  of
the  year,  and  five  months  since  mesmerism  had  been  dis¬
continued,  she  had  no  return  of  the  fits,  and  became  so  im¬
proved  as  to  be  enabled  to  resume  business.  Residing  then
at  Bristol  I  lost  sight  of  her  for  some  time,  but  lately  saw
her  mother,  who  informed  me  that  her  daughter  continued
quite  well,  was  comfortably  married,  and  now  the  mother  of
a  fine  healthy  child.

I  was  aware  that  she  had  been  engaged  for  some  time,
and,  whilst  under  treatment,  she  was  often  very  desponding,
lest  the  match  should  be  interfered  with  by  a  continuance  of
the  fits.  I  mention  this  particularly  for  the  following  reasons.
Under  ordinary  circumstances  medical  men  would  aver  that,
the  hope  or  imagination  being  thus  excited,  a  new  stimulus
would  be  given  to  the  system,  and  thus  the  disease  thrown
off.  But  it  happened  in  this,  as  in  many  other  cases,  that
this  explanation  will  not  apply.

The  fits  had  become  more  violent  up  to  the  time  that
mesmerism  was  adopted,  and  they  had  annihilated  the  hopes
which  she  had  entertained  while  going  through  other  plans
of  treatment.  When  the  treatment  was  commenced,  she


Alexis  Didier.  By  Mr .  Parsons.


91


acknowledged  she  had  no  belief,  and  only  complied  as  a  last
resource  and  as  a  duty.  No  particular  effects  were  induced
beyond  coma,  with  a  strong  inclination  to  sleep  during  the
day :  but  it  cannot  he  too  strongly  impressed  that  such  effects
are  amply  sufficient  for  a  curative  purpose.

Henry  Stoker,  M.D.
29,  Park  Street,  Bristol,  March  21,  1849.


XYI.  Alexis  Didier.  By  Mr.  Parsons.  Communicated  by

Dr.  Elliotson.

Alexis  Didier  has  been  lately  at  Brighton  and  Hastings,
and  is  expected  again  in  England  after  Easter.  A  pamphlet
has  been  published  upon  his  doings  by  Mr.  Edwin  Lee,  entitled
Reports  upon  the  Phenomena  of  Lucid  Somnambulism,  mani¬
fested  by  Alexis  Didier  at  Brighton.  I  requested  Mr.  Parsons
to  give  me  his  opinion,  and  he  sent  me  the  following  letter.

John  Elliotson.

Boyal  Marine  Library,
March  10th,  1849.

Dear  Sir, — I  was  present  at  three  seances.  At  one  he
failed  more  than  he  succeeded ;  at  another  he  succeeded  more
than  he  failed ;  at  the  third  he  succeeded  in  all  things.

At  this  seance,  which  was  given  at  Mrs.  Elliot's,  there
were  fewer  persons,  and  all  were  well-disposed  to  him.  The
result  was  that  nothing  went  wrong.  Alexis  was  in  the  highest
spirits.

I  myself  bandaged  his  eyes  in  the  usual  way.  First,  I
put  over  each  eye  a  large  lump  of  cotton  wool,  filling  up  the
whole  space  from  the  forehead  to  the  upper  lip  :  over  these
I  tied  tightly  the  first  handkerchief  across  the  eyes,  the  second
and  third  handkerchiefs  were  tied  diagonally ;  so  as  to  come
closely  on  each  side  of  the  nose.  In  this  condition  he  took  a
new  pack  of  cards,  provided  by  the  lady  of  the  house,  and
played  with  several  persons  successfully,  I  sitting  exactly
between  the  players.  He  saw  instantly  all  the  cards  in  his
adversary's  hand,  and  named  them.  He  played  his  own  with¬
out  turning  their  faces  up,  named  the  trump  card  without
having  it  turned,  selected  any  card  from  the  pack  which  the
lady  chose  to  name,  the  pack  being  on  the  tables  back  upwards,
merely  separating  the  cards  from  each  other  with  the  point
of  his  finger,  and  selecting  the  right  one  without  hesitation ;
this  he  did  three  times.  The  cards  were  then  put  aside,  and
he  next  proposed  to  read  any  book.  I  took  one  volume  of  an
English  novel,  which  I  chose  from  the  bookshelf,  and  opened


92


Alexis  Didier.  By  Mr.  Parsons.


it  before  him  :  lie  then  read  two  lines  on  the  page  He  next
proposed  to  read  so  many  pages  in  advance  without  turning
the  book  over,  but  for  this  he  removed  the  handkerchief:  he
successively  read  several  words,  indicating  the  situations  on
the  page  where  they  would  be  found,  but  never  stating  cor¬
rectly  the  exact  number  of  pages  in  advance  :  the  words,  in
every  instance,  were  found  deeper  down,  that  is  to  say,  if  he
pronounced  beforehand  to  read  through  ten  pages,  he  would
read  through  fifteen, — not  accurately  estimating  the  number,
— a  deviation  which  is  easily  enough  forgiven.  It  appeared
to  me  that  his  perceptive  faculty  always  caught  words  which
began  a  paragraph  under  the  spot  to  which  he  confined  him¬
self  when  he  began,  drawing  two  lines  above  and  below  with

a  pen, —  thus  .  I  myself  conducted  these  ex¬

periments,  and  took  care  never  to  turn  the  leaves  over  in  the
direction  he  was  to  read,  so  that  I  am  perfectly  certain  that
he  did  see  the  words  through  the  leaves,  as  I  looked  for  them
and  found  them  myself.

The  other  experiments  performed  by  him  might  be  only
thought-reading,  or  a  mixture  of  that  with  true  clairvoy¬
ance,  but  these  first  can  only  be  attributed  to  the  latter.

Thought  reading,  however  wonderful,  is  valueless ;  it  is
the  clairvoyance  which  is  useful  and  important,  and  I  hold  it
quite  fair  that  persons  should  convince  themselves  of  this
pow  er  by  such  experiments  as  will  admit  of  but  one  construc¬
tion,  before  they  consent  to  it.  After  all,  it  was  the  card
playing  and  the  book  reading  that  convinced  and  satisfied  me
of  Alexis’s  lucidity  :  for,  if  he  could  see  them  in  such  circum¬
stances  as  was  impossible  to  common  eyesight,  as  he  proved,
I  can  have  no  philosophical  reason  for  rejecting  the  assertion,
that  he  can  see  into  the  interior  of  any  human  being  with
whom  he  is  en  rapport , — and  that  is  the  use  of  clairvoyance.

The  experiments  of  reading  what  was  put  in  boxes  or  en¬
velopes,  or  stating  the  objects  contained  in  packets,  did  not
satisfy  me,  because  it  was  necessary  that  the  person  who  pre¬
sented  such  object  should  be  fully  acquainted  with  the  con¬
tents  and  should  be  put  en  rapport  with  the  clairvoyant ;  and
here,  on  one  occasion,  a  singular  instance  occurred  to  prove
the  uselessness  of  mere  thought-reading, — indeed,  the  mis¬
guiding  tendency  of  it.  Sir  It.  Grant  presented  a  packet
containing  a  portrait,  which  had  been  before  presented  by  a
sceptic,  and  Alexis  could  then  make  nothing  of  it.  Marcillet
then  proposed  that  the  packet  should  be  put  into  the  hands
of  any  other  gentleman  who  was  not  a  sceptic,  and  that  the
contents  should  be  exhibited  to  that  other  person  in  another
room.  Sir  R.  Grant  volunteered  and  this  was  done,  and  the


Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.


93


packet  secured  as  before.  Alexis  now  succeeded  in  describing
the  picture  with  particularity.  He  was  then  asked  the  name
of  the  lady, — he  had  already  described  her  rank  and  her  sud¬
den  death,  which  Sir  It.  Grant  demurred  to — (here  the  clair¬
voyance  was  struggling  to  develope  and  was  repressed  by  the
thought-reading)  after  some  hesitation,  Alexis  named  the
name  “  Elizabeth  ”  Sir  Richard  nodded  his  head,  and  said  he
was  right.  The  owner  of  the  packet  then  interfered  and  said
that  it  was  not  Elizabeth ;  it  was,  in  fact,  the  portrait  of
Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  but,  as  there  was  a  ruff  round  the
neck,  and  the  name  had  not  been  told  to  Sir  Richard,  he  had
believed  it  to  be  Queen  Elizabeth,  and  had  impressed  this
name,  by  intently  thinking  on  it,  upon  the  clairvoyante.  I
fully  believe  that,  in  this  instance,  he  was  clairvoyant,  but
that  Sir  Richards’s  determined  direction  to  the  wrong  person
extinguished  it,  and  it  dwindled  to  thought-reading.

I  was  certainly,  on  the  whole,  disappointed  with  his  visit
to  Brighton.  There  was  no  instance  which  could  compare  with
that  recorded  in  The  Zoist  (No.  XI.),  concerning  Col.Gurwood,
and  I  can  easily  account  for  it :  Alexis  was  always  in  a  crowd,
containing,  for  the  most  part,  a  large  proportion  of  avowed
unbelievers.  It  was  not  reasonable  to  hope  that  in  such  cir¬
cumstances,  the  faculty  could  develope  as  it  would  when
private  consultations  were  given ;  and  the  general  result  may
be  stated  thus, — those  who  were  disposed  to  believe  before
they  came  saw  enough  to  confirm  their  belief,  and  those  who
were  disposed  to  doubt  saw  enough  to  confirm  their  scepti¬
cism,  and  the  question  can  no  more  be  said  to  be  settled  than
it  was  before.  Those  who  were  what  one  may  call  public
sceptics  crow  more  loudly  than  ever,  inasmuch  as  the  bank
note  test  was  proposed  to  him,  and  he  did  not  succeed  in
reading  it.  This  /  was  disappointed  at,  for  I  confidently  ex¬
pected  he  would  be  able  to  do  it ;  but  I  am  more  than  ever
convinced  of  the  extraordinary  and,  as  yet,  unaccountable
power  which  scepticism  has  in  obstructing  the  faculty.  I  be¬
lieve  that,  if  a  determined  sceptic  have  only  held  in  his  hand
an  object  intended  for  a  test  of  lucidity,  it  will,  in  some  in¬
stances,  be  sufficient  to  nullify  the  efforts  of  a  clairvoyante ;
but  this  is  precisely  the  line  of  argument  which  unbelievers
call  begging  the  whole  question.  After  all  that  can  be  said,
we  can  never  be  said  to  be  fully  satisfied,  except  with  such
instances  as  are  developed  in  our  own  patient :  and,  as  our
own  scepticism  may  be  sufficient  to  repress  this  development
in  them  when  it  would  otherwise  spontaneously  exhibit  itself,
we  understand  how  another  mesmeriser  may  elicit  clairvoyance
from  our  own  patients,  when  we  have  never  given  it  a  chance


94


Alexis  Diclier.  By  Mr.  Parsons.


of  coming  forth.  In  such  a  case,  it  is  only  by  an  accidental
spontaneity,  when  we  are  not  thinking  of  the  matter  and  can
neither  be  helping  nor  hindering,  that  it  will  shew  itself :  and
in  just  such  a  way  did  it  continually  in  a  patient  of  mine  ;  the
instances  were  capable  of  immediate  verification,  and  were
beyond  the  sphere  of  my  knowledge.  They  were  shewn  in
numberless  minute  and  particular  cases,  which  perfectly  ex¬
cluded  the  explanation  of  them  as  guessing,  until  I  came  to
regard  the  power  as  an  almost  familiar  one,  of  which  I  had
no  more  doubt  than  of  ordinary  vision.  Yet  I  was  not  dis¬
posed  to  believe  so  readily  in  the  clairvoyance  of  others,  who
were  not  my  patients,  and  was  fully  as  rigid  in  exacting  a  set
of  conditions  which  left  no  loophole  for  escape,  as  if  I  had
not  been  so  familiar  with  it. — And  why  ?  Sometimes  my  own
patient  was  wrong, — it  was  but  rarely ;  I  can  only  recall  two
instances.  But,  where  there  is  no  possibility  of  verifying,  there
is  a  great  temptation  to  enlarge,  which  we  cannot  reconcile
with  the  difficulty  they  have  in  addressing  themselves  to  any
particular  which  can  be  instantly  verified ;  just  as  historians
deal  confidently  with  the  early  ages  of  their  subject,  but  be¬
come  cautious  and  reserved  as  they  approach  more  modern
periods.  There  is,  however,  one  thing  which  must  lessen  the
difficulty  of  believing.  All  lucid  patients  describe,  in  nearly
similar  terms,  the  luminosity  of  the  living  body.  This  must
greatly  assist  them,  and  they  can  have  no  such  assistance  in
examining  objects  enclosed  in  boxes.

The  experiments  of  Eeichenbach,  conducted  as  they  were
apart  from  the  subject  of  mesmerism,  are  a  valuable  confir¬
mation  of  it,  as  to  that  point — the  luminosity  of  human
emanations.

All  somnambules  seem  to  have  an  innate  aptness  for  intro-
vision  and  examining  the  human  frame  of  others;  it  seems
naturally  an  instinct  of  the  faculty,  as  if  its  final  cause — its
real  use  should  be  thrust  continually  to  the  front  and  with¬
draw  us  from  the  abuse  of  such  a  faculty  in  frivolous  experi¬
ments.  Somnambules  always  seem  disinclined  to  these  ex¬
periments,- — these  are  too  low  grounds  for  them ;  and  it  is  only
when  this  reluctance  is  overcome  by  habit,  that  they  become
reconciled.

The  state  may  be  abused  much  more  easily  than  carefully
educed.  This  last  requires  a  first-rate  moral  and  intellectual
organization  in  the  mesmeriser,  as  well  as  acquaintance  with
the  subject,  that  a  highly  conscientious  state  may  be  pre¬
served  in  the  patient.

I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  yours  very  truly,

W.  H.  Parsons.


(  95  )


XVII.  Ellen  Dawson’s  Clairvoyance.  By  Mr.  Barth.

Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

7,  Eversholt  Street,  Camden  Town,
March  15th.

Dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — In  reply  to  your  question  respecting
the  narrative  of  a  stolen  brooch  being  recovered  entirely  and
solely  through  Ellen  Dawson's  clairvoyant  perception,  which
appeared  in  the  February  number  of  La  Belle  Assemblee ,  I
assure  you  the  statement  is  strictly  the  truth.  The  circum¬
stance  is  so  strong  an  evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  faculty
of  such  marvellous  perception,  that  it  has  caused  many  think¬
ing  minds  to  enquire,  and  many  doubting  minds  to  believe.

Mrs.  M - ,  the  lady  who  consulted  Ellen  in  the  case,

informs  me  that  she  has  been  obliged  to  tell  the  story  over
and  over  again,  eight  or  nine  times  in  an  evening,  when  at
parties ;  and  at  last  consented  to  furnish  the  particulars  for
publication  in  La  Belle  Assemblee ,  at  the  earnest  request  of
Mr.  Crossland,  husband  of  the  editress,  who  is  an  old  friend

of  Mrs.  M - 's.  As  The  Zoist  is  the  only  periodical  record

which  we  have  of  mesmeric  facts  and  phenomena,  and  is  read
by  many  who  never  see  La  Belle  Assemblee ,  the  narrative  is
at  the  disposal  of  the  editors,  if  you  think  its  insertion  may
interest  its  readers,  or  assist  to  silence  or  convince  those
scoffers  at  mesmeric  phenomena,  who  will  not  take  the  trouble
to  investigate  in  a  truth-seeking  spirit,  but  find  it  more  easy
to  denounce  as  imposture  and  collusion,  than  to  believe  in
the  existence  of  facts  which  their  self-conceit  or  peculiar  cere¬
bral  organizations  cannot  be  brought  to  comprehend.  I  send
you  the  number  of  La  Belle  Assemblee  containing  the  lady's
own  narrative ;  also,  her  permission  for  its  insertion  in  The

Zoist.  Mrs.  M - further  authorizes  me  to  say,  that  she

is  quite  willing  to  confirm,  by  her  personal  assertion,  the
truth  of  the  statement  to  any  respectable  enquirer,  who  may
apply  to  me  in  the  first  instance,  if  I  deem  them  persons
worthy  of  an  interview.  Mrs.  M - does  not  court  noto¬

riety,  and  therefore  withholds  giving  her  name  publicly ;  but
she  is  now  so  well  convinced  of  the  real  existence  of  true
clairvoyant  perception,  that  she  considers  it  a  duty  to  confirm
the  truth  of  her  narrative  to  such  enquirers  as  I  may  think
proper  to  refer  to  her.

“  I  missed  a  valuable  brooch,  a  topaz  centre  set  with  brilliants,
the  beginning  of  last  November,  1848.  All  I  could  recollect  about
it  was,  that  I  had  it  in  my  possession  the  middle  of  August ;  there¬
fore,  how  or  when  it  disappeared  I  had  not  the  least  idea  ;  but  hav¬
ing  always  kept  it  locked  up  very  carefully,  I  was  obliged  to  come  to


96


Ellen  Dawson’s  Clairvoyance ,


the  conclusion  that  it  certainty  was  taken  out  of  the  place  it  had  been
in.  Having  unfortunately  changed  servants  very  often,  I  had  some
difficulty  in  recollecting  who  was  in  the  house  when  last  I  saw  it,  and
found  that  two  of  my  domestics  had  left  since  then.  In  my  first
moment  of  astonishment  at  the  idea  of  my  brooch  having  been  stolen,
I  really  did  not  know  whom  to  suspect,  and  I  was  for  some  days
sorely  perplexed  as  to  what  means  to  make  use  of  to  recover  an  or¬
nament,  not  only  valuable  in  itself,  but  more  especially  so,  as  it  for¬
merly  belonged  to  my  beloved  mother  and  was  an  old  family  relic.
I  spent  days  thinking  what  steps  I  should  take  to  recover  my  lost
treasure,  being  resolved  to  do  everything  in  my  power  for  the  accom¬
plishment  of  my  object.  At  last,  the  thought  of  trying  mesmeric
clairvoyance  came  into  my  mind.  I  had  heard  from  a  friend,  much
interested  in  mesmerism,  wonderful  accounts  of  persons  in  this  state  ;
and  thought,  perhaps  I  might  obtain  a  hint  as  to  how,  and  in  what
manner,  my  brooch  had  disappeared.  For  this  purpose  I  called
upon  Mr.  Barth  (mesmerist),  of  Eversholt-street,  Oakley-square,  a
perfect  stranger  to  me,  never  having  seen  him  before.  He  most
kindly  offered  to  procure  an  interview  for  me  with  Ellen  Dawson,  a
patient  of  Mr.  J.  Hands,  of  Duke-street,  Grosvenor-square,  whom  he
described  as  a  brilliant  clairvoyante ;  at  the  same  time  most  fairly
hinting  that  it  was  possible  I  might  not  obtain  the  information  I
wanted,  as  the  state  of  clairvoyance  in  the  best  clairvoyantes  was  not
always  equally  lucid ;  and  that  I  must  take  the  chance  of  the  uncer¬
tainty.  Notwithstanding,  however,  all  his  hints  and  cautions  as  to
a  possible  failure,  I  resolved  to  try  the  experiment ;  and  Mr.  Barth
most  kindly  consented,  at  my  request,  to  accompany  me.  I  must
here  say,  that  he  would  not  allow  me  to  tell  him  what  I  had  lost,
wishing  to  test  the  mesmeric  power  in  discovering  the  article.  An
interview  was  accordingly  arranged  for  Saturday,  Nov.  11,  at  Mr.
Hands,  who  mesmerises  Ellen  Dawson  ;  and  the  result  far,  very  far
indeed  surpassed  my  expectations.  Mr.  Hands  merely  seemed  to
look  at  her,  when  her  eyes  closed  and  he  said  she  was  in  a  deep
sleep,  aud  after  indulging  in  about  ten  minutes’  repose  would  get
into  the  sleep-waking  state.  This  she  did,  and  then  came  forward
and  spoke  to  Mr.  Barth,  appearing  very  lively  and  pleasant.

“Mr.  B.  introduced  us  (a  lady  and  myself)  as  his  friends,  and
stated  she  had  so  wonderfully  gratified  some  lady  he  named  who  had
seen  her  recently,  that  we  were  quite  anxious  to  be  introduced  to  her.
He  paid  her  many  compliments  on  her  powers  of  travelling  and  see¬
ing  mesmerically ;  at  which  she  seemed  pleased  and  smiled,  as  a
person  would  do  if  awake.  Mr.  B.  informed  us  that  many  persons
fail  in  obtaining  satisfactory  replies  from  clairvoyantes  in  consequence
of  their  own  rude  and  intolerant  behaviour  to  them.  He  inquired  if
she  would  like  to  travel  with  us  and  talk  to  us ;  she  replied  in  the
affirmative.  He  asked  her  if  she  could  tell  what  I  came  to  see  her
about :  in  a  few  minutes  she  answered,  f  about  a  loss — about  some¬
thing  she  has  lost.’  She  then  knelt  down  by  my  side,  when  I  took
hold  of  her  hands  and  commenced  telling  my  grievance  to  her.  I
began  by  saying  she  w^as  right, — I  had  lost  something  of  great  value


by  Mr.  Barth.


97


that  I  wanted  her  to  tell  me  about.  She  first  said  money,  to  which
I  replied,  ‘  No.’  Then  she  said  property,  to  which  I  assented.
Mr.  Barth  then  proposed  that  she  should  go  (ideally  of  course)  to
my  house,  to  the  place  from  where  the  missing  article  was  taken,
and  thus  discover  what  I  had  lost,  and  how  it  had  disappeared.  I
told  her  then  where  my  residence  was ;  she  said  she  did  not  know
the  place,  but  we  told  her  what  route  to  take,  and  she  soon  reached
the  house — described  the  exterior,  so  that  I  knew  she  was  right,
and  then  went  into  my  bed-room,  where  she  gave  a  very  minute
account  of  the  furniture.  I  then  directed  her  attention  to  the  place
from  where  the  article  had  been  taken,  and  she  soon  found  out  what
I  had  lost.  She  first  said  jewellery ;  and  when  I  asked  her  what
kind,  she  answered,  a  brooch.  I  inquired  then  what  it  was  like  ;  to
which  she  gave  a  wonderfully  accurate  answer :  she  said  it  looked
like  amber  surrounded  with  white.  She  then  said  it  was  some  little
time  since  I  had  lost  it,  that  it  was  very  old,  and  had  been  a  long
time  in  the  family.  She  then  told  me  I  had  been  out  of  town,  which
I  was  during  the  month  of  September.  Finding  her  account  and
description  so  very  correct  in  every  particular,  she  was  now  told  to
keep  her  eye  upon  the  brooch  and  see  what  became  of  it.  She  then
described,  in  words  not  to  be  mistaken,  the  person  who  had  taken
it  out  of  its  accustomed  place  :  in  fact,  no  artist  could  have  painted
a  more  perfect  resemblance  ;  and  it  was  a  servant  whom  I  never  sus¬
pected.  She  had  left  my  service  about  a  month  before  I  discovered
my  loss.  However,  Ellen  was  very  positive  in  her  description  of  the
person  who  took  it,  and  said  the  brooch  was  sold  for  a  very  small
sum  of  money,  nothing  at  all  like  its  value.  She  then  said  she  saw
a  shop  window,  that  the  brooch  was  in  a  queer  place  like  a  cellar
with  lots  of  other  property — silver  spoons  and  other  things ;  but  a
cloud  came  and  she  could  see  no  more.  I  must  not  omit  one  very
remarkable  circumstance  in  her  account ;  she  said  the  person  who
took  it  had  the  case  in  which  it  wras  kept  with  diamonds  in  it,  at
home  in  her  clothes  trunk.  At  first,  I  could  not  think  what  this
was,  but  soon  remembered  that  there  were  two  diamond  chains  fast¬
ened  to  a  small  diamond  ring,  separate  from  the  brooch,  but  for  the
purpose  of  attaching  to  it,  and  wearing  as  a  locket.  Having  thus
obtained  all  the  information  she  could  give  me  upon  the  subject,  I
inquired  what  I  was  to  do  to  recover  it,  and  she  then  gave  me  most
distinct  instructions  as  to  what  course  I  w^as  to  take,  saying  that  she
thought,  by  following  her  directions,  I  should  recover  it.

“I  have  now  only  to  say  that  her  prophetic  vision  was  as  correct
as  her  account  of  the  past  had  been,  and  that  shortly  after  I  took
the  steps  she  recommended,  my  brooch  was  in  my  possession.  It
was  returned  to  me  on  Thursday,  Nov.  16th.  She  was  perfectly
correct  as  to  who  had  taken  it ;  and  my  astonishment  may,  perhaps,
be  conceived,  when  first  the  case  was  brought  to  me  with  the  diamond
chains  and  ring  exactly  as  she  had  said,  and  then  a  duplicate  or
pawnbroker’s  ticket  for  the  brooch,  which,  instead  of  having  been
sold,  was  pawned  for  a  mere  trifle.

“  I  cannot  describe  the  happiness  I  felt  in  recovering  an  orna-
YOL.  VII.  II


98


Ellen  Dawson’s  Clairvoyance ,


ment,  so  precious  to  me  from  its  associations,  and  how  deeply  in¬
debted  I  am  to  mesmerism  for  its  restoration.  I  feel  no  hesitation
in  saying  that,  were  it  not  for  this  means,  I  never  should  have  suc¬
ceeded  in  obtaining  it ;  for,  after  the  first  moment  of  astonishment
had  passed,  my  suspicions  rested  rather  strongly  upon  quite  a  different
individual  from  the  one  described  by  Ellen  Dawson ;  so  much  so
that,  not  having  got  my  brooch  so  immediately  as  I  expected  after
following  her  directions,  I  was  really  disposed  to  think  she  had  made
a  mistake,  and  that  I  was  right  in  my  own  suspicions ;  in  fact,  I
was  on  the  point  of  accusing  an  innocent  person,  when  my  brooch
was  brought  back  to  me.  Had  I  waited  only  a  few — very  few  hours,
I  should  not  have  come  to  this  hasty  conclusion.  Thus,  I  could  not
help  feeling  truly  grateful  that  I  was  prevented  wounding  the  feelings
of  an  innocent  person  by  a  false  accusation.  This  circumstance  also,
of  my  own  suspicions  resting  altogether  in  another  quarter  from  the
one  named  by  the  clairvoyante,  will,  I  think,  prove  an  unanswerable
argument  to  those  sceptical  minds  that  may  be  disposed  to  think
hints  were  given,  and  thus  the  missing  article  was  found.  It  is  a
remarkable  circumstance  also,  that  I  was  a  perfect  stranger  to  all
parties  concerned,  never  having  seen  Mr.  Barth  until  I  called  upon
him  in  consequence  of  this  affair,  and  never  having  seen  Mr.  Hands
until  the  moment  he  put  Ellen  Dawson  to  sleep,  after  which  he  left
myself  and  friend  alone  with  Mr.  Barth  and  the  clairvoyante — Ellen
Dawson,  whom  I  never  saw  or  heard  of  until  this  interview  was  ap¬
pointed  for  me,  and  her  name  suggested  as  a  person  likely  to  do  what
1  wished  in  recovering  the  lost  article.

“Note. — The  means  adopted  by  our  correspondent  for  the  re¬
covery  of  her  brooch,  after  her  interview  with  the  clairvoyante,  were,
having  an  interview  with  the  real  culprit,  threatening  her  with  the
severest  temporal  punishment,  and  pointing  out  the  enormity  of  the
crime  and  certainty  of  Almighty  vengeance  if  she  did  not  produce  and
restore  to  its  owner  the  stolen  treasure.  At  first  these  threats  and
expostulations  had  no  other  effect  than  eliciting  tears  and  protesta¬
tions  of  innocence  ;  but  a  second  and  still  more  solemn  interview  so
wrought  upon  the  mind  of  the  culprit,  that  she  repented  of  her  fault
and  made  restitution  of  the  property.” — Belle  Assemblee ,  Vol.  XXII.,
No.  II.,  pp.  108-9.

Ellen  Dawson  acquitted  herself  most  cleverly  in  this  affair.
Many  persons  who  have  been  favoured  by  an  interview  with
Ellen  have  supposed  her  faculty  to  be  merely  “  thought¬
reading” — a  faculty  possessed  generally  by  good  clairvoyantes,
and  no  less  wonderful  than  clairvoyance.  In  this  case  much
was  told  by  Ellen  which  was  acknowledged  to  be  the  truth

by  Mrs.  M - ,  but  is  not  detailed  in  her  statement,  and

which  could  not  be  thought-reading.  Ellen  saw  the  past  and
the  present  as  relating  to  the  case,  and  also  foresaw  the
future.  The  precise  line  of  conduct  to  be  pursued  for  the
recovery  of  the  brooch  as  minutely  detailed  by  Ellen,  is


by  Mr.  Barth.


99


omitted  by  Mrs.  M - ,  and  not  accurately  given  by  the

editress  of  La  Belle  Assemblee.  I  will  endeavour  to  supply
it.  After  discovering  that  the  lost  article  was  a  brooch  and
correctly  describing  its  appearance,  she  proceeded  to  detail
how  it  was  taken,  and  portrayed  the  character  and  person  of
the  thief,  saying,  “  She  was  a  soft-  speaking,  fair-seeming  per¬
son,”  but  she  was  “  such  a  rummager ;  was  always  rummaging
about  to  try  what  she  could  find  when  nobody  saw  her.  She
had  those  white  things  you  thought  the  washerwoman  stole.”

Mrs.  M - when  appealed  to  about  this,  acknowledged  she

had  lost  articles  of  wearing  apparel  and  linen  which  she  sup¬
posed  her  laundress  had  taken.  After  we  had  got  all  Ellen
could  tell  about  the  past  and  present,  and  she  had  lost  sight

of  the  brooch,  Mrs.  M - anxiously  enquired  how  she  could

get  it  back  again,  adding  she  had  no  wish  to  punish  the  de¬
linquent,  she  was  only  desirous  of  recovering  the  article,
which,  from  family  associations,  she  valued  above  all  pecu¬
niary  considerations.  After  a  little  reflection,  Ellen  said,
“  You  must  not  tell  the  police,  or  the  girl  will  never  say
where  she  sold  the  brooch ;  she  will  not  confess  that  she  took
it.  You  must  send  for  her  to  come  to  your  house ;  but  she
has  moved  from  the  place  she  lived  at  when  she  left  you.  I
see  the  place — but  don’t  know  where  it  is.  If  you  find  her
and  she  comes,  say  that  you  know  she  took  the  brooch — that
God  saw  her  take  it  and  will  punish  her  if  she  does  not  repent
and  confess.  But  perhaps  she  won’t  care  about  God  knowing
it;  people  think  it  is  so  long  before  he  will  punish  them,
they  don’t  fear  that ;  so  tell  her,  somebody  else,  a  friend  of
your’s,  saw  her  take  it;  that  God  knows  every  thing,  but
there  are  people  in  this  world  who  can  see  things  done  when
wicked  people  think  that  nobody  sees  them ;  and  that  you
know  she  took  and  sold  your  brooch,  and  has  now  got  the
case  and  some  white  stones  in  it,  at  home  in  her  box ;  for  a
person  who  sees  it  has  told  you  all  about  it ;  that  she  must
repent  and  confess,  and  help  you  to  get  it  back  again,  and
you  will  never  tell  any  body  about  her,  so  she  may  retrieve
her  character  and  be  good  for  the  future ;  if  she  don’t,  she
will  never  be  happy  in  this  world  and  be  punished  when  she
dies.  You  must  talk  to  her  seriously  and  kindly,  and  promise
not  to  punish  her  for  it ;  and  get  her  to  confess  and  tell  you
where  she  sold  it,  and  give  money  to  get  it  back  again ;  you
won’t  get  it  if  you  don’t.”

It  was  on  Saturday,  Nov.  11th,  this  interview  took  place.
The  lady  called  on  me  next  day  to  say  the  girl’s  relatives  had
removed  from  their  residence,  and  she  feared  they  would  not
be  able  to  find  her  out,  but  a  friend  was  endeavouring  to


100


Ellen  Dawson’s  Clairvoyance.


trace  them.  This  coincided  with  Elleries  declaration,  that  the
delinquent  had  removed  to  another  residence.

On  Monday  Mrs.  M -  called  and  informed  me,  that

the  friend  who  had  been  kindly  assisting  her  in  the  enquiry
had  discovered  the  girl’s  new  residence,  and  that  she  had  sent

her  nurse  to  inform  the  girl  she  (Mrs.  M - )  wanted  to  see

her.  On  Wednesday,  Nov.  15th,  the  desired  interview  took
place,  and  Mrs.  M - called  on  me  afterwards,  much  dis¬

appointed  at  the  result,  declaring  that  though  Ellen  had  been
right  about  the  stolen  article  and  in  her  description  of  the
house  and  furniture  and  many  circumstances  which  she  cor¬
rectly  detailed,  she  was  certainly  wrong  as  to  the  party  who
abstracted  the  brooch  from  the  place  where  it  was  deposited,

as,  on  Mrs.  M - ’s  almost  plainly  accusing  the  girl  of  being

guilty  of  the  theft,  she  burst  into  tears  and  seemed  so  much
hurt  at  her  late  mistress’s  suspicion  of  her  and  declared  her

innocence  so  strongly,  that  Mrs.  M -  could  not  believe

her  guilty ;  she  never  did  suspect  her  but  from  what  Ellen
said,  and  had  no  doubt  that  another  servant  was  really  the
guilty  person;  that  she  thought  she  had  better  tax  her  (the other
servant)  with  it,  as  Ellen  had  advised  the  person  she  described
to  be  taxed,  and  if  she  would  not  confess,  then  she  must  em¬
ploy  the  police  to  search  her  and  her  relation’s  dwelling.  On
Thursday,  Nov.  16, — the  next  morning,  the  aunt  of  the  ser¬
vant,  whom  Ellen  accused,  called  upon  Mrs.  M -  and

presented  the  case  with  the  white  stones  still  in  it,  as  Ellen
declared,  and  a  pawnbroker’s  duplicate  for  the  brooch,  which
had  been  pawned  instead  of  sold.

This  case  hardly  requires  further  remark.  If  it  is  true,
then  is  Ellen’s  clairvoyance,  in  this  instance,  established ;  and
the  most  stupid  of  sceptics,  funless  he  he  the  reverse  of  a  gentle¬
man)  will  hardly  venture  to  accuse  a  lady  of  falsehood  and
fraud  before  he  makes  due  enquiry  or  knows  who  that  lady  is.

The  existence  of  such  a  lady  as  Mrs.  M - mentioned,  I  can

prove  by  reference  to  her  personally  :  if  an  enquirer  will  call
upon  me,  seeking  the  truth  in  the  spirit  of  dispassionate  in¬
vestigation,  I  will  strive  to  satisfy  him ; — I  think  a  rational
enquirer  can  need  nothing  more.

I  have  several  times  found  Ellen  equally  clear  and  truth¬
ful  as  in  the  above  instance ;  and  it  is  but  fair  to  state  also,  I
have  known  her  make  blunders  and  be  wrong  in  her  assertions.
Ellen,  in  her  sleep-waking  state,  is  fond  of  praise,  is  very
communicative  to  those  who  please  her,  and  is  very  apt  to
make  comments  upon  what  she  sees.  Parties  questioning  her
are  likely  to  mix  her  observations  and  inferences  with  her  true
clairvoyant  perception.  Too  much  care  cannot  be  taken  when


Mesmerism  and  Language.


101


consulting  a  clairvoyante  to  distinguish  between  that  which  is
thought  and  that  which  they  declare  they  actually  see.  The
errors  attributed  to  clairvoyantes  are  often,  I  know  by  expe¬
rience,  attributable  to  their  interrogators.

I  have  the  happiness  and  privilege  of  being  in  frequent
communication  with  two  clairvoyantes  of  a  high  order,  and
could  supply  much  as  wonderful  and  interesting  as  the  above,
and  of  a  more  elevated  character  as  to  utility.  This  commu¬
nication  is,  I  fear,  already  too  long,  and  I  will  therefore  refrain.*
Believe  me,  dear  Dr.  Elliotson,

Your  obedient  servant,

E.  H.  Barth.


XVIII.  Mesmerism  and  Language.

There  appear  to  be  well-attested  facts  of  persons  in  the
sleep-waking  state  comprehending  questions  and  communica¬
tions  made  to  them  in  a  language  with  which  they  are  unac¬
quainted.

These  facts  are  a  little  startling,  and  apparently  approxi¬
mate  too  much  to  the  miraculous  not  to  meet  with  incredulity.
I  have  therefore  given  the  subject  some  consideration,  and  it
appears  to  me  to  admit  of  a  natural,  and  therefore  satisfactory
solution.

When  we  analyse  mesmerism  what  do  we  discover  it  to  be  ?
The  state  of  a  patient  whose  nervous  fluid  (apparently  electric
matter)  is  in  communication  or  rapport  with  some  other  per¬
son.  In  other  words,  that  that  fluid  or  principle  which
operates  upon  the  nerves  of  the  patient,  and  thereby  conveys
to  his  brain  the  sensations  of  which  the  nerves  are  capable  of
receiving  an  impression,  is  also  in  the  possession  or  power  of
some  other  person.  Now,  as  the  sensations  of  these  two
persons  will  be  the  same,  it  follows  that,  in  consequence  of
this  nervous  fluid  acting  contemporaneously  upon  both  the
persons,  the  sensations  of  the  mesmeriser  will  be  communi¬
cated  or  felt  by  the  party  mesmerised.

Now,  then,  when  we  analyse  language,  in  what  does  it
consist?  Of  certain  conventional  sounds,  by  which  certain
ideas  or  sensations  are  communicated  to  or  received  into  the
mind.  Now,  as  it  is  not  the  words  which  produce  the  idea,
but  the  sensation  which  those  words  cause,  it  follows,  that  if
when  the  mesmeriser  speaks  to  the  party  mesmerised  he  only
communicates  a  sensation,  the  mesmerised  will  receive  such

*  See  an  instance  of  Ellen  Dawson’s  cerebral  sympathy  in  No.  X.,  p.  236.
— Zoist.


102


On  the  conduct  of


sensation; — no  matter  what  may  be  the  sounds  in  which  it
it  is  conveyed, — and  consequently  a  knowledge  of  the  words
is  not  material  or  necessary  to  the  sensation.

Supposing  the  parties  not  to  be  en  rapport,  i.e.,  supposing
them  to  be  in  an  independent  state,  then  it  is  clear,  that  to
convey  the  same  impression  which  the  one  feels  to  the  other,
there  must  be  a  conventional  sound  understood  by  each,  be¬
cause  in  that  case,  the  sensation  can  be  produced  in  no  other
way ;  but  if  the  parties  are  en  rapport ,  i.e.,  if  the  same  ner¬
vous  fluid  acts  upon  both,  it  then  follows  that  the  sensation
will  be  produced  in  the  mesmerised  by  the  will  of  the  mes-
meriser,  although  he  expresses  that  volition  by  words  of  the
meaning  whereof  the  mesmerised  is  wholly  ignorant.

W.  F.  S.


Clapton,  Oct.  15th,  1848.


XIX.  On  the  conduct  of  Professors  Miller  and  Simpson,  of

Edinburgh.

“  On  the  23rd  of  December,  1846,  it  was  my  privilege
to  read  a  letter  in  this  class-room,  from  the  late  Mr.  Liston,
announcing  in  enthusiastic  terms  that  a  new  light  had  burst
on  surgery,  and  that  on  mankind  a  large  boon  had  been  con¬
ferred.  The  subject  was  anaesthesia,  and  its  first  sound  had
come  from  across  the  Atlantic.  It  fell  on  no  dull  or  idle  ears.
It  was  taken  up,  tried,  and  speedily  re-echoed ;  and  in  a  few
daj^s  it  filled  the  island.  Mr.  Liston  struck  the  key-note,
and  a  pealing  note  it  was.  The  profession  were  surprised,
excited,  charmed  in  the  mass ;  and  more  especially  those  on
the  sunny  side  of  the  grand  climacteric.  The  elderly  gen¬
tlemen  had  their  preconceived,  and  hitherto  settled  notions
suddenly  jostled  and  disturbed, — not  a  few  grew  irritable  and
resisted  the  interference ;  they  closed  their  ears,  shut  their
eyes,  and  folded  their  hands ;  they  refused  to  touch,  or  in
any  way  meddle  with  the  unhallowed  thing ;  they  had  quite
made  up  their  minds  that  pain  was  a  necessary  evil,  and  must
be  endured ;  they  scowled  on  the  attempted  innovation,  and
croaked  that  f  no  good  would  come  of  it/  The  public,  as
was  naturally  to  be  expected,  were  greatly  excited,  and  re¬
joiced  in  the  tidings.  At  first  they  seemed  incredulous  as  if
it  were  ‘  too  good  news  to  be  true/  Soon  all  became  satisfied
of  there  being  f  something  in  it/  Bye  and  bye,  however,  a
panic  threatened :  a  ‘  fatal  case’  was  announced,  and  it  was
whispered  that  there  were  many  more.  The  alarm  was  laid
hold  of,  and  worked  by  the  sexagenarians  formerly  spoken  of.
They  had  foreseen  it  all.  ‘  Did  we  not  say  this  would  happen ?


Professors  Miller  and  Simpson ,  of  Edinburgh.  103

Wait  a  little,  this  is  only  one;  the  beginning  of  the  end  :  he
will  be  a  bold  man  now  who  shall  venture  to  repeat  the  expe¬
riment  on  a  capital  occasion.'  "

Professor  Miller  on  Chloroform.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — When  I  read  the  first  pages  of  the  Edinburgh  pro¬
fessor's  pamphlet  above  quoted,  I  rubbed  my  eyes  with  aston¬
ishment,  and  asked  myself,  can  this  be  the  late  Mr.  Liston's
correspondent  who  was  congratulated  by  him  on  the  “  heavy
blow  and  discouragement"  which  mesmerism  had  received?
Has  the  author  opened  his  ears  and  eyes  to  the  proofs  of  that
unhallowed  thing  denounced  by  his  talented  and  lamented
friend;  and  has  he  now  turned  upon  the  sexagenarians  of
the  profession  who  had  maintained  that  pain  was  a  necessary
evil?  But  I  soon  discovered  that  it  was  chloroform ,  not
mesynerism,  that  had  worked  the  wonderful  change.  Is  it
not  lamentable,  Mr.  Editor,  to  see  how  contracted  are  the
views  of  our  medical  and  surgical  professors  ?  Mesmerism
had  for  many  years  conferred  this  very  great  boon  on  hu¬
manity,  in  the  discovery  of  which  by  means  of  ether  and
chloroform,  the  enthusiastic  professor  now  rejoices  with  such
exceeding  great  joy,  and  so  worthily  sneers  at  the  bigotry  of
those  of  his  brethren  who,  unlike  himself,  are  not  on  the
sunny  side  of  their  grand  climacteric.  Now  that  they  can
produce  insensibility  to  pain  by  means  of  ether  and  chloro¬
form,  they  declare  that  there  is  nothing  mysterious  in  the
matter.  The  seat  of  such  sensibility  is  located,  they  assert,
in  the  medulla  oblongata ;  the  chloroform  paralyses,  for  a  time,
the  organ  of  sensation,  and  consequently  no  pain  is  felt.
Taking  up  an  empty  phial,  the  professor  is  said  thus  to  have
addressed  the  medical  students  of  his  class,  “  Here  is  a  phial
full  of  the  mesmeric  fluid — a  compound  of  equal  parts  of
collusion,  delusion,  and  illusion — three  very  potent  spirits
much  in  vogue  with  the  public ;  a  dram  for  a  dose ;  a  dram
of  whisky  would  be  much  better.  And  here,"  said  he,  taking
up  a  bottle  of  chloroform,  “  is  a  phial  full  of  liquid  mes¬
merism,  which  you  can  all  see  and  handle.  This  acts  upon
the  brain,  as  jalap  does  upon  the  bowels,  substance  upon
substance,  and  there  is  no  mistake,  each  drug  possessing  its
peculiar  virtues.  Let  the  mesmerists  concentrate  or  condense
their  invisible  fluid,  as  the  chemists  do  with  some  of  the  in¬
visible  gases  by  the  combined  effect  of  cold  and  pressure,  and
produce  it  to  me  in  a  liquid  state,  and  I  will  then  have  no
scruples  to  swallow  their  dram  of  it,  and  recommend  it  to
my  patients.  We  can  show  you  our  medulla  oblongata  and


104


On  the  conduct  of


our  admirable  drug :  let  the  mesmerists  lay  before  us,  in  a
tangible  shape,  their  imagination ,  and  their  imaginary  fluid,
which  ought  to  be  no  difficult  task,  as  they  profess  to  have
the  latter  at  their  finger-ends.  Ha,  ha,  ha/’  And  the  pro¬
fessor  and  his  pupils  had  a  hearty  laugh  at  this  excellent  joke.
But  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  although  the  profession  at  large,
whether  on  this  or  that  side  of  the  grand  climacteric,  now
jeer  at  mesmerism,  chloroform  will,  to  a  rising  generation,
afford  evidence  of  the  reality  of  mesmerism,  in  the  similarity
of  their  effects  on  the  human  organism,  which  the  prejudices
of  the  oracles  of  the  medical  schools  will  not  permit  them  to
acknowledge,  and  doctors  yet  unborn  will  hereafter  do  justice
to  the  memories  of  such  men  as  Elliotson,  who  were  a  century
in  advance  of  their  cotemporaries  in  science.

I  am,  Sir,

Your  obedient  servant,

Dundee.  Nonwist.

note.

Professor  Miller’s  letter  is  absolutely  shocking.  “  A  new
light  had  burst  upon  surgery  in  1846,”  in  the  artificial  pro¬
duction  of  anaesthesia  or  want  of  feeling  !  This  was  hailed  by
the  tender  surgeon,  and,  “  a  pealing  key-note”  being  struck
by  Mr.  Liston,  the  mass  of  the  profession  was  “  excited  and
charmed  !”  when  the  very  same  thing  had  been  done  again
and  again, — operation  after  operation  being  performed  without
pain, — and,  during  the  previous  four  years,  been  told  again
and  again  with  all  earnestness  by  us  to  the  surgeons  of  this
country,  but  utterly  disregarded, — nay,  more, — despised  by
this  Professor  Miller  and  his  equally  tender  friend,  Mr.
Liston ;  who  not  only  closed  their  ears,  shut  their  eyes,  and
folded  their  hands,”  but  “  grew  irritable,”  and  something
worse.  The  letter  from  Mr.  Liston,  which  it  was  Mr.  Miller’s
ec privilege”  to  read,  we  published  in  our  22nd  Number,  p.  211.
It  begins,  “  Hurrah  !  Rejoice !”  not  because  a  new  mode  of
preventing  the  pain  of  surgical  operations  had  been  discovered,
— no,  but  because  “  mesmerism  and  its  professors  have  met
with  a  heavy  blow  and  great  discouragement.”

If  this  is  shocking  on  the  score  of  moral  feeling,  the  rest
of  the  pamphlet  is  shocking  as  regards  the  want  of  the  in¬
telligence  expected  in  one  who  is  paid  to  instruct  young  men.
“  A  phial  full  of  the  mesmeric  fluid,  a  compound  of  equal
parts  of  collusion,  delusion,  and  illusion ” — “a  dram  for  a  dose,
— a  dram  of  whiskey  would  be  much  better  /”  The  vulgarity
of  the  opponents  of  mesmerism  is  very  remarkable.  But  the
absurdity  of  supposing  that,  if  there  is  a  mesmeric  fluid, —
which  there  may  be  or  may  not  be,  as  there  may  be  or  may


Professors  Miller  and  Simpson,  of  Edinburgh.  105

not  be  an  electric  fluid,  or  a  fluid  of  heat,  of  gravitation,  &c.,

- — we  ought  to  be  able  to  condense  it  any  more  than  natural
philosophers  to  condense  the  fancied  electric  fluid,  or  that
of  caloric,  light,  &c.,  in  a  "  tangible  shape  !,y  Of  saying  we
ought  to  be  able  to  do  this ;  nay,  to  condense  imagination  in
a  tangible  shape!  And  of  crying  “Ha,  ha,  ha!!”  This  sur¬
geon  may  open  abscesses,  pass  instruments  into  the  body,  cut
off  legs  and  arras,  and  do  all  living  carpentry  well, — as  Mr.
Liston  did,  though  in  all  other  matters  of  his  profession  and
in  all  science  a  more  ignorant  and  unintelligent  man  never
existed, — but  he  must  be  a  total  stranger  to  all  “  divine  phi¬
losophy,”  to  all  play  of  the  higher  intellectual  powers.

Are  not  the  phenomena  of  electricity  true,  and  does  it  not
act  powerfully  on  the  human  frame  both  as  a  remedy  and  as
a  destroyer,  and  yet  do  we  ever  see  it  as  matter  ?  Do  we
know  that  it  is  matter  ?  And  do  we  not  produce  its  mani¬
festations  by  friction  and  manipulations  precisely  in  analogy
with  the  production  of  mesmerism  ?  And  is  the  action  of
chloroform  more  understood  than  the  action  of  mesmerism  ?
is  the  action  of  any  drug  known  ?  Can  we  tell  why  ipeca¬
cuanha  causes  sickness,  and  opium  induces  sleep  ?  No, — no
more  than  why  iron  rusts  rapidly  and  gold  does  not,  why
sulphur  has  one  smell  and  prussic  acid  another.  Professor
Miller  sets  a  lamentable  example  to  the  youth  of  his  class.

Professor  Simpson  is  also  greatly  to  be  condemned.  He
knows  mesmerism  to  be  true,  has  proved  it,  and  confessed
his  conviction  of  its  truth ;  but  in  private  only,  lest,  he  says,
his  interests  should  be  injured.  This  shews  how  feeble,  after
all,  he  considers  his  reputation  to  be.  But  he  has  professed
to  write  an  account  of  all  the  means  which  have  ever  been
employed  to  prevent  the  pain  of  operations  :  and,  though  he
mentions  pressure  as  well  as  a  host  of  narcotics,  he  never  once
alludes  to  mesmerism  .*  nay,  when  he  refutes  the  absurdity  of
religious  objectionf  to  the  use  of  means  to  prevent  pain,  he
actually  cites  the  account  of  the  deep  sleep  into  which  Adam
is  said  to  have  been  thrown  by  God  before  the  extraction  of
his  rib,  without  any  hint  that  this  instance  had  been  employed
before  by  me  for  the  same  purpose  in  the  Thirteenth  Number
of  The  Zoist,  p.  4,  in  1846, — an  argument  which  a  Dr.  Elliot
of  Exeter  had  pronounced  blasphemous  in  me,  J  but  which  no
one  considers  blasphemous  when  adduced  in  the  cause  of  the
drugs  ether  and  chloroform.  John  Elliotson.

*  Edinburgh  Monthly  Journal  of  Medical  Science.  Dec.,  1847,  p.  451.

f  Answer  to  the  religious  objections  adduced  against  the  employment  of
Anaesthetic  Agents  in  Midwifery  and  Surgery.  1847.

%  He  did  his  little  best  against  mesmerism  till  he  was  beaten  and  had  gained  a
dispensary  :  and  now  he  has  no  dispensary. — Zoist.

VOL.  VII.


I


106  Books  received ,  Notice  to  Cor  respondents ,  fyc.


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

The  Ethnological  Journal.  The  numbers  for  January,  February,  and  March.

The  Journal  of  Psychological  Medicine  and  Mental  Pathology,  edited  by
Forbes  Winslow,  M.D.  January,  1849.

A  Notice  of  the  late  Sir  George  Stewart  Mackenzie,  Bart.

A  Narrative  of  the  proceedings  relative  to  the  appointment  of  the  Medical
Officers  to  the  Portsmouth,  Portsea,  and  Gosport  Hospital.  By  W.  C.  Engledue,
M.D.,  formerly  President  of  the  Royal  Medical  Society  of  Edinburgh. — “  If  an
offence  come  out  of  the  Truth,  better  is  it  that  the  offence  come,  than  the  Truth
be  concealed.” — Jerome.

Though  this  pamphlet  relates  to  a  local  matter,  it  is  worth  reading  as  an
instance  of  a  stand  made  for  principle :  and  a  few  passages  will  not  be  unaccept¬
able  : —

“  With  the  great  bulk  of  society,  life  is  merely  the  following  of  a  few  inferior
instincts,  with  a  perfect  blindness  as  to  consequences.  Selfishness  is  the  ruling
passion  of  the  majority,  and  it  is  shown  on  every  trivial  opportunity.”  p.  35.

“  I  wished  not  to  bolster  myself  up  with  advantages  which  were  not  enjoyed
equally  by  all  my  brethren.  I  entered  on  the  race  of  life  free  and  unfettered,
and  free  and  unfettered  I  will  remain.  No  man  shall  point  the  finger  of  scorn
at  me,  and  declare  that  in  my  social  career,  I  took  that  which  I  did  not  use  my
best  exertions  to  give  him  an  opportunity  of  possessing.  I  will  run  the  race,  and
I  will  use  my  best  endeavours  to  win,  but  it  shall  be  on  fair  and  equal  terms.
I  will  take  nothing  from  the  world  which  is  not  honestly,  truly,  and  manfully
earned.  These  are  my  feelings,  my  weaknesses.  They  may  be  designated
Utopian — visionary — Quixotic,  or  anything  else  the  reader  may  please,  there  is
at  any  rate  this  quality  attached  to  them — they  cannot  be  disrobed  of  the  dignity
of  reason — the  dignity  of  truth.”  p.  44.

“The  shallow  pates  are  ever  the  obstructives.  Incapable  of  originating  a
thought  of  any  magnitude  for  their  own  or  their  neighbour’s  real  improvement,
they  are  employed  in  fluttering  through  their  little  day  and  crying  down  what
they  can  neither  understand  nor  appreciate,  or  what  their  selfish  and  grasping
propensities  prompt  them  to  imagine  may  become  inimical  to  their  own  interests.
It  is  thus  in  matters  appertaining  to  the  physical  world — it  is  similar  with  matters
belonging  to  the  moral  world.  Where  is  the  man  who  has  advanced  a  scheme
for  the  improvement  of  his  fellow  man  without  having  to  fight  his  way  step  by
step  against  the  prejudices  of  his  compeers,  and  having  to  remove  too  often
single-handed,  the  obstructions  wantonly  placed  in  his  path  by  those  who  should
have  been  foremost  in  rendering  him  assistance  ?  All  schemes  are  denounced  by
such  men  as  visionary — all  innovators  are  presumed  by  such  men  to  have  emi¬
grated  from  the  land  of  Utopia,  and  they  continue  their  opposition  for  years,
thus  conducting  themselves  like  cattle  in  a  field  towards  a  newly-erected  rubbing-
post — for  they  are  at  first  frightened — then  shy — then  a  little  bold — and  at  last
becoming  familiarized  with  the  intrusion  they  very  quietly  put  the  thing  to  its
proper  use.  Yes,  the  dial  of  the  world  is  moved  on  by  those  whom  the  world
persecutes.  The  pioneers  are  the  martyrs.  When  the  millions  reap  the  advan-
tanges  previously  shadowed  forth  by  the  few,  then  they  begin  to  think  how  vile
their  treatment  has  been ;  and  when  the  brains  which  gave  birth  to  the  propelling
thoughts,  have  been  resolved  into  their  elements  and  the  men  no  longer  live,  then
their  memories  are  worshipped  and  the  marble  pile  is  reared  to  denote  that  such
men  once  lived.”  p.  50.


NOTICE  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

We  regret  that  many  valuable  communications  must  be  postponed.


THE  ZOIST.


No.  XXVI.


JULY,  1849.


I.  An  Account  of  the  Head  of  Rush,  the  Norfolk  Murderer .

By  Dr.  Elliotson.

The  true  nature  of  Bush  cannot  be  mistaken.  It  is  certain
that  he  was,  in  every  respect,  an  atrocious  villain,  and  a  vil¬
lain  of  extraordinary  force  of  character.  His  acts  were  such
that  his  whole  nature  is  unveiled :  and,  if  the  development  of
his  head  had  not  agreed  according  to  Gall’s  principles  with
his  life,  Gall’s  physiology  of  the  brain  must  have  fallen  to
the  ground  for  ever.  For  a  cerebral  physiologist  may  always,
without  fear,  assert  positively  of  the  head  from  constant,  posi¬
tive,  exhibition  of  a  mental  faculty,  because  constant  strength
of  certain  parts  of  the  mind  is  accompanied  by  strong  develop¬
ment  of  certain  parts  of  the  brain,  and  consequently  of  the
skull ;  just  as  he  may  always  fearlessly  assert  negatively  of  the
mental  faculties  from  negative  exhibitions  of  the  head,  because
deficient  development  of  certain  parts  of  the  brain,  and  con¬
sequently  of  the  skull,  is  accompanied  by  deficient  strength
of  certain  mental  faculties :  although,  conversely,  he  would
not  assert  respecting  mental  faculties  from  positive  exhibitions
of  the  head,  nor  respecting  the  head  from  negative  exhibitions
of  mental  faculties,  because  the  development  of  the  head  may
arise  from  other  causes  than  brain,  or  the  quality  of  the  brain
may  not  be  healthy  ;  and  on  the  other  hand  deficiency  of  the
manifestation  of  certain  mental  faculties  may  arise  from  mere
want  of  excitement  or  from  disease.*  Therefore,  before  we
saw  the  cast  of  Bush’s  head,  we  all  declared  that  his  head
must  have  been  very  large ; — the  organs  of  the  disposition
to  violence,  of  courage,  and  of  the  love  of  property,  of  cun-

*  See  my  Human  Physiology ,  pp.  373-4.  I  lament  to  say  that  mine  is  the
only  Physiology  in  the  English  language  that  sets  forth  and  defends  phrenology
and  mesmerism.

VOL.  VII.


K


108  An  Account  of  the  Head  of  Rush  the  Murderer,

ning,  of  the  love  of  the  opposite  sex,  and  of  food,  enormously
large ;  while  those  of  self-esteem  and  love  of  notoriety,  with
the  lower  range  of  intellectual  organs,  must  have  been  large;
and,  provided  the  brain  were  healthy,  the  organs  of  justice
and  caution,  and  the  higher  intellectual  organs,  small.

The  man  was  a  farmer,  land  agent,  and  auctioneer  and
appraiser,  in  West  Norfolk;  of  middle  age,  rather  below  the
middle  height,  very  muscular,  with  broad  shoulders,  short
neck,  massive  head  inclined  rather  to  the  right  shoulder,  and
a  slouching  gait,  and  a  countenance  which  made  people  dislike
him  and  say  they  should  not  wish  to  meet  him  in  the  dark.

On  the  evening  of  the  28th  of  last  November,  he  went,
masked  and  otherwise  disguised,  and  without  any  accomplice,
to  Stanfield  Hall,  the  house  of  a  neighbouring  gentleman,
named  Jermy,  whom  he  shot  dead  in  the  porch,  where  he
knew  his  victim  would  be  at  that  time ;  entered  the  house  by
the  servants'  door  and  shot  the  son  dead  in  the  hall,  coolly
and  successfully  motioning  the  butler  to  retire  to  his  pantry ;
and  then  shot  and  wounded  the  mistress  and  her  maid,  saying,
“  Poor  thing,  poor  thing  !"  when  he  saw  the  latter  fall  whom
he  had  not  aimed  at,  and  firing  a  second  time  at  Mrs.  Jermy.
He  also  pursued  Miss  Jermy,  but  she  escaped  into  the  stables.
He  then  withdrew  to  his  own  home.  These  may  not  have  been
the  only  murders  committed  by  him. — In  1844,  he  and  his

«/  t/  *

father-in-law  had  been  shooting  at  the  farm  of  the  latter,  and,

after  returning  to  the  house,  his  father  was  shot.  The  account

given  by  Push  was,  that,  after  directing  his  father's  attention

to  the  excellence  of  his  gun,  he  left  the  room  while  his  father

was  examining  it,  but  almost  immediately  heard  a  report,

and  on  going  back  found  that  the  gun  had  gone  off*,  lodging

all  its  contents  in  his  father's  head. — In  August,  1848,  his

mother  having  been  ill  for  some  time,  he  told  her  nurse  one

evening,  as  the  woman  reports,  that  he  would  sit  up  with  his

mother  that  night,  and  on  the  woman's  objecting  he  insisted.

After  the  nurse  had  been  in  bed  some  time,  she  saw  Push  enter

her  room,  as  if  he  wished  to  ascertain  whether  she  was  asleep.

He  made  no  remark  and  went  awav.  About  four  in  the

*

morning  he  went  into  the  room  again,  and  she  asked  how  her
mistress  was.  “  Oh,"  he  replied,  “you  need  not  trouble
yourself,  she  has  been  dead  these  four  hours."  The  nurse
jumped  up,  and  found  that  Push  had  laid  his  mother  out  and
performed  all  the  necessary  offices  himself. — A  salesman,
named  Collins,  who  had  done  business  for  Push,  and  at  whose
house  Push  had  once  spent  a  day  and  night,  returned  the
visit  at  Push's  earnest  invitation,  though  Mrs.  Collins  strongly
objected  to  her  husband  going  and  said  there  was  something


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


109


about  Hush's  manner  that  she  did  not  like.  Indeed,  Mr.
Jermy,  jun.,  had  an  inconceivable  dislike  to  Rush,  and  often
warned  his  father  against  him  :  and  Mrs.  Jermy  disapproved
of  Rush  going  to  the  house  whenever  he  chose  without
ringing.  On  the  very  night  of  Mr.  Collins's  arrival,  Rush's
wife  was  taken  ill.  Rush  went  to  Mr.  Collins’s  room  and
told  him  of  this,  begging  him  at  the  same  time  to  come  down
stairs.  Mr.  Collins  asked  whether  he  had  sent  for  a  doctor.
Rush  said  no,  it  would  be  useless,  for  she  was  too  ill  for
any  one  to  do  her  good.  Before  morning  she  was  dead. —
A  man  and  woman  slept  one  night  a  few  years  ago  at  an
inn  about  Shoreditch.  In  the  night  the  woman  was  taken  ill
and  died.  The  man  represented  himself  as  a  Norfolk  farmer
but  did  not  give  his  name,  alleging  that  the  woman  was  a  per¬
son  he  had  picked  up  that  day  in  town.  She  was  said,  by  a
medical  man,  to  have  died  of  diseased  heart ;  but  with  what
good  reason  is  not  known.  When  likenesses  of  Rush  were
published  lately,  the  landlord  recognized  the  face  as  that  of
the  man  who  had  slept  at  the  inn  on  that  occasion. — He  had
a  child  last  year  by  a  young  woman,  named  Emily  Sandford,
whom  he  seduced  and  was  keeping  at  his  farm  at  the  time  of
the  murder  of  the  Messrs.  Jermy,  sen.  and  jun.,  but  it  soon
died. — A  woman,  named  Sims,  settled  comfortably  in  a  farm,
was  advised  by  Rush  to  give  it  up ;  and  he  got  possession  of
the  proceeds,  and  ultimately  made  away  with  them  all.  This
seriously  depressed  her  spirits ;  she  went  to  live  at  Stanfield
Hall  farm,  not  far  from  Rush,  and  was  found  dead  in  her
bed  one  morning. — He  was  very  violent,  bursting  out  into  a
rage,  not  only  in  private,  but  at  his  trial  and  in  prison.  His
cruelty  was  exhibited  in  the  unfeeling  manner  in  which  he
cross-examined  Emily  Sandford — the  chief  victim  of  his  lust,
and  even  in  1846  he  had  declared  it  would  not  be  long  before
he  served  Mr.  Jermy  with  an  ejectment  for  the  other  world.
His  revengeful  feeling  led  him  to  compass  the  destruction,
not  of  the  husband  only,  but  of  the  wife,  the  son,  and
daughter.  He  wrote  to  Mr.  Jermy  thus, —

“  You  have  completely  ruined  me  as  far  as  my  own  property  goes.
If  you  think  I  shall  not  take  steps  to  ruin  you  and  your  family,  you
never  were  more  deceived  in  your  life.  You  do  not  know  me  yet.
Hitherto,  I  have  done  but  what  I  have  told  you  of ;  but  unless  you
answer  this  letter  satisfactorily,  nothing  on  earth  shall  prevent  me
from  treading  in  your  steps,  and  paying  you  off  in  the  same  base
coin  that  you  have  me.”

As  to  courage,  or  combativeness,  which  is  courage  in  excess,
Mr.  Beattie — the  sincere  and  useful  lecturer  on  mesmerism
and  cerebral  physiology — informs  me  that  a  friend  of  his  sat

k  2


110  An  Account  of  the  Head  of  Rush  the  Murderer,

on  the  same  bench  with  Rush  at  school,  and  that  Rush  was
always  ready  to  fight  any  boy  for  a  penny,  and  was  nicknamed
“  Gully”  by  the  boys  for  his  propensity  to  fight.  In  after  life
he  frequented  fighting  cribs.  His  great  courage  was  mani¬
fested  in  his  bold  attacks  upon  Mr.  Jermy's  family,  unaided
by  any  accomplice,  and  when  all  were  up  and  stirring ;  by
his  unaided  defence  on  the  trial,  before  council,  judge,  and
witnesses,  and  the  whole  world,  during  six  long  days ;  and
the  steadiness  of  his  demeanour  at  his  execution,  for  his  step
never  faltered  as  he  regularly  marched  to  his  doom,  and,
when  the  rope  was  adjusting,  he  said  coolly,  “  This  does  not
go  easy,  put  the  thing  a  little  higher, — take  your  time, —
don't  be  in  a  hurry,”  and  these  were  his  last  words ;  and  his
courage  was  as  striking  at  the  trial.

“  As  witness  after  witness  cut  away  every  fragment  of  a  chance,
his  nerves  seemed  to  become  more  firmly  strong,  and  his  resolution
more  unassailable.  While  every  eye  was  turned  on  him  with  loathing
— while  on  every  side  his  gaze  must  have  rested  on  a  mass  of  faces
breathing  but  one  sentiment — on  pen  and  pencil  busily  engaged  in
writing  the  lines  which  proclaimed  his  atrocity  to  the  world — on
artists  recording  the  lineaments  of  his  features  for  the  gratification  of
every  vulgar  crowd,  and  for  the  ornament  of  every  village  ale-house
— while  he  knew  he  stood  there,  unsentenced  and  untried.  Rush,
the  murderer, — he  looked  about  him  with  an  unshrinking  eye  ;  ar¬
ranged  his  papers  as  coolly  as  if  he  were  engaged  in  a  college  thesis,
and  never  gave  one  single  minute  touch  which  showed  he  felt  fear  or
compunction.  In  fact,  he  was  a  sort  of  rustic  Richard  the  Third —
bloody,  resolute,  and  cruel.  If  country  stories  be  true,  he  was  fa¬
miliar  with  deeds  of  murder,  and  impunity  had  made  him  secure  and
foolhardy.  A  father-in-law,  a  mother,  and  a  wife,  are  generally
believed  to  be  among  the  number  of  his  victims.  They  all  died  under
circumstances  of  great  suspicion.  It  was  curious  to  mark  the  specu¬
lative  curiosity  in  his  eye,  as  the  judge  was  about  to  put  on  the  black
cap  ;  he  looked  like  an  indifferent  spectator  who  had  never  seen  the
awful  ceremony  before,  and  was  anxious  to  observe  it  closely.  In¬
deed,  some  parts  of  the  evidence,  which  were  purely  circumstantial
and  ingenious,  seemed  to  interest  him  much  in  the  same  way.  For
instance,  that  important  evidence  respecting  the  covers  on  which  the
notices  were  written.  This  remarkable  piece  of  evidence  was  evidently
regarded  by  the  prisoner  with  a  sort  of  admiration,  though  it  had
the  greatest  possible  weight  against  him.”

His  love  of  gain  appeared  in  his  extreme  energy  in  busi¬
ness  and  his  engaging  in  far  more  concerns  than  he  had  the
means  or  the  time  to  conduct  efficiently.  He  had  many  actions
successfully  brought  against  him  for  breach  of  covenants,  and
his  endless  pecuniary  transactions  appear  to  have  been  charac¬
terized  by  grasping  and  roguery.  His  murderous  attack  upon
the  Jermys  was  partly  to  obtain  property  fraudulently  and  to


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


Ill


escape  the  obligation  of  payment,  as  well  as  to  gratify  revenge,
— which  revenge,  however,  arose  from  being  opposed  by  Mr.
Jermy  in  his  attempts  to  defraud  that  gentleman,  with  whom
he  had  many  pecuniary  transactions  and  whose  tenant  he  was
as  well  as  debtor :  he  would  have  been  called  upon  to  pay  a
considerable  sum  to  Mr.  Jermy  in  a  day  or  two  after  the  time
of  the  murder.  He  prevailed  upon  Emily  Sandford  to  forge
documents  relative  to  Mr.  Jermy’s  property  and  himself.

His  cunning  was  displayed  on  all  occasions ;  it  mixed  it¬
self  with  every  act  of  his  life  ;  he  did  nothing  without  artifice.
He  wished  to  appear  a  marvellously  religious  man.  In  his
cross-examination  he  continually  urged  religious  considerations
upon  the  witnesses  to  induce  them  by  perplexing  them  to
speak  the  truth,  as  he  called  it,  but  which  would  have  been
a  perversion  of  truth.  He  attended  places  of  worship  with
some  regularity ;  listened  attentively  and  with  deep  emotion ;
sometimes  disturbing  the  congregation  with  sighs  and  sobs ;
took  the  sacrament ;  and  had  family  prayers  read  every  morn¬
ing,  even  while  he  was  arranging  his  murders.  When  two
persons,  Lamer  and  Jermy,  were  at  his  house  that  he  might
aid  them  in  a  claim  upon  Mr.  Jenny*  s  estate,  and  he  was  laying
his  plans  to  fix  the  future  murders  upon  them,  he  joined  with
them,  upon  his  knees,  in  family  prayer.  In  his  cross-exam¬
ination  of  his  victim,  Emily  Sandford,  he  impudently  asked
her,  “  Have  I  not  given  you  passages  of  Scripture  that  I  said
would  sanction  the  way  in  which  we  lived  together?  Did  I
not  say  also,  that  God  Almighty  would  forgive  us  that  sin,  if
we  committed  no  other  ?”  “  Have  you  not  invariably,  before

coming  to  bed  to  me,  knelt  down,  and,  to  all  appearance  to
me,  said  your  prayers  ?”  “  In  his  house  was  a  box  designed

for  the  collection  of  money  for  a  society  in  London  called  The
Society  for  promoting  Christianity  among  the  Jews,  and  to
this  he  invariably  called  upon  his  friends  to  contribute.”  He
made  himself  in  company  be  considered  a  nice  man,  and  soon
got  round  innocent  unsuspecting  women.

In  addition  to  what  has  been  incidentally  mentioned  in
regard  to  another  part  of  his  character,  we  are  told  that,  when
younger,  “  he  was  known  among  his  companions  as  a  libertine,
and  few  have  carried  out  so  regularly  and  universally,  in  this
particular,  the  desires  of  a  depraved  and  sensual  appetite.
He  made  a  boast  of  seduction,  and  many  a  heart  and  many  a
family  have  been  saddened  by  his  criminal  atrocities.  When
thoroughly  set  upon  a  purpose  of  this  kind,  he  was  to  be  de¬
terred  by  no  difficulty  :  he  would  undertake  journeys,  lay
plans,  execute  manoeuvres,  resort  to  enterprize,  persuasion,
flattery,  falsehood.”  After  the  death  of  his  wife,  who  bore


112  An  Account  of  the  Head  of  Rush  the  Murderer,

him  nine  children,  he  advertised  for  a  lady  to  take  the  educa¬
tional  charge  of  his  offspring,  and  four  young  women  filled
the  situation  in  succession,  Emily  Sandford  being  the  last
and  not  the  only  victim  among  them.

His  attention  to  taking  his  food  was  strikingly  shewn
by  his  words  in  the  “  condemned”  cell  after  sentence  was
passed.  “  Where’s  my  supper  V3  he  exclaimed;  “  I  want  my
supper  after  a  hard  day’s  work.  I  shall  now  live  at  the
country’s  expense no  refreshment  being  ready,  he  threw
himself  upon  the  bed.  On  the  Saturday  before  his  trial  he
wrote  the  following  letter  to  Mr.  Leggatt : —

“Norwich,  24th  March,  1849.

“  Sir, — You  will  oblige  me  by  sending  my  breakfast  this  morn¬
ing,  and  my  dinner  about  the  time  your  family  have  their’s.  Send
any  thing  you  like  except  Beef  \  and  I  shall  like  cold  meat  as  well  as
hot,  and  meal  bread;  and  the  tea  in  a  pewter  mug  (if  with  a  cover
on  the  better).  I  will  trouble  you  to  provide  for  me  now,  if  you
please,  till  after  my  trial;  and  if  you  could  get  me  a  small  sucking
pig  in  the  market  to-day,  and  roast  for  me  on  Monday,  I  should  like
that  cold  as  well  as  hot  after  Monday,  and  it  would  always  be  in
readiness  for  me,  as  it  will  be  so  uncertain  what  time  I  then  have  for
my  meals  after  Monday.  Have  the  pig  cooked  in  the  same  way  as
you  usually  have,  and  send  plenty  of  plum  sauce  with  it.  Mr.  Penson
will  pay  you  for  what  I  have  of  you.  By  complying  with  the  above,
you  will  very  much  oblige ,

“  Your  humble  and  obedient  servant,

“  James  B.  Rush.

“  Mr.  Leggatt,  Bell  Inn,

“  Oxford-street,  Norwich.”

However  great  was  his  cunning,  he  was  deficient  in  cau¬
tiousness.  His  enjoyments  beyond  his  means,  his  idea  of
murdering  the  Jermys  and  not  being  at  once  suspected,*  his
not  reflecting  that  the  sensation  would  be  intense  and  the
murderer  be  ultimately  detected,  the  defence  of  himself  on
his  trial  and  his  absurd  mode  of  conducting,  all  exhibited
a  great  deficiency  of  caution :  as  indeed  did  his  whole  life.
He  was  always  sly,  but  never  prudent ;  just  like  so  many
bad  men  who  form  a  false  idea  of  the  sources  of  true  happi¬
ness.  In  assuming  the  appearance  of  innocence  and  piety  in
jail,  he  so  overacted  his  part  as  clearly  to  shew  his  hypocrisy.

His  want  of  justice  or  conscientiousness  was  equally  great
with  his  want  of  prudence.

He  must  have  had  a  high  opinion  of  himself  or  he  would
not  have  taken  so  much  upon  himself  in  business,  nor  relied


*  As  soon  as  the  murder  was  known,  all  fixed  upon  Rush  as  the  criminal,
and  the  officers  of  justice  repaired  to  his  house  early  in  the  morning.


by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


113


upon  his  own  strength  for  his  defence.  Throughout  life  he
had  been  fond  of  self-reliance.

His  love  of  approbation  contributed  no  doubt  to  his  re¬
ligious  hypocrisy,  and  was  exhibited  to  the  last  in  his  pro¬
testation  of  innocence.  His  constant  language  in  prison
was,  “  Thank  God,  I  am  quite  comfortable  in  body  and
mind;  I  eat  well,  drink  well,  and  sleep  well.”  After  his
committal,  he  was  constant  in  his  attendance  at  chapel,
and  soon  requested  to  have  the  sacrament  administered  to
him  privately.  He  pretended  to  sleep  beautifully  when  he
positively  did  not  at  all  on  the  last  night  of  his  life.  When
the  chaplain  urged  him  on  the  morning  of  execution  to  re¬
pent  of  his  crime,  he  replied,  “  God  knows  my  heart ;  He
is  my  judge,  and  you  have  prejudged  me:”  and  when  the
chaplain  and  a  dissenting  minister  at  a  late  hour  urged
confession  and  repentance,  he  began  to  quarrel  violently  with
them,  and  the  governor  entered  the  chapel  and  pinioned  him.
He  once  coolly  asked  if  they  had  begun  to  put  up  that  ma¬
chine  (the  gallows),  and,  having  no  answer,  said  he  hoped  it
would  be  a  fine  day.  He  walked  to  the  gallows  in  black,  with
patent  leather  boots,  and  his  scrupulously  white  shirt  collar
folded  down,  turning  his  face  from  the  crowd  to  the  castle
wall.  He  had  always  made  himself  so  agreeable  at  a  re¬
spectable  party  that  he  was  considered  an  acquisition.

He  was,  notwithstanding,  not  destitute  of  kind  feeling,
of  love  for  his  offspring,  or  of  veneration.  When  he  found
he  had  wounded  the  maid-servant,  who  had  nobly  come  for¬
ward  to  defend  her  mistress  when  terrified  at  the  reports  as
the  two  Mr.  Jermys  fell,  he  exclaimed,  “Poor  thing,  poor
thing !”  and  certainly  from  no  other  reason  than  pity,  for
he  ran  a  risk  of  his  voice  being  recognized,  and  could  not  be
attempting  to  make  any  one  suppose  that  he  regretted  it :
pity  only  will  explain  it.  He  was  liked  by  his  workmen.
At  church  he  would  be  as  unconcerned  as  a  rock  while  future
punishment  was  dwelt  upon ;  but,  when  a  dying  Christ  was
the  topic,  he  would  be  greatly  affected,  and  nothing  but  this
seemed  to  cause  emotion  in  him  at  church.

He  stole  a  cheque  for  <£40  during  his  trial :  and  abso¬
lutely  denied  all  knowledge  of  it  till  he  became  satisfied  that
it  would  be  appropriated  to  his  children  if  found  :  and  he  then
took  it  forth  from  behind  the  lining  of  his  hat.  He  was  much
moved  when  the  Rev.  Mr.  Andrews  brought  certain  family
matters  to  his  recollection,  and  his  spirit  for  a  time  seemed
subdued.  He  was  a  very  indulgent  father.

Many  a  bandit,  both  robber  and  murderer,  has  been  religi¬
ous  :  that  is,  he  has  firmly  believed  all  the  supernatural  ac-


114  An  Account  of  the  Head  of  Rush  the  Murderer ,


counts  and  opinions  inculcated  on  him,  and  worshipped  and
humbled  himself  sincerely  in  prayer.  How  many  of  the  reli¬
gious  world  around  us  are  all  uncharitableness  in  denouncing
others  not  of  the  same  fancies,  malicious,  and  most  given  to
creature  comforts,  even  to  sensuality,  so  as  to  be  Christians
moving  upon  velvet :  and  yet  are  sincerely  religious,  that  is,
are  strangers  to  the  principles  of  Christ,  but,  like  Calvin,
fancy  themselves  to  be  Christians.*  That,  as  in  Rush,  there
is  a  great  admixture  of  cant  and  hypocrisy  in  the  religious
world,  cannot  be  doubted :  but  how  much,  it  is  not  always
easy  to  determine.  Gall  says,

“  When  devotion  is  found  in  men  endowed,  in  other  respects,
with  qualities  which  do  not  appear  very  appropriate  to  it,  or  which
are  even  diametrically  opposed  to  it,  we  usually  accuse  those  men  of
hypocrisy,  or  at  least  of  acting  for  some  sinister  purpose.  We  can
scarcely  believe  that  it  was  in  good  faith  that  Gustavus  Adolphus
and  Suwarrow,  on  the  eve  of  a  battle,  themselves  performed  and
commanded  their  armies  to  perform  the  most  severe  religious  exer¬
cises,  prayers,  fasts,  &c.,  either  to  obtain  a  general  absolution,  or
to  ensure  the  victory.

“  Gabrino  Rienzi  was  generally  accused  of  being  an  impostor,  a
hypocrite,  and  of  making  religion  serve  his  purposes  by  employing
revelations  and  visions  to  authorize  his  ambition  and  cruelty.  The
inspection  of  his  portrait  explains  all  the  contrasts  of  his  conduct.

“Now  that  we  understand  how  the  most  revolting  contradictions
may  subsist  in  the  same  individual,  we  shall  no  longer  be  astonished
at  seeing  the  devotees,  Louis  XI.,  and  Philip  II.,  commit  all  acts
of  cruelty,  make  auto-da-fes,  and,  with  their  own  hands,  perform
the  functions  of  the  executioner.  Again,  it  is  organology  alone
which  gives  the  most  reasonable  explanation  of  the  horrors  of  the
holy  inquisition.

“  The  life  of  the  conqueror  Cromwell  is  an  enigma  to  most  of  his
biographers.  Was  his  devotion  real  ?  was  it  a  calculation  of  hy¬
pocrisy  ?  M.  Villemain  expresses  himself  as  follows  when  speaking
of  Cromwell’s  mysticism  : — f

“  ‘  That  official  mysticism,  if  we  may  so  term  it,  employed  by
Cromwell  in  his  communications  with  parliament,  is  found  at  the
same  period  in  his  private  letters.  Must  we,  from  this  fact,  suppose
with  Voltaire,  that  Cromwell  was  for  a  long  period  really  a  fanatic,
and  that  he  became  a  hypocrite  in  proportion  as  his  mind  was  sharp¬
ened  by  the  progress  of  his  power?  or  must  we  believe  that  Cromwell,
like  Mahomet,  made  his  first  dupes  amongst  his  own  family,  and
began,  by  their  delusion,  the  imposture  which  he  desired  to  extend
around  him  ?

“  The  following  are  some  of  the  religious  letters  which  Cromwell,
already  powerful  and  celebrated,  wrote  to  members  of  his  family.

*  See  my  Human  Physiology ,  p.  195.

4  “  History  of  Cromwell ,  vol.  i.,  p.  404.


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


115


The  first,  dated  in  1646,  is  addressed  to  his  daughter  Bridges :  —

“  ‘  Dear  daughter, — Your  sister  Claypole  is  tormented  by  some
uneasy  thoughts  (I  confide  in  the  mercy  of  the  Lord)  ;  she  sees  her
own  vanity  and  the  carnal  disposition  of  her  soul ;  she  laments  it,
and  seeks  that  which  must  satisfy  her.  Thus  to  seek  is  to  belong
to  the  most  happy  sect,  after  that  which  finds,  as  every  humble  and
faithful  seeker  must  do.  Happy  seeker!  happy  finder !  Who  has
ever  tasted  how  gentle  is  the  Lord,  without  experiencing  some  returns
of  self-love  and  feebleness  ?  Who  has  ever  enjoyed  this  kindness  of
God,  and  could  become  less  zealous  in  his  desire,  and  less  urgent  to
obtaiu  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  Lord.  My  dear  love,  always  pursue
the  Lord :  let  not  thy  husband  nor  anything  else  in  the  world  cool
thy  affection  for  Jesus  Christ.  I  hope  he  will  be  an  occasion  of
exciting  them  still  more  in  thee.  What  is  most  worthy  of  love  in
thy  husband  is  that  he  bears  in  him  the  image  of  Jesus  Christ ;  fix
there  thine  eyes ;  behold  what  must  be  beloved  before  all  things,
and  every  thing  else  for  that/  &c.

“Another  letter  of  Cromwell,  to  his  wife,  presents  the  same
character  and  is  not  less  curious :  —

“  ‘My  very  dear - ,  I  am  rejoiced  at  learning  that  thy  soul

prospers,  and  that  the  Lord  augments  his  favours  towards  thee  more
and  more :  the  great  good  which  thy  soul  can  desire  is  that  the  Lord
should  shed  upon  thee  the  light  of  his  protection,  which  is  worth
more  than  life,’  &c.

“  I  submit  to  the  reader  these  ascetic  letters,  which  appear  more
worthy  of  Madame  Guyon  than  of  a  conqueror  ;  if  he  is  not  resolved
to  see  in  them  habitual  phrases,  and  an  intention  to  deceive,  which
is  powerful  only  when  adopted  every  moment,  we  may  conclude  from
them  that  Cromwell  was  sincere.  Independently  of  the  different
proofs  which  I  have  opposed  to  this  opinion,  and  of  the  testimony
of  the  enemies  of  Cromwell,  who,  whether  fanatical  or  not,  all  accuse
him  of  hypocrisy,  I  may  cite  the  authority  of  an  impartial  and  in¬
different  witness.  Debordeaux,  the  ambassador  of  France,  wrote
respecting  Cromwell’s  zeal  for  Protestantism:  ‘The  reports  which
are  spread  respecting  the  General  are  not  true  :  he  affects  great  piety  ;
but  with  a  particular  communication  with  the  Holy  Spirit :  he  is  not
so  weak  as  to  allow  himself  to  be  caught  by  flattery.  I  know  that
he  ridiculed  it  with  the  ambassador  of  Portugal.’*

“M.  Villemain  says  in  a  note  of  the  second  book  of  his  Histoire
de  Cromwell : —

“  ‘We  find  in  a  letter  written  after  the  death  of  Cromwell  by  a
man  who  had  been  attached  to  him,  some  details  respecting  his
character  and  person  which  are  useful  for  shewing  what  he  was  and
what  he  appeared.  The  most  curious  feature  of  this  description  is
that  proneness  to  compassion  often  observed  in  the  life  of  Cromwell,
and  which  makes  Whitelock  say,  in  his  Memoirs,  that  the  Protector
was  a  very  good  man ;  a  kind  of  sensibility  sometimes  entirely  phy¬
sical,  which  does  not  reach  the  soul,  and  which  accords,  in  some

*  “  Thurlow’s  Slate  Papers,  vol.  i.,  p.  256.


116  An  Account  of  the  Head  of  Rush  the  Murderer,

\

men,  with  the  cold  meditation  of  the  greatest  cruelties.  The  fol¬
lowing  are  the  terms  of  this  letter  : — cThe  Protector  was  of  a  pow¬
erful  and  robust  constitution  ;  his  height  was  under  six  feet,  (by
two  inches  I  believe;)  his  head  so  'preponderating  that  you  would
have  believed  it  contained  a  vast  treasure  of  intellectual  faculties  ;
his  temper  excessively  inflammable,  but  this  flame  subsided  spon¬
taneously,  or  was  soon  appeased  by  the  moral  qualities  of  the  Pro¬
tector.  He  was  naturally  compassionate  towards  suffering  objects,
even  to  an  effeminate  degree.  Although  God  had  given  him  a
heart  in  which  there  was  little  room  for  the  idea  of  fear,  excepting
that  which  He  himself  inspired,  yet  he  carried  to  excess  his  tender¬
ness  towards  those  who  suffered.  ...  He  lived  and  died  in  a  perfect
union  with  God,  as  the  judicious  persons  who  were  near  him  have
observed.’*

“In  truth,  the  form  of  this  extraordinary  man’s  head  proves,
in  an  irrefutable  manner,  that  his  devotion  as  well  as  his  other
qualities  are  in  harmony  with  his  organization.  In  general,  I  do
not  think  that  sovereigns,  especially  when  they  are  powerful,  take
great  pains  to  appear  otherwise  than  as  they  really  are,  and  we  shall
never  fail  to  find  the  explanation  of  their  most  singular  contrasts,
and  of  their  apparent  hypocrisy,  in  a  particular  combination  of
organs  simultaneously  developed  to  a  high  degree  of  activity.

People  are  excited  to  hypocrisy  by  the  absurdity  of  too
many  of  the  religious  world,  who  praise  their  neighbour,  not
for  excellence  of  life,  but  for  all  the  outward  performances
and  show  of  religion,  so  profitable  to  the  performer,  and  for
his  profession  of  particular  opinions  on  matters  which  would
require  for  due  appreciation,  or  even  comprehension,  if  some
can  be  comprehended,  far  more  intelligence  and  study  than
fall  to  the  lot  of  the  bulk  of  those  called  the  educated,  though
sound  and  genuine  education  has  scarcely  yet  begun  among
us.  Europe  is  Christian :  yet  bloody  battles  are  incessantly
fought  in  it :  two  millions  and  a  half  of  soldiers  with  ample
instruments  of  death  said  to  be  maintained ;  and  England  to
pay  annually  forty-six  million  pounds  sterling  for  wars  past,
present,  or  to  come.  Were  Christ  to  revisit  earth,  whatever
profession  of  Christianity  he  might  find,  he  would  find  little
conception  of  the  beautiful  spirit  and  little  obedience  to  the
precepts  which  he  so  simply  and  in  so  unpriestly  a  manner
inculcated  :  he  would  have  to  recommence  his  great  and  blessed
work,  and  shew  that  he  had  been  completely  misunderstood.
Hypocrisy,  the  mere  shadow  of  virtue,  and  a  false  estimate
of  virtue  and  happiness,  are  sadly  encouraged  by  the  richer

*  “  Thurloiv’s  State  Papers ,  vol.  i.,  p.  766.

+  Gall’s  Fonctions  du  Cerveau,  t.  v.,  p.  389.  Were  Mr.  Symes’s  transla¬
tion  of  this  work  published,  the  advantage  to  English  readers  would  be  incalcu¬
lable.  He  has  it  ready,  but  no  bookseller  takes  it.  We  ought  to  ensure  its
publication  by  subscription.  See  Zoist,  No.  XIX.,  p.  213.


by  Dr.  Elliotson.  117

sort,  the  instructed,  and  the  teachers  of  the  people,  though
they  think  it  not.

Rush,  though  he  could  talk  glibly  and  was  a  sharp,  active
man  of  business,  shewed  no  force  or  grasp  of  intellect.  His
defence  was  most  loose  and  rambling;  he  asked  irrelevant
questions ;  sometimes  he  aimed  at  what  could  be  of  no  service
to  him,  and  sometimes  disgusted  every  person  by  his  stupid
and  glaring  efforts  to  establish  falsehood.  His  force  of  cha¬
racter  was  great,  but  it  was  the  force  of  all  the  lower  feel¬
ings.  Placed  in  certain  high  situations,  he  might  have  become
in  the  vulgar  sense  a  great  and  renowned  man — might  have
destroyed  nations  most  heroically,  and,  if  cursed  with  arbi¬
trary  power,  have  trodden  upon  the  necks  of  millions  of
subjects.  But  the  want  of  high  intelligence  and  of  a  high
sense  of  justice  and  benevolence  rendered  his  strength  mere
brutality.

In  accordance  with  his  qualities,  his  head  is  very  large.

The  circumference  of  his  cast  over  the  eyes  is  24%  inches.

A  line  drawn  from  ear  to  ear  over  the  eyes  is  12 %  ditto.

Ditto  ditto  backwards  12  ditto.

Ditto  ditto  over  the  head  12^  ditto.

But  unfortunately  the  head  is  large  where  it  had  better
have  been  smaller ;  and  small  where  it  had  better  have  been
large.  The  head  strikes  a  person,  even  unacquainted  with
phrenology,  as  one  of  the  most  monstrous  and  ill-shaped  ever
beheld ;  quite  as  hideous  as  his  character :  and  his  face  is  in
exact  accordance ;  his  upper  lip  is  frightful.  The  sides  of  his
head  and  the  lower  part  of  its  back  are  enormous,  and  there
lay  the  positive,  the  forcible  part,  of  his  character.  The
organs  of  Alimentiveness ,*  sexual  impulse,  the  love  of  pro¬
perty  (Acquisitiveness),  the  disposition  to  violence  (Destructive¬
ness),  the  disposition  to  contend  (Courage,  Combativeness),
cunning  (Secretiveness),  are  enormous.

The  breadth  at  Disposition  to  Violence  is  6f-  inches.


Ditto  ditto  Courage  .  5f  ditto.

Ditto  ditto  Love  of  Property  ....  Q%  ditto.

Ditto  ditto  Cunning .  .  6^  ditto.


Ditto  ditto  centre  of  Sexual  Impulse  3^  ditto.

Ditto  ditto  Alimentiveness  .  6-j  ditto.

The  remarkable  negative  part  of  his  character  arose  from
the  smallness  of  his  organs  of  Justice f  and  Caution.  In  the

*  See  my  note  in  No.  XII.,  p.  462,  upon  the  discovery  of  this  organ.  The
unhappy  Crook  has  lately  destroyed  himself.

f  My  reasons  for  regarding  it  as  the  organ  of  justice,  and  not  of  conscien¬
tiousness,  are  given  in  No.  XII.,  p.  466.


118  An  Account  of  the  Head  of  Rush  the  Murderer,


situation  of  these  organs  the  head  grows  narrow  and  slopes
down  in  a  most  singular  manner.  The  contrast  with  the
other  organs  already  mentioned  strikes  every  eye.  At  Caution
the  breadth  is  only  4£-  inches.

The  organs  of  Attachment,  Love  of  Offspring,  Love  of
Notoriety ,  or  Vanity,  as  Gall  terms  it,  and  of  Self-esteem,  are
large.  The  force  of  any  of  them  would  be  very  great  when
one  or  more  of  the  six  very  large  organs  at  the  lower  part
of  the  sides  and  back  of  the  head, — Destructiveness,  Com¬
bativeness,  Cunning,  &c.,  acted  in  concert  with  them ;  but
must  have  been  overpowered  when  opposed  by  one  or  more
of  these.

The  same  remark  holds  with  respect  to  Benevolence,  Vene¬
ration,  and  Firmness,  which  are  not  quite  so  large  as  the  four
former,  but  still  are  full.  The  organ  of  Ideality  is  not  at  all
deficient.  The  organ  of  Firmness,  or  rather  Perseverance,  is
not  an  overpowering  organ  in  him,  but  much  that  is  called
firmness  is  really  either  courage,  or  the  strong  action  of  some
other  organ :  and  his  organs  of  perseverance  wrere  so  sup¬
ported  by  the  immense  power  of  the  very  large  organs,  that  I
see  no  reason  to  doubt  from  Pushes  head  that  Gall  is  correct
in  what  he  advances  upon  this  faculty  and  organ.  The  term
firmness  in  common  acceptation  signifies  sometimes  steadiness
in  a  course,  sometimes  resolution  or  courage  in  some  par¬
ticular  circumstance.  The  former  is  supposed  to  be  the
faculty  of  the  organ.

The  distance  measured  by  callipers  from  the  orifice


of  the  ear  to  Firmness  is .

Ditto  ditto  Veneration .  6

Ditto  ditto  Benevolence  .

Ditto  ditto  Self-esteem .  61-

Ditto  ditto  Parental  Love . .  5^

The  breadth  at  the  centre  of  the  two  organs  of
Attachment  is  .  4


The  development  of  his  intellectual  organs  is  in  accord¬
ance  with  what  we  know  of  him.  The  lower  range,  the  per¬
ceptive  organs,  as  some  term  them,  were  in  general  large  :
while  the  higher  or  reflecting  range  were  poor.

The  organs  of  Music,  the  Sense  of  Persons,  Form,  Lan¬
guage,  and  Locality,  were  large.  His  speech  in  his  defence
for  fourteen  hours  proved  he  had  words  enough  at  command,
and  he  was  known  to  be  very  fond  of  music  and  to  play  well
upon  the  flute.*

His  organ  of  observation,  of  the  Sense  of  Things,  as  Gall

*  See  my  remarks  on  the  equal  wickedness  of  people  with  much  “  music  in
their  souls,”  No.  XXI.,  p.  53.


by  Dr.  Elliofson.


119


denominates  it,  divided  by  Dr.  Spurzheim,  on  what  ground
I  know  not,  into  Individuality  and  Eventuality,  was  not  quite
so  large.  The  length  from  the  orifice  of  the  ear  to  it  is
six  inches.

The  organ  of  Order  was  small.

The  upper  row  of  intellectual  organs  were  among  the
smallest  of  his  head.  His  forehead  at  this  part  was  narrow
and  did  not  advance.  Causality  was  small,  Wit  small,  and
Comparison  was  larger.  The  length  from  the  orifice  of  the
ear  to  Comparison  was  inches.  The  distance  of  the  centre
of  each  organ  of  Causality  inches ;  the  breadth  at  the
outer  extremity  of  the  orbits  being  5J  inches.  So  that  the
want  of  intellectual  power  exhibited  in  his  defence  is  fully
accounted  for.*  Such  a  brain  would  never  have  chosen  intel¬
lectual  pursuits,  but  must  always  have  occupied  itself  in  the
gratification  of  the  feelings  which  the  brute  department  of
animals  possess,  some  one,  and  some  another,  in  equal  force
with  ourselves.f


Why  was  such  a  monster,  such  a  monstrous  organization,
made  ?  But  why  is  the  whole  world  a  scene  of  suffering  and
wickedness  ?  Why  are  innocent  babies  tortured  with  endless
varieties  of  disease  ?  why  are  they  agonized  with  the  natural
process  of  obtaining  their  teeth  ?  Why  do  epidemic  poisons
devastate  nations,  the  good  and  the  bad  equally  ?  Why  do
agonizing  and  fatal  hereditary  diseases  attack  the  virtuous  ?
Why  do  countless  causes  of  misery  assail  the  just  and  the
unjust  ?  There  is  little  happiness  which  is  not  produced  with
the  unhappiness  of  others,  toiling  and  anxious ;  or  which  is
not  liable  to  be  smashed  unexpectedly.  As  to  the  miseries
occasioned  by  ourselves,  why  are  we  not  so  made  as  to  wish
and  be  able  to  act  better?  Why  have  we  not  more  intel¬
ligent  and  more  virtuous  brains?  Why  is  mankind  so  or¬
ganized  and  situated  that  ignorance,  superstition,  vice,  and
suffering,  are  the  prevalent  lot  of  humanity  ?  Whatever  the
external  show  of  happiness,  we  may  find  sorrow  actual  or
impending  almost  every  where,  if  we  go  behind  the  scenes
and  learn  the  particulars  of  every  individual ;  or,  if  not,  we

*  The  head  is  farther  ill  shaped.  The  posterior  portion  of  the  right  side  and
the  superior  portion  of  the  back  are  smaller  :  and  the  anterior  portion  of  the  left
side  smaller,  than  their  opposites.

t  My  cast  of  Rush  was  taken  from  the  corpse  at  Norwich  by  an  Italian  figure
maker  resident  there,  and  sold  by  him  to  B.  Casci,  No.  3,  Harford  Place,  Drury
Lane,  who  sells  copies  for  a  few  shillings,  and  is  a  man  whom  I  can  recommend
for  taking  casts,  both  on  account  of  his  skill  and  integrity.  Whoever  wishes  for  a
cast  of  a  deceased  relative  will  find  in  him  an  admirably  conducted  man.


120  An  Account  of  the  Head  of  Rush  the  Murderer,

have  only  to  wait  and  we  find  it  come.  Not  only  while  be¬
holding  the  glitter  and  happy  excitement  of  our  parks  and
streets  have  we  merely  to  turn  our  heads  and  see  the  famish¬
ing  and  diseased  beggar,  or  visit  the  hospitals  or  the  dirty
alleys  and  back  streets  and  behold  want  and  agonizing  and
wasting  disease :  but,  while  we  are  enjoying  the  most  glo¬
rious  landscapes,  the  dwellings  of  the  destitute  and  almost
houseless  are  at  hand,  some  victim  of  disease  is  never  far  off,
and  some  suffering  birds,  fish,  beast,  or  insects,  in  more  or
less  abundance,  are  always  discoverable.

For  the  innocent  brutes  suffer  too.  Look  at  the  miseries  of
the  toiling  horse — that  docile  and  affectionate  animal — cruelly
forced  to  excessive  labour  for  our  advantage  or  perhaps  taken
into  bloody  battle  to  be  wounded  and  painfully  killed.  Look
at  the  miseries  of  the  myriads  of  animals  which  are  every  mo¬
ment  painfully  put  to  death  for  our  own  nutriment.  Truly,
“  the  whole  creation  travaileth  and  groaneth.”  The  insensible
department  of  nature  is  no  less  exposed  to  injury  and  destruc¬
tion.  Plants  perish  from  over  crowding,  from  lack  of  mois¬
ture  and  nourishment,  and  from  the  violence  committed  upon
them  by  the  animal  department  of  nature,  and  by  weather.
The  inanimate  department  is  equally  injured;  mountains  fall,
countries  are  swallowed  up ;  streams  obstructed ;  shores  worn
away.  In  the  vegetable  and  inanimate  department  there
is  no  suffering,  and  all  appears  a  magnificent  circulation  of
changes :  but  the  same  general  laws  which  disturb  them
reign  throughout,  and  disturb  the  sentient  department  of
nature  just  as  though  this  part  were  also  insensible.  Good
comes  out  of  evil  every  moment.  But  the  question  presents
itself,  Why  the  evil  at  all?  And  next  comes  the  greater
question,  Why  is  anything  at  all  ?  For  what  end  this  strange
and  suffering  spectacle  of  nature  ?

The  head  of  Bush  is  no  greater  mystery  than  the  rest  of
sentient  nature.  To  give  a  shadow  of  a  reason  is  impossible.
The  purpose  of  all  this  is  past  finding  out.  We  must  be
content  with  beholding  and  submitting  in  silence,  conscious
of  our  own  littleness  and  inability ;  and  not  foolishly  and  pre¬
sumptuously  attempting  an  explanation.  We  must  be  satis¬
fied  that  it  could  not  be  otherwise  than  it  is,  and  this  is  my
own  sole  consolation.  But  while  we  thus  encourage  a  humble
spirit,  let  us  do  all  the  good  in  our  power.

From  Bush’s  head  we  must  learn  charity.  Let  every  man
remember  that,  if  he  had  such  a  charge  of  cunning,  acquisi¬
tiveness,  &c.,  &c.,  as  Bush  was  burthened  with  in  the  pos¬
session  of  such  massive  organs,  and  a  corresponding  deficient
charge  of  higher  feeling  and  intellectual  power,  he  would  be


Mesmerism  in  the  East.


121


a  Rush.  Let  us  detest  such  organizations  as  we  detest  the  or¬
ganizations  called  wolf,  tiger,  rattlesnake,  scorpion,  or  vermin ;
and  let  us  defend  ourselves  and  others  from  them  by  all  means
which  are  absolutely  necessary  and  as  little  cruel  as  possible.
But  let  us  pity  the  individual,  for  he  did  not  make  himself, —
no,  not  a  hair  of  his  head.*  /


MESMERISM  IN  THE  EAST.

COMMUNICATED  BY  DR.  ELLIOTSON.

II.  “  Report  of  the  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital  for  October.
By  James  Esdaile,  M.D.,  Presidency  Surgeon.”  From
the  Indian  Reporter  of  Medical  Science.

“  ‘  I  look  upon  mesmerism  as  no  longer  worthy  of  the  serious  consideration
of  the  operating  surgeon.’ — Mr.  O’  Shaughnessy’s  Rej)ort  on  the  Mesmeric  Hos¬
pital.

“  ‘  It  is  time  to  throw  away  mummery  and  work  above  board,  now  that  we
have  got  ether.’ — Advice  of  Dr.  Duncan  Stewart.

“  Sir, — When  a  man  publishes  his  opinions  or  the  results  of
his  experience,  it  is  with  the  hope  of  the  one  being  approved
and  the  other  accepted  as  facts  by  the  public.  But  a  writer
must  be  prepared  to  have  the  soundness  of  his  opinions  and
the  reality  of  his  facts  well  sifted  before  he  can  hope  them  to
meet  with  general  acceptation.  1  have  patiently  submitted
to  this  painful  bolting  process,  and  I  hope  that  the  professor
of  surgery  in  the  Medical  College  will  be  equally  resigned
while  I  dissect  some  of  his  opinions,  which  appear  to  me  to
be  both  erroneous  and  dangerous.

“  Since  my  last  Report,  public  attention  has  been  a  good

*  “  Humility  and  benevolence  are  two  leading  duties.  If  we  detect  the  signs
of  intellectual  deficiency  and  vice  in  our  own  heads,  we  may  learn  to  think  humbly
of  ourselves ;  and,  being  put  in  possession  of  true  self-knowledge,  endeavour  to
strengthen  what  is  too  weak  and  repress  what  is  too  strong.  If  we  detect  the
signs  of  great  talents  and  virtues  in  the  heads  of  others,  we  may  love  them  the  more
as  superior  and  highly  favoured  beings  :  whereas,  if  we  detect  the  signs  of  great
virtues  and  talents  in  our  own  heads,  we  may  learn  to  give  no  praise  to  ourselves,
but  be  thankful  for  the  gift ;  and,  if  we  detect  the  signs  of  vice  and  intellectual
deficiency  in  others,  we  may  learn  to  pity  rather  than  censure.  ...  A  vicious  man
must  be  restrained,  as  a  wild  beast*,  for  the  good  of  others,  though,  for  aught
we  know,  his  faults  may,  like  the  acts  of  the  beast  of  prey,  be  chargeable  rather
on  his  nature  ;  and,  while  we  feel  justified  in  confining,  and  the  culprit  is  perhaps
conscious  how  richly  he  deserves  his  fate,  we  may  pity  in  our  hearts  and  acknow¬
ledge  that  we  ourselves  have  often  been  less  excusable.

“  ‘  Teach  me  to  love  and  to  forgive.

Exact  my  own  defects  to  scan,

What  others  are  to  feel,  and  own  myself  a  man.’  ”f

*  “  A  man  of  determined  bad  principle  may  in  like  manner  be  shnned  by  the  most  benevo¬
lent,  on  account  of  being  odious  and  dangerous ;  though  they  wish  him  so  well  as  ardently  to
long  for  his  reformation,  and  pity  his  organisation,  his  education  and  the  circumstances  in
which  he  has  been  placed.” — See  my  Human  Physiology,  p.  410.

t  “  Gray,  Ode  to  Adversity.


122


Mesmerism  in  the  East.


deal  directed  to  an  unfortunate  case  in  which  death  speedily
followed  the  inhalation  of  chloroform  at  the  Medical  College
here.  The  operator,  Mr.  O’Shaugnessy,  has  favoured  us  with
some  ‘Remarks’  upon  the  case  in  your  last  number,  and  it  is
to  them  that  I  wish  to  direct  the  attention  of  your  readers.

“  The  death  of  the  patient  is  attributed  ‘  entirely  to  the  in¬
sensibility  caused  by  chloroform  ,’  but  yet  we  are  told  that  this
person,  and  all  those  who  have  expired  under  the  influence  of
chloroform,  f  did  not  die  from  any  poisonous  effects  of  this
valuable  drug.5  We  are  hence  led  to  infer,  that  chloroform
does  not  possess  any  poisonous  qualities.  As  the  most  fatal
mistakes  may  occur,  if  this  opinion  is  acted  upon,  I  will  take
the  trouble  to  prove  to  those  who  have  not  the  necessary
means  of  information  at  hand,  that  chloroform  is  a  virulent
poison,  requiring  ‘keen  observation,  caution,  and  judgment’
in  its  administration,  as  remarked  by  Dr.  M‘Kinnon  in  your
last  number,  and  that  with  every  precaution,  it  occasionally
kills  with  lightning-like  rapidity.  Every  medical  periodical,
for  the  last  year,  abounds  with  fatal  experiments  upon  ani¬
mals.  Dr.  Plouviez,  for  example,  stated  at  a  Meeting  of  the
Parisian  Academy  of  Sciences,  that  he  had  given  a  dog,
weighing  81bs.,  23  grains  of  chloroform  to  inhale,  and  that
the  animal  died  in  a  minute  and  a  half.

“  Mr.  Bennett,  in  the  Edinburgh  Monthly  Journal,  says, —
‘  The  poisonous  action  of  chloroform,  as  observed  in  animals,
is  precisely  similar  to  that  of  a  pure  narcotic.”

“  ‘  The  poison  enters  at  once  into  the  circulation,  and  pene¬
trates  through  the  whole  system,  and  but  a  few  minutes  elapse
between  apparently  perfect  health,  and  the  death  of  the  pa¬
tient.  Art  is  powerless  in  dealing  with  the  poisonous  effects
of  the  vapour.’ — Medical  Gazette,  July,  1848.

“  In  a  paper  ‘  on  death  from  chloroform,’  Mr.  Sibson  says,
that  when  asphyxia  is  induced,  ‘  wre  must  regard  chloroform
as  one  of  the  most  uncontrollable  narcotic  poisons’  But  to
proceed  to  its  effects  upon  man.

“If  the  following  people  were  not  poisoned,  I  should  like
to  know  wrhat  happened  to  them  : —

“  A  lady  at  Boulogne,  30  years  of  age,  in  good  health,
was  put  under  the  influence  of  chloroform  to  have  a  small
abscess  in  the  thigh  opened.  A  handkerchief  with  fifteen  or
twenty  drops  of  chloroform  was  held  under  the  nostrils.  The
patient  only  made  a  few  inspirations,  when  she  cried,  ‘I’m
suffocating and  died  on  the  instant.

“  A  dentist  in  London  gave  a  healthy  looking  young  man
chloroform  to  inhale.  After  six  inspirations  his  head  dropped,
and  lie  never  moved  or  spoke  after.


Dr.  Esdaile’s  Report  of  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  123

“  A  lady  at  Cincinnati,  died  at  the  expiration  of  five  minutes
after  inhaling  chloroform.  She  was  in  excellent  health.

“  In  the  case  at  Hyderabad,  the  operating  surgeon  reports
that  ‘  the  death  was  almost  instantaneous.’

“  At  the  hospital  Beaujon  in  Paris,  M.  Robert  had  only
made  one  flap  in  a  case  of  amputation  when  the  patient  died.

“Mr.  Spencer  Wells  reports,  ‘  I  saw  a  patient  die  in  bed
just  as  M.  Malgaine  had  completed  disarticulation  at  the
shoulder  joint,  and  feel  convinced  that  chloroform  was  the
immediate  cause  of  death/

“  A  druggist’s  boy  in  Aberdeen  was  found  dead,  leaning
upon  the  counter  with  his  face  in  a  towel,  which  he  had  im¬
pregnated  with  chloroform.

“A  girl  at  Newcastle  died  in  two  minutes  after  inhaling
chloroform  for  the  removal  of  a  toe-nail.

“  Having  only  one  medical  periodical  at  hand,  I  know  not
how  many  more  fatal  cases  may  have  been  reported  elsewhere,
but  enough  has  been  said  for  my  purpose,  and  it  is  to  be
hoped  that  we  shall  hear  no  more  of  the  innocuous  nature  of
chloroform.  It  would  fill  a  whole  number  of  your  Journal  to
notice  the  disagreeable  and  dangerous  after  effects  of  chloro¬
form.

“  Mr.  O’Shaughnessy  was  equally  confident  and  oracular
in  vindicating  the  suspected  innocence  of  ether.  We  were
told,  1  The  dangers  are  imaginary.  The  reported  fatal  effects
attributed  to  ether,  all  practical  men  now  laugh  at.’  Yet  every
body  knows  that  within  a  year  from  its  discovery,  fatal  ether
cases  had  become  so  numerous  that  it  became  absolutely  ne¬
cessary  to  seek  some  safer  general  anaesthetic  agent,  and  hence
the  birth  of  chloroform,  destined  apparently  to  an  equally
short  universal  empire.  If  the  Professor  of  Surgery  expects
us  to  respect  him  as  an  authority,  his  opinions  will  be  better
considered  and  his  statements  more  correct  in  future  when
writing  in  a  Medical  Journal,  or  reporting  to  Government
upon  a  scientific  subject.  Such  Delphic  responses  may  over¬
awe  and  impose  upon  an  audience  of  Hindoo  boys,  but  are
only  calculated  to  make  ‘  all  practical  men  laugh.’

“  But  no  reasonable  person  objects  to  the  use  of  chloro¬
form  merely  because  it  is  a  poison,  but  because  it  is  an  un¬
manageable  one,  and  no  skill,  prudence,  and  experience  can
suffice  to  guard  against  its  occasional  fatal  effects.  Ether  and
chloroform  for  surgical  purposes  are  most  valuable  additions
to  our  armoury,  and,  I  believe,  that  I  was  the  first  individual
in  this  country  who  tested  their  powers.  But  having  wit¬
nessed  their  physiological  action  upon  the  human  system,  I
felt  convinced  that  their  effects  would  often  be  dangerous,

VOL.  VII.  L


124


Mesmerism  in  the  East .


and  prophesied  that  their  general  use  in  surgery  would  even
be  frequently  fatal.  If  we  had  no  other  resource,  this  would
be  a  necessary  evil,  and  the  danger  would  have  to  be  care¬
fully  weighed  with  the  possible  advantage.

“  But  when  we  possess  another  equally  powerful,  always
safe,  and  generally  successful  natural  agent,  as  we  have  in
this  country,  it  does  appear  incomprehensible  to  me,  and  the
public  are  equally  puzzled,  why  mesmerism  is  never  resorted
to  in  the  general  hospitals  of  Calcutta,  but  the  more  violent
and  dangerous  method  always  preferred.  I  have  always  un¬
derstood  that  the  most  scientific  surgeon  or  physician  is  he
who  cures  his  patient  in  the  simplest  and  safest  manner,  and
the  medical  mesmerists  acting  upon  this  principle,  only  have
recourse  to  the  inferior  and  dangerous  agent,  when  the  supe¬
rior  and  safe  power  has  disappointed  their  expectations,  which
happily  in  this  country  very  seldom  happens.

“  These  exceptional  cases  seem  to  me  to  be  the  proper
and  legitimate  field  for  ether  and  chloroform,  and  they  are  so
few,  that  if  restricted  to  them,  we  might  hope  never  to  hear
of  another  fatal  case  in  India — a  consummation  devoutly  to
be  wished,  but  impossible  to  be  obtained,  while  chloroform  is
exclusively  used  in  surgery.  There  are  many  cases  in  which
no  man  who  values  his  reputation  and  the  lives  of  his  patients
would  venture  to  administer  chloroform  for  surgical  purposes,
and  I  am  curious  to  learn  how  such  cases  are  disposed  of  in
hospitals  where  mesmerism  is  tabooed.  Cases  of  extreme
debility  and  chronic  organic  disease  are  especially  adapted
for  mesmeric  treatment,  and  justice  cannot  be  done  to  the
patient  by  any  other  means.  Add  to  this,  the  total  absence
of  anxiety  in  the  surgeon’s  mind,  caused  by  perfect  confidence
in  the  safety  of  his  proceedings,  and  it  passes  all  comprehen¬
sion  how  men  can  reject  such  a  blessed  relief  to  themselves  as
well  as  their  patients.  There  is  not  an  operator,  one  would
think,  wrho  does  not  envy  Dr.  Martin  and  Dr.  Webb’s  satis¬
faction  while  performing  the  following  operations  in  my  hos¬
pital  : —

“  Removal  of  a  malignant  Tumor  of  the  Eye.

“  Sheik  Abdoolla,  aged  50.  One  of  his  eyes  has  been
diseased  ever  since  he  was  10  years  of  age,  but  it  did  not
burst  till  two  years  ago.  A  tumor  then  began  to  form,  which
now  protrudes  from  the  orbit,  and  covers  half  the  cheek :  it
is  hard,  deeply  ulcerated,  and  firmly  attached  to  the  sur¬
rounding  parts.  The  man  was  sent  to  my  hospital  by  Dr.
Martin,  of  the  Eye  Infirmary,  to  be  mesmerised.

“  He  was  mesmerised  on  the  8th  October,  and  was  fit  to
be  operated  upon  next  day.


Dr.  Esdaile’s  Report  of  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  125

/

“Dr.  Martin  performed  the  operation  on  the  13th,  in  the
presence  of  a  large  company,  and  not  a  vestige  of  muscular
irritability  even ,  was  seen  from  first  to  last.  As  the  bleeding
was  very  profuse,  it  was  desirable  to  plug  the  orbit  with  lint
as  soon  as  possible,  and  I  remarked,  that,  if  any  diseased
structure  was  left,  the  operation  might  be  completed  any
other  day  without  inconvenience  to  the  patient.  He  awoke
about  half  an  hour  after  the  operation,  totally  unconscious  that
any  thing  had  been  done  to  him ,  and  feeling  just  as  usual.

“  16th.  He  was  entranced  to  be  dressed  for  the  first  time
to-day,  and  Dr.  Martin,  finding  some  of  the  diseased  mass
left,  carefully  dissected  it  off  the  orbit,  and,  to  give  further
security,  undiluted  nitric  acid  was  freely  applied  all  round ,
and  to  all  this  the  man  was  perfectly  indifferent,  saying,  on
awaking ,  that  there  was  no  pain  in  the  part.

“  At  different  dressings,  nitric  acid  was  freely  sponged
around  the  orbit  with  the  best  effect,  and  always  without  the
knowledge  of  the  patient,  who  has  never  appeared  in  any  wa}r
affected  by  the  operation  and  the  subsequent  proceedings.

“  Remarks  by  Dr.  Martin,  upon  a  case  of  malignant  Tumor
of  the  Eye  extirpated  in  the  mesmeric  trance.

et  The  chief  interest  in  this  case  consists  in  the  state  of
perfect  insensibility  produced  within  a  few  days  by  the  mes¬
meric  processes.  At  the  time  of  operation,  not  the  slightest
trace  of  feeling  could  be  perceived  in  any  part  of  the  body ;  the
breathing  remained  perfectly  regular,  and  his  pulse  only  be¬
came  affected  in  the  course  of  the  operation,  as  it  became
lowered  by  loss  of  blood.  This  rendered  the  removal  of  the
tumor  from  the  face  and  orbit,  which  under  other  circum¬
stances  would  have  been  very  distressing  to  the  patient,  and
a  source  of  some  anxiety  to  the  operator,  a  matter  of  com¬
paratively  little  anxiety  to  either.  This  perfect  coma  not  only
took  place  on  this  occasion,  but  on  others,  when  he  was  mes¬
merised,  which  was  only  done  when  it  was  absolutely  necessary;
on  these,  undiluted  nitric  acid  was  applied  to  the  part  of  the
raw  surface  of  the  face  which  showed  at  one  time  a  disposition
to  slough,  and  not  only  to  the  face,  but  to  the  walls  and  back
part  of  the  orbit,  which  were  in  the  same  condition.  The
latter  operation,  I  should  imagine ,  would  be,  except  in  a  state
of  insensibility ,  almost  beyond  the  limits  of  human  endurance.
This  case  tends  to  prove,  that  in  a  large  proportion  of  cases
requiring  operation,  perfect  anaesthesia  may  be  produced  by
mesmerism,  without  any  material  loss  of  time,  with  no  im¬
pairment  of  the  nervous  energies,  and  with  perfect  safety.


Mesmerism  in  the  East.


]  26


“  Hypertrophied  Scrotum.

“  Ramsoonder  Doss,  aged  48,  a  writer,  has  suffered  for
twenty  years  from  a  scrotal  tumor.  He  was  mesmerised  for
the  first  time  on  the  9th  October,  and,  on  examining  him  at
the  end  of  an  hour,  his  eyes  were  wide  open  and  natural  in
appearance,  and  I  thought  he  was  wide  awake :  but,  on  speak¬
ing  to  him,  he  did  not  answer  or  move  when  I  pricked  him.
Shortly  after  he  roused  himself  suddenly  and  said  that  he
had  been  asleep.

“  10th.  On  looking  at  him  to-day,  his  eyes  were  wide
open,  rotating  naturally,  and  one  would  have  said,  observantly.
But  no  corpse  could  have  been  more  callous  to  pinching,  prick¬
ing,  and  burning,  than  he  was.

“  As  I  wished  to  examine  his  pupils,  which  were  in  a  bad
light,  I  ordered  the  bed  on  which  he  lay  to  be  turned  to  front
the  light,  and  we  found  that  the  iris  was  contractile,  but  less
so  than  natural.  Dr.  Webb  and  Dr.  Martin  being  present,  I
ordered  him  to  be  demesmerised  for  their  satisfaction,  and
the  man  said  that  he  had  just  now  woke;  that  neither  the
ants  nor  mosquitoes  had  bitten  him  when  asleep,  but  he
added,  fmy  head  was  at  the  other  end  of  the  bed  when  I
went  to  sleep,  how  has  this  happened  V  Dr.  Webb  hereupon
said,  ‘  How  I  should  like  to  have  the  pleasure  of  operating
upon  such  a  patient  V  To  which  I  repled,  that  he  was  very
welcome  to  operate  upon  this  man,  and  he  gladly  accepted
the  offer.

“  12th.  Dr.  Webb  performed  the  operation  to-day,  and
it  was  very  severe  and  protracted  from  the  hardness  of  the
mass  and  the  adhesions  the  testes  had  contracted  to  the  usual
scars  made  by  the  actual  cautery,  which  is  the  favourite,  but
useless  and  dangerous  treatment  of  the  native  doctors.  The
testes  were  reserved  for  subsequent  examination,  and  the  en¬
veloping  mass  removed  as  fast  as  possible.  We  had  the  mor¬
tification  to  find  that  both  testes  were  converted  into  balls  of
bone,  and  they  were  therefore  cut  off.  The  man^s  eyes  were
wide  open  all  the  time,  and  a  casual  observer  would  have  said
that  he  was  as  observant  as  any  person  in  the  room,  but  he
might  as  well  have  been  a  log  for  any  other  sign  of  life  that
could  be  detected  in  his  whole  body  during,  and  for  half  an  hour
after,  the  operation,  when  he  awoke  as  fresh  as  when  he  went
to  sleep.

(( Hypertrophy  of  Scrotum  and  Colis.

“Bolonath,  a  cook,  aged  40.  The  colis  is  enormously
enlarged,  but  the  scrotal  tumor  is  of  a  moderate  size.

“He  has  been  an  opium-eater  for  eight  years,  and  now


Dr.  Esdaile's  Report  of  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  127

takes  eight  grains  of  bazaar  opium  daily,  and  I  was  doubtful
whether  this  habit  might  not  interfere  with  the  mesmeric
influence.

“  10th.  Mesmerised  for  the  first  time  to-day ;  slept  na¬
turally,  apparently.

“  12th.  Insensible  to  fire  and  steel.

“  14th.  Operated  upon  to-day — all  the  organs  saved.  He
became  disturbed  in  the  upper  part  of  his  body  towards  the
end  of  the  operation,  and  moaned,  but  very  soon  relapsed
into  perfect  repose ,  and  continued  so  during  the  tying  of  the
vessels ,  and  for  about  half  an  hour  afterwards.  He  awoke
while  I  was  examining  his  eyes,  and  was  quite  ignorant  that
any  thing  had  happened  to  him ,  feeling  just  as  usual ,  he  said.

“ Hypertrophy  of  Scrotum.

“  Ramnath  Jogee,  aged  30,  a  shop-keeper,  mesmerised
on  the  10th,  ready  on  the  16th,  operated  upon  on  the  18th.
Both  testes  were  involved  in  large  hydroceles,  which  were
opened,  and  the  diseased  sacs  leisurely  dissected  off  the  cords
and  testes,  the  colis  was  then  freed,  and  the  whole  mass
struck  off — all  the  organs  kept.  During  all  this  hacking,  the
patient  was  perfectly  quiet  and  motionless,  and  only  began  to
wince  a  little  at  the  tying  of  the  vessels.  As  soon  as  the  bed
was  re-adjusted,  he  awoke  in  a  half  delirious  state,  probably
caused  by  the  sudden  withdrawal  of  blood  from  the  brain ;
the  loss  of  blood  having  been  very  great.  He  soon  became
tranquil,  however,  and  said  that  a  feeling  of  thirst  had  awoke
him.  The  mass  weighed  40  lbs.,  and  is  probably  near  the
limit  of  safety  in  attempting  to  save  the  testes.

“  Hypertrophied  Scrotum.

“  Sheik  Etwaree,  aged  42,  a  cloth-merchant,  and  a  very
powerful  handsome  man.  He  was  mesmerised  on  the  18th,
was  ready  on  the  20th,  and  the  operation  was  performed  on
the  23rd.  No  dead  body  could  have  been  more  composed  from
first  to  last — all  the  organs  saved ;  weight  of  tumor  8  lbs.

“  He  awoke  three  quarters  of  an  hour  after  all  was  over,  as
fresh  and  lively  as  if  he  had  never  been  touched,  and  without
an  ache  in  any  part  of  his  body.  Baboo  Ramchunder  Mettre,
of  the  Hindoo  College,  conversed  a  good  while  with  him,
without  his  having  the  least  suspicion  that  anything  had  been
done  to  him,  and  he  begged  me  to  cure  him  soon,  as  he  had  a
wife  and  family  at  Hooghly,  and  could  not  afford  to  be  long
absent  from  them.  The  Baboo  at  last  told  him  he  had  been
cured  in  his  sleep,  but  the  man  fairly  laughed  in  his  face,
and  the  idea  was  so  absurd  that  he  did  not  even  condescend


128


Mesmerism  in  the  East .


to  make  any  examination  of  its  truth.  But  when  the  Bev.
Mr.  La  Croix,  who  is  a  perfect  master  of  Bengalee,  stepped
forward,  and  assured  him  of  the  fact,  telling  him  that  ‘he
had  great  reason  to  thank  God  for  his  deliverance/  the  man's
expression  changed  from  laughing  incredulity  to  profound
attention,  and  being  at  length  satisfied  by  examination  of
the  truth  of  what  he  heard,  his  eyes  filled  with  tears  of  gra¬
titude,  and  he  thanked  Allah  and  then  me  most  fervently
and  eloquently.  Allah  was  above  all,  and  I  represented  him
upon  earth.  Allah  had  given  him  life  at  first,  but  I  had
given  him  a  second  life,  and  he  prayed  Allah  to  give  me  a
golden  ‘  topee /

“  Sooroop  Moll,  aged  40,  mesmerised  on  the  22nd,  ready
on  the  24th,  operation  performed  on  the  25th.  No  corpse
could  have  been  more  indifferent.  He  awoke  in  about  20
minutes  after  the  operation.  Organs  all  saved — the  mass
weighed  8  lbs.

“  The  reader  will  perceive  that  all  these  men  might  have
been  disposed  of  at  much  earlier  periods,  if  it  had  been
necessary.  But  as  it  was  not,  it  was  prudent  to  take  additional
security.  Beaders  not  practically  acquainted  with  the  appear¬
ance  of  people  in  the  mesmeric  trance,  may  possibly  be  misled
by  the  frequent  recurrence  of  such  expressions  as, — e  death¬
like  repose, — lay  like  a  corpse,  fyc.,3  in  my  Beports.  But  I
beg  them  to  understand,  that  this  relates  merely  to  their
passiveness  under  the  knife,  for  in  every  other  respect,  they
resemble  healthy  sleepers.  The  pulse  is  natural,  the  blood
unchanged,  the  breathing  tranquil,  the  skin  warm,  and  the
countenance  full  and  fresh.  From  all  which  it  is  evident,
that  the  brain,  the  seat  of  volition  and  consciousness,  is  alone
affected,  and  that  the  organic  life  remains  in  full,  or  even
increased,  activity.  A  most  convincing  proof  of  this  is,  that
out  of  100  capital  operations  performed  by  me  in  the  mesmeric
trance,  only  two  patients  died  within  a  month  after  the  opera¬
tion — one  of  cholera  and  one  of  tetanus.  To  those  who  will
refer  to  the  list  given  in  my  last  report,  this  will  appear  very
remarkable,  considering  the  severe  and  dangerous  nature  of
the  operations,  and  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  ascribing  it
to  the  preservative  and  fortifying  power  of  mesmerism,  which,
unlike  all  other  ansesthetic  agents,  does  not  diminish  the
nervous  sensibility  necessary  for  reaction  and  perfect  recovery
from  severe  injuries.

“  Calcutta,  10th  December,  1848."


Dr.  Es dalle’s  Report  of  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  129

“  First  Half-yearly  Report  of  the  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.
Froin  1st  September,  1848,  to  1st  March,  1849.

“  To  H.  M.  Elliot,  Esq.,  James  Hume,  Esq.,  Dr.  Martin,
Rev.  H.  Fisher,  Rev.  Mr.  La  Croix,  Rajah  Kali-
krishna.  Rajah  Sutt  Churn  Ghosal,  Rajah  Pertaub
Ciiunder  Sing,  Baboo  Ramgopal  Ghose,  Baboo  Rama-
persaud  Roy,  Members  of  the  Mesmeric  Hospital  Com¬
mittee.

“  Gentlemen, — In  presenting  you  with  a  Report  of  our
proceedings  during  the  last  six  months,  I  will  not  inflict  upon
you  the  details  of  every  operation  performed.  As  nearly  200
mesmeric  operations  have  already  been  minutely  described  to
the  public,  this  would  be  as  wearisome  to  you  as  irksome  to  me.
I  will  therefore  only  trouble  you  with  a  tabular  statement  of
the  operations  performed,  with  their  results.  If  the  infliction
of  severe  injuries  upon  the  human  body  without  endangering
life  is  a  good  test  of  surgical  practice,  our  results  are  most
satisfactory  in  this  respect,  as  out  of  30  capital  operations  not
a  single  death  has  occurred  in  consequence  of  the  injury  sus¬
tained  by  the  patient.

“  Nothing  can  be  more  gratifying  also  than  the  success  we
have  had  in  preventing  all  pain  to  the  patients  during,  and
often  even  subsequently  to  the  operations ;  and  I  have  still  the
satisfaction  to  report,  that  in  no  instance  have  I  ever  seen  a
disagreeable  local  or  general  effect  produced  by  the  use  of  mes¬
merism  in  surgery.  In  only  one  instance  did  the  patient  be¬
come  conscious  during  the  operation,  and  this  arose  from  the
carelessness  caused  by  continued  success.

“  Since  the  discovery  of  ether  and  chloroform,  we  have  been
told  as  if  by  authority, — ‘  that  mesmerism  is  no  longer  worthy
of  the  serious  attention  of  the  practical  surgeon.’  This  was  all
very  well  when  we  knew  no  better,  but  it  is  now  quite  worn
out  and  used  up ;  only  a  few  imbeciles  who  are  unable  to  keep
pace  with  the  march  of  intellect  now  trouble  themselves  about
it.  Among  the  cases  now  submitted  to  you,  Gentlemen,
will  be  found  numerous  examples  in  which  mesmerism  has
succeeded  in  doing  what  dare  not  and  cannot  be  done  by
chloroform  or  any  other  known  means.

“  Let  me  ask  who  would  venture  to  reduce  a  man  to  insen¬
sibility  by  chloroform,  for  10  days  in  succession,  in  order  to
have  a  stone  broken  down  in  his  bladder,  or  to  have  the  orbit
of  his  eye  dressed  and  sponged  with  nitric  acid  as  often  as  was
desirable  ?  or  who  would  dare  to  remove  scrotal  tumors  weigh¬
ing  50,  60,  70,  80,  90,  lOOlbs.  and  upwards,  under  the  in¬
fluence  of  any  narcotic  drug  whatever  ?  Not  I,  certainly,  and


130


Mesmerism  in  the  East.


I  would  earnestly  dissuade  any  one  from  attempting  it,  or
suffering  it  to  be  done  to  him.  We  all  know  now  that  chloro¬
form  has  a  tendency  to  paralyse  the  heart,  lungs,  and  brain,
and  it  requires  no  doctor's  learning  to  be  convinced  that  such
exhausting  operations  can  only  be  performed  with  a  chance
of  success  ill  cases  where  the  vital  powers  are  intact.  When
these  tumors  weigh  above  401bs.,  the  loss  of  blood  is  so  pro¬
fuse,  that  the  pulse  is  usually  extinguished  on  the  spot,  and
it  takes  a  considerable  time  to  revive  it ;  the  brain  is  so  ex¬
hausted  by  the  sudden  withdrawal  of  blood  that  the  patient
awakes  in  a  half  delirious  state,  and  the  stomach  sympathising,
vomiting  also  takes  place,  and  hours  elapse  before  the  equi¬
librium  of  the  sanguineous  and  nervous  systems  is  re-estab¬
lished.  In  the  case  of  the  last  tumor  of  401bs.,  I  ordered  the
solid  clots  to  be  gathered,  and  they  weighed  2 Jibs. ;  and,
taking  into  account  the  serum  that  covered  the  floor,  with
the  blood  in  the  mass,  I  presume  that  about  51bs  of  blood
were  discharged  in  a  few  minutes — half  of  the  blood  in  the
whole  body,  according  to  Harvey ;  and  in  cases  of  double  this
size  and  upwards,  the  loss  of  blood  must  be  much  greater.*

“  It  must  be  evident  to  every  one  of  common  sense,  that
persons  fainting  from  this  immense  hemorrhage  (as  they
usually  do)  would  probably  never  revive  if  the  vitality  of  the
heart  and  brain  was  lowered  by  any  influence  whatever.  The
late  fatal  case  at  the  Medical  College  here  illustrates  this ;
although  there  was  only  moderate  bleeding,  we  are  told,  the
patient  fainted  and  never  recovered,  and  Mr.  O'Shaughnessy,
in  reporting  the  case,  very  truly  said  that  all  narcotic  drugs
were  open  to  the  objection  that  they  prevented  the  re-action
necessary  for  recovery  from  injuries  attended  with  great  ex¬
haustion  of  the  system.  Mesmerism  is  the  only  known  anaes¬
thetic  agent  to  which  this  does  not  apply,  for  it  not  only  pro¬
tects  but  exalts  organic  life ;  the  best  proof  of  which  is,  that
not  one  of  these  monstrous  tumor  cases  has  been  lost  in  con-

*  The  readers  of  The  Zoist  will  be  amused  with  the  following  extract  from
the  Lancet  of  the  19th  of  last  May. — John  Elliotson.  “  Ether  and  chloroform
never  had  a  very  extensive  hold  upon  London  midwifery  practice.  .  .  .  Within  the
past  month,  three  stunning  blows  have  been  dealt  out  against  the  practice  of  an¬
aesthesia  in  natural  labour — namely  Dr.  Collin’s  historical  memoir  of  Dr.  Joseph
Clarke  ;  the  re-publication  of  Dr.  Montgomery’s  address  to  the  Dublin  Obstetric
Society ;  and,  lastly,  Mr.  Gream’s  forcible  pamphlet.  The  latter  contains  the
details  of  a  large  number  of  cases  of  death  after  operations  and  after  delivery,
where  anaesthetic  agents  were  employed,  and  an  inquiry  into  the  results  to  mother
and  child  in  cases  where  serious  symptoms  followed  their  exhibition.  Mr.  Gream
has  been  blamed  in  no  measured  terms,  for  endeavouring  to  find  out,  by  a  rigor¬
ous  enquiry,  the  bad  effects  of  chloroform,  but  really  its  beauties  had  been  so
highly  painted  by  its  thick-and-thin  friends,  that  some  such  warning  voice  from
behind  the  scene  was  required,  and  will  be  received  with  thanks  by  the  profession.”


Dr.  Esdaile’s  Report  of  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  131

sequence  of  the  operation  :  and  yet  we  are  told, — f  that  mes¬
merism  no  longer  deserves  the  serious  attention  of  the  operating
surgeon  !’  The  existence  of  a  mesmeric  hospital  supported
by  public  subscription  here  is  the  best  rebuke  to  such  rash
assertions;  and  I  hope  that  this  standing  protest  against  pro¬
fessional  prejudice  will  be  persevered  in  till  this  important
means  of  alleviating  human  suffering  is  admitted  into  the
public  hospitals  of  Calcutta.  The  Government  and  the  public
have  a  right  to  expect  this  after  the  interest  they  have  shewn
in  the  subject,  and  the  expense  they  have  been  at  in  prose¬
cuting  the  experiment  to  a  successful  issue.  So  far  from  de¬
siring  to  perpetuate  a  separate  and  rival  hospital  to  those
already  in  existence,  I  will  gladly  make  over  my  mesmeric
corps  to  any  general  hospital  in  Calcutta  that  will  condescend
to  avail  itself  of  their  services.  But  till  this  important  branch
of  the  healing  art  is  welcomed  and  cultivated  in  our  public
hospitals,  I  shall  endeavour  to  preserve  it  in  vigour  for  future
and  more  liberal  times ;  and  I  trust  that  you,  Gentlemen,
and  the  public  will  think  a  little  trouble  and  money  well  spent
in  providing  an  asylum  for  one  of  God’s  best  gifts  to  man,
and  which  appears  to  be  particularly  valuable  to  the  natives  of
this  country.

“  I  hope  that  the  native  gentlemen  of  the  Committee  will
make  their  countrymen  understand,  that,  in  subscribing  to
the  Hospital,  they  in  no  way  benefit  me,  for  I  have  never  got
a  farthing  for  my  labours  from  first  to  last.*

"It  is  also  very  desirable  that  the  people  should  be  dis¬
abused  of  the  absurd  notion  that  mesmerism  is  most  efficient
in  the  treatment  of  scrotal  tumors.  The  real  fact  being,  that
the  generality  of  surgical  cases  requiring  operations  are  more
easily  managed  from  the  patients’  nervous  system  being  re¬
duced  by  long  previous  suffering.

"We  have  not  been  able  to  prosecute  the  medical  branch
of  the  subject  to  the  desired  extent  on  account  of  the  numerous
surgical  cases  requiring  attention,  and  our  want  of  accommoda¬
tion.  The  proper  sphere  for  medical  mesmerism  is  in  large
general  hospitals,  where  the  patients  from  the  severity  of  their
diseases  are  compelled  to  remain  for  a  length  of  time,  and  are
under  the  command  of  their  medical  attendants.  As  our
patients  come  to  the  Hospital  to  be  mesmerised,  we  have  no
control  over  them:  many  disappear  before  any  effect  can  be
produced,  others  cease  to  come  on  finding  relief,  and  the  ter¬
mination  cannot  be  ascertained.

*  We  recommend  this  fact  to  the  notice  of  Mr.  G.  Cornewall  Lewis,  M.P.,
&c.  See  our  notice  of  this  well-informed,  just,  and  gentleman-like  man  farther
on  in  the  present  number. — Zoist .


132


Mesmerism  in  the  East.


“  We  have  lately  seen  the  stimulating  and  sedative  proper¬
ties  of  ether  and  chloroform  applied  with  success  in  the  cure  of
medical  diseases,  and  I  cannot  understand  why  the  same  vir¬
tues  possessed  by  mesmerism,  with  superadded  advantages,
should  not  be  enlisted  by  the  physician  as  auxiliaries  to  his
other  means  of  combating  disease.  The  refreshment  from
sleep,  often  not  otherwise  to  be  procured,  and  the  sedative
influence  of  the  trance ,  would  alone  constitute  mesmerism  a
valuable  medical  agent.  But  it  is  from  its  power  of  stimu¬
lating  the  nervous  system  that  the  patient  often  derives  the
greatest  benefit  when  all  other  remedies  have  failed ;  and,  to
produce  this  effect,  neither  sleep  nor  coma  is  usually  necessary.
The  following  cases  will  illustrate  this  double  action  of  mes¬
merism.

“  Gunga,  a  Hindoo  lad,  aged  18,  came  to  the  Hospital  with
the  wrist  of  his  right  arm  much  enlarged  and  excessively  ten¬
der  :  he  cannot  bear  the  least  pressure  on  it.  The  entire
hand,  back  and  palm,  is  so  swollen  (oedematous)  that  the
bones  cannot  be  felt,  and  there  is  not  the  slightest  power  of
motion  in  the  wrist  and  joints  of  the  fingers.  He  has  been
leeched ,  blistered,  fyc.,  during  the  last  six  weeks  at  the  Native
Hospital,  and  without  the  least  benefit.

“The  part  was  ordered  to  be  mesmerised  for  an  hour  daily.
After  3  or  4  days,  the  swelling  of  the  hand  began  to  decrease,
the  wrist  became  daily  less  tender,  and  at  the  end  of  six  weeks
he  was  dismissed  cured,  with  his  hand  as  fine  as  the  other,  and
the  motions  of  all  the  joints  quite  free — no  other  means  having
been  used.  Many  cases  of  low  disorganizing  inflammation  of
joints  have  been  cured  by  the  stimulating  power  of  mesmerism ;
and  acute  inflammation  even  extinguished  by  the  sedative  in¬
fluence  of  the  trance.

“  Shaik  Dowlut,  aged  21,  came  to  the  Hospital  on  the  10th
October  with  a  rheumatic  affection  of  the  scalp  of  two  months’
standing.  The  contour  of  the  head  is  very  irregular  from
numerous  bumps  all  over  it  which  are  very  painful.  The
swellings  soon  began  to  diminish  and  to  shift  their  place  fre¬
quently,  and  on  the  21  st  he  was  dismissed  cured ,  with  his  head
smooth  and  symmetrical.

“  The  following  is  a  striking  case  of  mesmeric  susceptibility
in  the  European  constitution,  and  the  curative  effects  upon
the  system  are  the  more  valuable  from  being  accidentally  and
unexpectedly  evolved  during  the  treatment  of  a  surgical  case.

“Capt.  - ,  a  seaman,  a  strongly  built  muscular  man,

apparently  in  good  health,  was  sent  to  my  hospital  by  Dr.
Webb  to  get  mesmerised,  if  possible.  ‘  What  can  you  want
to  be  mesmerised  for  V  I  said,  ‘  you  are  more  likely  to  rues-


Dr.  Esdaile’s  Report  of  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  133

merise  my  people,  to  look  at  you/  He  then  explained  that
he  suffered  from  a  fistula,  which  required  to  be  laid  open,  but
the  orifice  was  so  tender  that  an  attempt  to  probe  it  almost
brought  on  convulsions,  and  the  approach  of  a  probe  horrified
him ;  he  therefore  hoped  to  have  this  irritability  subdued  by
mesmerism.  I  told  him  that  he  looked  a  very  unpromising
subject,  but  that  I  would  try  if  he  possessed  any  natural  sus¬
ceptibility  to  the  influence.  I  seated  him  in  a  chair,  and,  in
a  minute  or  two,  his  eyelids  began  to  quiver  and  then  closed  :
after  three  or  four  minutes,  I  called  him  by  name  without  his
paying  any  attention,  and  at  the  end  of  five  minutes,  I
plucked  some  hair  out  of  his  beard  and  then  stuck  a  pin  into
the  thick  of  his  thumb  without  disturbing  him  in  the  least.
Being  alone,  I  now  left  the  room  to  get  a  probe,  and,  just  as
I  returned,  he  awoke  with  a  sudden  start,  throwing  his  hands
up  at  the  same  time,  when  his  eye  fell  upon  the  pin  sticking
in  his  thumb,  and  he  was  surprized  not  a  little.  He  had  not
heard  of  or  felt  anything  in  his  sleep.  As  this  promised  to  be
a  very  easy  case  to  subdue,  I  determined  to  conclude  it  myself.

On  the  2nd  day,  Dr.  Webb  being  present,  Capt. - again

fell  into  the  mesmeric  state  in  a  minute  or  two,  but  soon  be¬
came  very  much  disturbed  in  his  sleep.  His  scalp  moved
about  in  an  extraordinary  manner,  spasms  passed  over  his
countenance  which  soon  extended  to  his  whole  body,  and  he
bounced  up  into  the  sitting  posture  (he  was  lying  on  a  couch),
with  his  eyes  staring  wide  open,  but  evidently  sightless.
After  a  moment’s  reflection  apparently,  he  pounced  upon  his
left  wrist  with  his  right  hand,  and  appeared  to  feel  his  pulse
with  intense  interest  for  some  time.  I  continued  to  mesmerise
him,  and  he  soon  fell  back  again  as  if  shot  through  the  head.
When  he  awoke  in  about  an  hour  after,  he  had  no  recollection
of  having  been  in  any  way  disturbed  during  his  sleep.

<e  { What /  said  I,  ‘  do  you  not  remember  getting  up  and
feeling  your  pulse  V  Hereupon  he  laughed  and  answered,
‘  That  is  very  curious,  for  I  am  confident  that  if  any  one  was
watching  me  when  my  sleep  was  disturbed,  he  would  see  me
feeling  my  pulse.  You  must  know  that  I  have  a  very  strange
pulse,  it  sometimes  mounts  50  beats  in  the  minute  without
any  apparent  cause,  and  I  have  fallen  into  the  habit  of  watch¬
ing  it/  On  board  ship,  when  any  one  asks  (  Where  is

• - V  the  answer  is,  ‘  Oh  !  you  will  find  him  counting  his

pulse/

“  On  the  3rd  day  he  yielded  as  readily  as  on  previous  occa¬
sions,  and  as  I  diffused  my  influence  more  generally  and  gradu¬
ally,  there  were  no  spasms  excited.

“  On  awaking  to-day,  he  said  that  he  felt  his  nerves  so  much


134


Mesmerism  in  the  East.


strouger  that  lie  could  now  stand  a  probing,  and  it  was  ac¬
cordingly  done  without  more  than  the  usual  pain.  Although
the  mesmeric  sleep  was  daily  induced  easily,  insensibility  of
the  surface  was  slower  of  being  developed  than  I  expected,

and  as  Capt. -  had  quite  recovered  his  nerve,  the  little

operation  was  performed  in  his  waking  state,  on  the  9th  day.
Besides  the  general  improvement  of  his  nervous  system,  he
observed  that  his  natural  sleep  was  longer  and  sounder,  even
when  he  slept  during  the  day.  He  never  missed  waking  at
midnight  and  day-break, — his  watch  times ;  but,  since  he  has
been  mesmerised,  he  has  never  awoke  at  either  time,  and  is
only  disturbed  in  the  morning  by  the  return  of  his  children
from  their  drive.

“  On  the  1st  of  February,  an  old  woman  brought  her  son
to  my  hospital  on  account  of  his  being  dumb.  The  man  him¬
self  intimated  by  pantomime  that  he  possessed  all  his  faculties
but  the  power  of  speech  :  he  could  not  utter  a  sound  of  any
kind  even.  He  made  us  understand  also,  that,  after  having
eaten  something,  he  had  become  insensible,  and,  on  coming
to  his  senses,  he  found  that  he  could  not  speak ;  and  he  made
signs  that  his  head  was  constantly  turning.  On  being  asked
if  he  had  been  poisoned,  he  nodded  assent.  In  the  hope  of
stimulating  his  brain,  I  ordered  him  to  be  mesmerised  for  an
hour  daily.

“  2nd.  When  I  asked  him  to-day  if  he  could  speak,  he,  to
my  great  surprise,  answered ,  ‘  a  little and  I  found  that  he
could  utter  single  words,  but  with  much  difficulty.

“3rd.  He  speaks  pretty  well  to-day.

“  4th.  He  speaks  with  fluency  and  precision  to-day,  and  his
voice  is  only  a  little  weak  and  hoarse.  Ever  since  he  came  to
his  senses,  his  head  has  been  constantly  turning  and  he  scarcely
ever  slept :  whenever  he  went  to  sleep,  he  used  to  start  up
immediately  in  a  state  of  great  alarm.  After  the  2nd  day’s
mesmerising ,  the  turning  of  his  head  left  him,  and  since  then
he  has  slept  long  and  comfortably .

“  On  recovering  his  speech,  he  told  me  a  strange  tale  of
poisoning  and  robbery,  which  I  sent  him  to  relate  to  the  pro¬
per  authorities.*

“Now  if  the  derangement  of  the  nervous  system  in  the
last  two  cases  had  extended  to  the  intellectual  organs,  is  it
not  reasonable  to  suppose  that  they  also  would  probably  have
responded  to  the  mesmeric  stimulus,  and  their  functions  been


*  See  in  No.  III.,  p.  340,  the  cure  of  equal  dumbness  and  of  perfect  deafness,
effected  by  myself  through  mesmerism,  in  a  lad  who  had  been  terrified  into  a  fit,
and  had  been  treated  fruitlessly  in  King’s  College  Hospital. — John  Elliotson.


Dr.  Esclaile’s  Deport  of  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  135

restored  in  consequence  of  the  improved  condition  of  the
brain  ?  If  we  possessed  the  power  of  rousing  the  weakened
brain,  of  soothing  the  irritable  nerves,  and  of  giving  sleep
to  the  sleepless,  without  any  of  the  evil  consequences  attend¬
ing  the  use  of  common  stimulants  and  narcotics,  is  it  not  evi¬
dent  that  we  should  be  in  possession  of  a  sovereign  remedy
for  many  cases  of  insanity  arising  from  debility  or  functional
derangements  of  the  organs  of  intellect  ?  Nature  has  mer¬
cifully  supplied  us  with  such  an  agent  in  mesmerism ,  and  I  have
long  been  desirous  to  try  its  efficacy  in  the  treatment  of  mad¬
ness.  By  the  exemplary  liberality  of  Dr.  Strong,  and  your
kindness  in  sanctioning  the  requisite  outlay,  I  shall  soon  have
an  opportunity  of  experimenting  on  a  large  scale  in  the  Lu¬
natic  Asylum  here,  and,  even  though  the  results  may  disap¬
point  the  physician,  I  have  little  doubt  that  they  will  be  very
interesting  to  the  physiologist  and  psychologist.

“  I  might  now  relate  other  cases  of  neuralgic  and  rheumatic
affections  cured  by  mesmeric  treatment  exclusively ;  but  per¬
haps  enough  has  now  been  said  to  vindicate  our  belief  in  the
curative  powers  of  mesmerism,  and  to  reconcile  people  to
being  sometimes  cured  by  the  unaided  hand  of  nature,
although  they  do  not  exactly  know  how  she  acts.  If  we  were
equally  exacting  with  regard  to  physic ,  there  would  be  won¬
derfully  little  of  it  consumed.

“  I  remain,  Gentlemen,

Your  obedient  Servant,

“James  Esdaile,  M.D.,  Presy.  Surgn.

“  Calcutta,  1.9^  March,  1849.


Mesmeric  operations  performed  during  last  G  months .  31

Minor  Miscellaneous  operations  .  278

Dispensary  patients  prescribed  for .  455


Average  Monthly  Expenditure .  Rs.  285.”


Mesmerism  is  of  course  not  employed  in  the  treatment  of
insanity  in  this  country,  and  Dr.  Conolly  has  lately  thought
it  necessary  for  his  character  to  advertise  in  the  newspaper
that  he  rejects  it  altogether  (No.  XXIV.,  p.  369).  But  I
found  the  following  passage  in  a  late  number  of  the  Register
of  Medical  Science,  published  at  Calcutta, —

“  We  have  been  gratified  by  the  receipt  of  some  f  memo¬
randa  of  mesmeric  trials*  made  by  Dr.  Kean,  at  Moorshe-
dabad,  upon  the  patients  in  the  insane  hospital  there.


i


136


Mesmerism  in  the  East.


“  Dr.  Kean  informs  us,  that  he  was  induced  in  the  year
1845,  when  the  wonders  of  mesmerism  were  much  talked  of,
to  experiment  for  himself,  as  the  shortest  and  most  satis¬
factory  way  of  coming  to  a  conclusion  regarding  the  truth  of
mesmerism,  but  never  having  seen  the  manipulations,  he  was
at  a  loss  how  to  proceed.  A  blind  person,  however,  having
called  upon  him  for  advice,  he  thought  it  a  good  opportunity
to  make  a  trial,  so,  desiring  the  patient  to  be  seated,  passes
were  made  before  his  face  without  his  knowledge,  and  some¬
what  to  Dr.  Keanes  surprize,  he  succeeded  in  inducing  sleep
in  about  half  an  hour.  Dr.  Kean,  being  now  satisfied  that
he  possessed  the  power  of  inducing  the  mesmeric  sleep,  pro¬
ceeded  to  use  it  as  a  remedial  agent  in  cases  of  epilepsy  and
insanity.

“  The  notes  of  the  cases  we  have  been  favoured  with  a
sight  of,  are  mere  jottings  never  intended  for  publication,  and
therefore  would  not  interest  our  readers.  But  Dr.  Kean's
summary  of  his  experience  will,  we  think,  most  certainly  do
so, — it  ought  to  be  premised  that  the  hospital  attendants  and
jail  burkundauzes,*  strong  up-country  men,  are  the  mes-
merisers.

“  Dr.  Kean  informs  us,  that  since  the  employment  of  mes¬
merism  almost  all  difficulty  in  the  management  of  the  patients
has  vanished.  Formerly,  there  were  always  a  number  of
noisy  and  violent  patients,  and  a  good  many  who  slept  neither
day  or  night,  for  weeks  together,  in  spite  of  every  remedial
measure.  Now  the  whole  are  as  orderly  and  quiet  as  an  equal
number  of  persons  in  any  other  house ,  and  all  enjoy  natural
rest.  So  great  is  the  change,  that  Dr.  Kean  says,  he  could
with  additional  burkundauzes,  as  easily  manage  500  as  50
patients  !

“  This  statement  is  so  extraordinary  and  important,  that
we  earnestly  hope  Dr.  Kean  will  be  pleased  to  afford  us  the
necessary  data  in  support  of  it,  as  the  skeleton  notes  sent  to
us  are  too  scanty  and  disjointed  to  be  satisfactory  to  any  but
the  writer.

“  In  the  future  reports  with  which  we  hope  to  be  favoured
by  Dr.  Kean,  we  would  beg  him  to  be  particular  in  giving
us  the  duration  of  the  disease,  the  frequency  of  the  paroxysms,
if  there  are  intermissions ;  if  not,  the  character  of  the  mania,
and  the  supposed  exciting  cause.  The  mesmeric  symptoms,
bodily  or  mental,  if  present,  should  also  be  carefully  noted
in  each  case.

“  Spontaneous  somnambulism  has  hitherto  been  of  rare


*  Jail  Guards.


Dr.  Esdaile’s  Report  of  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  137

occurrence  in  this  country,  we  believe,  and  we  should  like  to
know  if  it  has  happened  in  Dr.  Kean's  practice.

“  When  it  does  exist,  we  should  expect  it  to  be  very  effi¬
cacious  in  the  treatment  of  insanity,  not  only  from  the  extra¬
ordinary  control  that  the  mesmeriser  is  said  to  have  over  the
patient  in  the  somnabulistic  state,  but  also  from  the  alleged
possibility  of  extending  the  directing  influence  into  the  natural
state,  from  impressions  received  in  the  state  of  somnambulism.
This,  according  to  the  best  mesmeric  authorities,  is  not  an
unfrequent  phenomenon.  If  the  somnambulist  is  requested
by  his  mesmeriser  to  act  in  a  certain  manner  when  he  awakes,
and  the  promise  to  obey  is  given,  it  is  usually  most  faithfully
performed,  the  person  feeling  an  instinctive  craving,  at  which
he  often  himself  wonders,  to  perform  certain  actions,  and
adopt  habits  altogether  foreign  to  his  natural  disposition  and
tastes.  Supposing  this  to  be  attainable,  it  is  clear  that  it
would  give  us  an  admirable  means  of  modifying  and  insensibly
improving  the  bodily  and  mental  health  of  the  insane,  though
the  mere  sedative  influence  will  often  be  highly  curative,  no
doubt.  If  Dr.  Kean  has  not  as  yet  any  experience  in  som¬
nambulism,  we  hope,  that  with  his  opportunities,  he  will  at¬
tempt  to  enlighten  us  upon  so  interesting  a  subject,  and  will
not  be  deterred  by  any  extent  of  adverse  theorising  or  con¬
fident  dogmatism,  from  satisfying  himself  experimentally  of
the  truth  of  the  matter.

“  The  honor  and  utility  of  demolishing  a  fallacy  is  often
as  great  as  that  of  discovering  a  new  truth,  and  we  shall  be
equally  grateful  to  him  who  destroys  or  establishes  the  won¬
ders  of  mesmeric  somnambulism  to  our  satisfaction."

In  a  letter,  dated  April  6th,  Dr.  Esdaile  thus  writes  to
me : —

“  For  a  month  past  I  have  been  at  work  in  the  Lunatic
Asylum  here,  and  our  results  have  been  very  encouraging.
But  a  length  of  time  must  elapse  before  we  can  speak  with
confidence  on  the  subject."

It  is  the  solemn  duty  of  those  who  treat  the  insane  to  give
those  poor  creatures  a  full  trial  of  mesmerism.  For  no  part
of  medicine  is  more  defective  than  the  treatment  of  insanity.

Instances  of  the  very  wonderful  benefit  of  mesmerism
in  insanity  and  hypochondriasis,  will  be  found  in  The  Zoist,
No.  II.,  pp.  162,  180,  186;  V.,  p.  133;  VI.,  p.  267;  X.,
p.  193;  XIV.,  p.  238;  XVIII.,  p.  142;  XIX.,  pp.  234,
300;  XX.,  p.  364;  XXI.,  p.  40;  XXIV.,  pp.  321,  390;
XXV.,  p.  9.


(  138  )


III.  MESMERISM  IN  THE  WEST.

COMMUNICATED  BY  DR.  ELLIOTSON.

After  several  times  showing  itself,  mesmerism  appears  nowr
to  have  fairly  come  up,  and  witli  the  certainty  of  flourishing
perennially,  in  the  western  hemisphere.  The  extraordinary,
mysterious,  inexplicable  epidemic,  whose  devastating  influence
upon  the  Caucasian  variety  of  the  medical  profession,  through¬
out  the  earth,  has  been  so  unsparing,  and  will  constitute  one
of  the  most  remarkable  incidents  in  medical  and  general  his¬
tory, — the  epidemic  infatuation  of  weak  incredulity  and  of
ignorant  contempt,  in  regard  to  the  plain  evidence  of  the  ex¬
ternal  senses  and  to  common  sense,  in  all  mesmeric  facts,
must  soon  expend  itself ;  and,  on  recovering  their  senses,  the
profession  will  look  back  upon  their  wild  conduct  with  wonder.
I  have  received  some  American  newspapers  with  accounts  of
the  mesmeric  success  of  Mr.  Keely,  who  is  not  a  medical
man.  But  the  well-known  Dr.  Caldwell  and  other  physicians
have  manfully  certified  to  the  good  he  has  done,  forming
themselves,  in  conjunction  with  clergymen  and  various  lay¬
men,  into  committees  to  investigate  his  cures.

“  From  the  Louisville  Journal.

“Mr.  Keely.

“This  most  distinguished  and  successful  of  all  the  American
practitioners  of  mesmerism  is  now  in  the  city.  He  has  made  a
triumphant  tour  through  several  of  the  principal  interior  towns  of
Kentucky,  and  is  about  to  start  for  St.  Louis  with  the  intention  of
giving  a  course  of  twenty  lectures,  with  experiments,  in  that  city.

“  Wherever  Mr.  Keely  has  been,  his  experiments,  especially  in
the  curing  of  diseases,  have  been  thoroughly  scrutinized,  and  in
every  instance  a  highly  favourable  report  on  them  has  been  made  by
the  first  citizens  of  the  community.  The  details  of  the  report  made
in  this  city,  and  the  names  of  the  professional  and  other  gentlemen
attached  to  it,  are  well  remembered.  The  report  in  Frankfort  is  signed
by  G.  A.  Robertson,  Rev.  J.  S.  Braddock,  W.  T.  Hurndon,  Esq.,
Rev.  B.  Miles,  Mr.  Craig,  keeper  of  the  penitentiary,  T.  D.  Tilford,
Esq.,  J.  M.  Mills,  M.D.,  and  several  others.  The  report  in  Ver¬
sailles  is  signed  by  Medley  Sheldon,  Esq.,  Hugh  Turner,  Esq.,
Herman  Bowman,  Esq.,  and  more  than  twenty  others.  The  report
in  Shelbyville  is  signed  by  Dr.  Bonney,  Dr.  T.  V.  Bush,  Dr.  W.  A.
Bush,  Mr.  Rice,  Mr.  Middleton,  editor  of  the  News,  and  others.
The  report  at  Lexington  is  signed  by  Rev.  Mr.  Kavanaugh,  Rev.
Mr.  Farnsworth,  president  of  the  Memphis  University,  Rev.  S.  S.
Church,  II.  C.  Pindell,  Esq.,  John  Lutz,  Esq.,  and  others  of  equally
high  character.  The  report  at  New  Albany,  made  several  months
ago,  and  signed  by  a  large  number  of  the  leading  citizens  of  the
town,  gave  detailed  accounts  of  the  most  surprising  cures,  and  the


I


Numerous  Cures  of  various  Diseases  by  Mr.  Keehy.  139

same  gentlemen  have,  within  the  last  two  or  three  days,  given  their
testimony  to  Mr.  Keeley  that  the  cures  wrought  by  him  have  con¬
tinued  up  to  the  present  time.

“  In  the  September  number  of  the  American  Phrenological
Journal ,  we  find  a  well-written  communication  from  Dr.  Caldwell,
giving  a  truthful  and  graphic  description  of  Mr.  Keely’s  achieve¬
ments  here.  The  doctor*  after  a  brief  account  of  the  efforts  of
several  other  lecturers  on  mesmerism  in  this  city,  says  : —

“  ‘  In  this  calm  and  moderate,  but  not  unpromising  state,  did
matters  continue  until  the  arrival  in  Louisville  of  I.  I.  Keely,  Esq.,
in  the  winter  of  1847-8,  when  everything  connected  with  mesmerism
was  changed.  And  the  change  was  sudden  and  great,  beyond  any¬
thing  of  the  sort  I  had  ever  witnessed.  Better  still;  it  was  perma¬
nent.  I  should  rather  say,  that  its  course  was  necessarily  forward.
Like  all  other  gushes  of  truth  and  nature,  it  could  never  retrograde
— because  it  was  itself  truth  and  nature,  and  had  therefore  the  firm¬
ness  and  endurance  of  the  4  house  not  made  without  hands.’  ’

“But  the  following  report  of  a  committee  of  Mr.  Keely’s  private
class,  the  correctness  of  which  I  cheerfully  avouch,  is  a  document
much  more  creditable  to  him  and  his  performances,  than  all  I  have
said,  or  can  say  in  their  behalf.  With  the  addition  of  that,  there¬
fore,  I  conclude  my  narrative.

“  Ch.  Caldwell.

“  In  offering  the  following  testimonial  to  the  success  of  Mr.
Keely,  in  his  late  teaching  and  public  demonstrations  of  the  power
of  animal  magnetism  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  both  of  its  many  singular
phenomena,  and  especially  of  its  efficacy  as  a  curative  agent,  it  is
not  the  wish  or  the  intention  of  the  members  of  Mr.  Keely’s  class
to  engage  in  any  discussion  as  to  the  agent  itself,  or  the  ( modus
operandi  ’  through  which  its  startling  and  extraordinary  results  are
developed.  Their  business  is  with  those  results  alone  as  facts,  and
they  feel  it  their  duty  to  state  distinctly  the  grounds  on  which  they
are  disposed  to  fix  a  high  estimate  upon  the  exertions  of  Mr.  Keely,
and  to  do  him  full  justice  before  the  world.

“There  is  not  originality  in  Mr.  Keely’s  manner  of  inducing  the
magnetic  state,  though  it  was  novel  to  most  of  us  in  this  city,  nor
does  he  make  such  a  claim;  on  the  contrary,  he  expressly  disavows
it.  Nor  again  does  he  advance  or  advocate  any  especial  theory  as
to  the  source  or  mode  of  action  of  animal  magnetism.  This  in  his
remarks  he  judiciously  avoids,  simply  pointing  out  occasionally  errors
of  theory  in  others,  and  conclusively  demonstrating  those  errors  by
the  plainest  and  fairest  experiments  in  proof  of  his  position.

“Mr.  Keely’s  great  merit  appears  to  us  to  lie  in  the  correct
judgment  that  has  guided  him  in  the  application  of  animal  magnetism
as  a  remedial  agent.  Of  certain  singular  and  anomalous  cases  of
the  cure  of  long-standing  disease  by  the  sudden  shock  of  some  violent
mental  emotion,  familiar  as  facts  to  the  well  read  physician,  but
whose  rationale  has  never  been  understood  so  as  to  lead  to  any  im¬
portant  practical  good,  Mr.  K.,  though  not  a  medical  man,  has,
VOL.  VII.  M


140


Mesmerism  in  the  West.


we  think,  given  a  correct  explanation.  Guided  by  a  fair  deduction
from  this,  he  has,  we  think,  with  a  peculiar  felicity  and  success,
applied  the  principle  on  which  he  conceived  those  results  to  depend
to  the  remedial  application  of  this  science.  The  strong  and  unques¬
tionable  evidences  of  his  success  in  other  places,  brought  by  Mr.  K.
to  this  city,  together  with  the  number  of  cases  of  disease  to  which
he  has,  under  the  observation  of  his  class,  with  greater  or  less  suc¬
cess,  applied  his  mode  of  treatment,  induce  us  to  express  our  firm
conviction  that  as  a  system,  to  render  the  benefits  of  animal  mag¬
netism  easily  and  generally  available  in  the  relief  of  disease  and
suffering,  that  adopted  and  taught  by  Mr.  Keely  is  the  best  that  has
yet  been  offered  to  the  public.  The  proportion  of  individuals  affected
by  the  magnetic  influence  is  much  greater  than  by  other  modes  of
induction,  and,  with  very  few  exceptions,  all  brought  under  its
agency,  who  are  invalids,  are  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  benefitted,
besides  a  number,  to  all  appearances,  entirely  relieved  from  suffering
and  disease.

“Before  closing  these  brief  remarks  we  may  be  permitted  to
make  one  more  statement,  which  in  justice  is  due  to  Mr.  Keely.
The  character  of  the  practical  magnetizer  ought  to  be  unimpeach¬
able  on  the  score  of  general  morals  and  stern  integrity.  Mr.  K.
brings  with  him,  from  that  part  of  the  country  where  he  has  resided,
the  strongest  testimonials  on  this  especial  point,  and  we  are  bound
to  say  that  his  entire  deportment  during  his  visit  to  Louisville  has
been  such  as  fully  to  confirm  them.  In  establishing  the  practical
benefits  of  magnetism,  he  has  also  manifested  correct  feeling  to  the
afflicted  who  were  in  indigent  circumstances,  a  number  of  such
having  received  the  full  benefit  of  his  services  with  the  privilege  of
constant  attendance  at  his  asylum  free  from  all  charge.

“  Subjoined  are  given  a  number  of  cases  operated  on  and  relieved
by  Mr.  Keely,  during  his  visit  here,  with  the  signatures  of  the  in¬
dividuals  themselves.  Most  of  them  have  been  known  by  personal
observation  to  a  majority  of  the  class ;  and  every  means  have  been
adopted  by  the  committee,  appointed  by  the  class  for  the  purpose,
to  ensure  accuracy  in  the  statements  thus  offered  to  the  public.

“Sam.  D.  Baldwin,  A.M.

“Preacher,  Wesley  Chapel  Station,  M.E.  Ch.  South.

“T.  L.  Caldwell,  M.D.

“Wm.  J.  C.  Baum,  M.D.

“C.  Pirtle,  M.D.

“  J.  W.  Bright,  M.D.

“Geo.  D.  Prentice.

“Case  No.  1.  I  have  been  for  nine  weeks  so  much  affected
with  rheumatic  pains  that  I  could  not  for  the  whole  time  raise  my
right  hand  to  my  head,  and,  for  part  of  the  time,  in  the  same  con¬
dition  with  both  hands.  My  joints  were  all  stiff,  and  it  was  with
great  pain  and  much  actual  misery  that  I  could  walk  at  all.  On
yesterday  evening  chance  threw  me  in  the  company  of  Mr.  Keely,
and  I  consented  that  he  might  make  an  effort  to  relieve  me.  He


Numerous  Cures  of  various  Diseases  by  Mr.  Keely.  141

did  so,  and  here  is  the  result.  In  twenty  minutes  I  could,  without
pain,  raise  and  use  my  arms ;  in  thirty  minutes  I  was  freed  from
all  pain,  having  the  perfect  control  and  use  of  both  arms  and  hands
as  well  as  I  ever  had;  and  in  about  the  same  length  of  time  I  found
the  pain  and  accompanying  stiffness  of  my  knees  and  ankles  wholly
gone,  and  could  rise  from  my  seat  and  walk  with  the  activity  of  my
younger  days.  It  is  now  10  o’clock,  a.  m.,  January  1,  1848,  and
there  is  no  return  of  pain — none  of  stiffness.  I  am  entirely  free
from  either.

“  For  a  great  part  of  the  time  I  have  been  unable  to  put  on  or
pull  off  my  cloak  or  to  help  myself  at  my  meals.  These  difficulties
are  gone,  certainly  gone,  but  why  or  wherefore  I  cannot  tell.  I  am
only  certain  of  being  free  from  them,  and  that  they  departed  under
the  touch  of  Mr.  Keely.

“  James  I.  Dozier.

“  Jan.  1,  1848.

“1  certify  that  Mr.  Dozier  remains  perfectly  well  up  to  this
date;  has  had  no  return  of  rheumatic  pains.

“William  Elliott.

“Louisville,  Jan  31,  1848.

“  Case  2.  This  will  certify  that  I  have  been  partially  deaf  for
four  years  past.  My  hearing  at  times  was  better  than  at  others.  I
have  been  at  no  time  able  to  hear  conversation  unless  addressed  in  a
loud  conversational  tone,  and  giving  strict  attention  to  the  speaker.
I  have  been  magnetically  treated  by  Mr.  Keely  for  the  last  five  days,
and  am  now  entirely  and  perfectly  restored.  I  am  the  son  of  Robert
Graham,  of  Rock  Haven,  Meade  county,  Ky.  My  age  is  nineteen
years.

“  William  U.  Graham.

“Louisville,  Jan.  13,  1848.

“Case  3.  “This  will  certify  that  I  have  been  afflicted  with
rheumatism  for  three  years  and  three  months  in  every  joint  in  my
body,  suffering,  more  or  less,  continually  ;  unable  to  attend  to  business
three-fourths  of  the  time.  Nine  months  of  the  time  I  was  confined
to  my  bed.  I  was  compelled  to  use  a  cane  at  all  times.  I  have  been
under  the  care  of  ‘  medical  men’  of  good  standing,  and  the  relief  I
experienced  was  but  momentary.  I  called  on  Mr.  Keely  on  the  1st
of  January,  was  magnetically  treated  for  the  removal  of  my  rheu¬
matism,  and  I  was  at  once  entirely  relieved  from  pain.  I  have  had
no  use  for  my  cane  since.  I  have  been  magnetized  four  times  since.
I  have  not  been  magnetically  treated  for  the  last  nine  days.  I  am
now  well  and  have  been  free  from  pain  since  the  first  operation,  and
I  consider  myself  perfectly  and  positively  cured.  My  age  is  twenty-
nine  years.  Occupation  miller  and  buhr  maker.  I  have  resided  in
this  city  twelve  years.

“Robert  Hacket.

m  2


“Louisville,  Jan.  18,  1848.


142


Mesmerism  in  the  West.


“  Case  4.  This  will  certify  that  my  son  James  Me  Cory  has
been  afflicted  with  palsy  of  the  arm  and  leg  for  about  three  years
past — so  much  so  that  he  has  been  unable  to  use  his  arm.  His  leg
has  been  so  badly  palsied  that  he  walked  with  great  difficulty  touch¬
ing  his  toes  only  to  the  ground  ;  the  sinews  so  drawn  as  to  throw
him  in  a  crooked  position.  I  had  him  treated  by  galvanism  with
scarce  a  shadow  of  relief.  I  was  induced  to  place  him  under  Mr.
Keely’s  treatment  on  Tuesday,  Jan.  18.  My  boy  is  now  able  to  use
his  arm  freely,  with  firmness  and  strength  ;  he  walks  erect,  steps
with  firmness,  and  is  almost  perfectly  and  fully  restored.  I  live  in
Hamburg,  la.  I  left  him  in  the  care  of  Rev.  M.  W.  Sellers,  who
has  witnessed  the  treatment  and  testifies  to  the  facts  as  stated  above.

“  John  McCory.

“  Louisville,  Ky.,  Jan.  29,  1848.

“  I  know  the  above  to  be  correct,

“M.  W.  Sellers,  Pastor  of  Little  Flock
Church  of  the  Regular  Baptists,  Sel-
v  lersburgh,  Clark  co.,  Ia.


“  Case  5.  William  Jackson,  deaf  since  four  years  of  age,  is  now
nineteen  ;  hears  ticking  of  a  watch  three-fourths  of  an  inch  from  left
ear  and  two  and  a  half  inches  from  the  right ; — cause,  scarlet  fever.
Commenced  treatment  Jan.  10,  1848.  He  could  not  hear  unless  ad¬
dressed  in  a  very  loud  and  full  tone.  He  has  been  under  Mr.  Keely’s
charge  for  ten  days,  and  he  can  now  hear  the  same  watch  tick  sixteen
inches  from  the  left  ear  and  twelve  inches  from  the  right,  and  can
hear  when  addressed  in  a  common  conversational  tone.  Fie  is  the
son  of  Jane  Gwinn,  who  has  been  living  in  this  city  18  years.

“Jane  Gwinn.


“Jan.  21,  1848.


<c


o  i  -tip  i  f  C.  Pirtle,  M.  D.,
Subscribed  for  her  j  winniferd  Hollis.


“  Case  G.  This  will  certify  that  I  have  been  partially  deaf  for
about  six  years.  When  I  first  called  on  Mr.  Keely  I  could  hear  the
ticking  of  his  watch  with  difficulty  in  contact  with  my  left  ear,  and
at  the  distance  of  near  a  foot  from  my  right.  I  have  been  under  his
treatment  for  two  weeks,  having  been  magnetized  three  or  four  times.
I  now  hear  the  same  watch  tick  with  my  left  ear  at  about  two  and  a
half  feet,  and  the  right  ear  at  the  distance  of  six  feet  distinctly.

“  J.  W.  Athy,

“Jan.  19th,  1848.  “Second  Clerk  City  of  Louisville.

“  Case  7.  This  is  to  certify  that  some  ten  days  since  I  came  to
Mr.  Keely,  afflicted  with  rheumatism  in  my  neck,  shoulders,  arms,
and  hands,  and  had  not  been  able  to  move  my  head  without  also
moving  my  body.  I  had  suffered  in  this  way  for  six  months.  After
being  magnetically  treated  twice,  I  obtained  entire  relief  in  my  arms
and  hands  ;  after  being  magnetized  twice  more  I  obtained  entire  re¬
lief,  and  I  have  been  free  from  pain  ever  since.

“Matilda  West.

“Jan.  29th,  1848.


Numerous  Cures  of  various  Diseases  by  Mr.  Keely.  143

“  Case  8.  This  is  to  certify  that  I  have  suffered  from  rheumatic
affection,  chiefly  of  the  knee  joints,  for  about  fifteen  years.  The
pain  has  not  been  constant,  but  the  attacks  frequent.  The  stiffness
in  my  joints  has  been  such  that  for  fifteen  years  I  have  been  unable
to  bend  them  so  as  to  stoop  down  and  rise  up  again.  I  have  also
been  suffering  from  general  nervous  debility  during  the  whole  time.
For  some  twenty  years  I  have  had  a  sore  on  my  left  ankle,  occasioned
by  fever,  and  attended  with  much  pain  continually.  I  have  also  suf¬
fered  much  for  some  years  with  great  soreness  of  my  throat,  supposed
to  be  from  ulceration.  For  the  last  three  months,  I  have  not  been
able  to  walk  without  assistance.  When  I  first  came  to  Mr.  Keely’ s
asylum,  I  had  great  difficulty  in  getting  up  the  stairs,  suffering  much
pain.  I  have  been  under  his  charge  five  days,  and  I  now  feel  as  well
as  I  ever  did  in  my  life  ;  my  nerves  are  perfectly  calm  and  my  gene¬
ral  health  much  improved.  I  now  have  the  perfect  use  of  my  knees.
The  soreness  in  my  throat  is  gone.  The  sore  on  my  ankle  is  assum¬
ing  a  natural  and  healthy  appearance,  and  I  can  now  walk  on  it  with
ease,  and  part  of  the  time  entirely  without  pain.

“Elizabeth  Golen.

“  Subscribed  for  her  by  the  Rev.  S.  D.  Baldwin.
“Louisville,  Jan.  31,  1848.

“  Case  9.  This  will  certify  that  my  daughter  Elizabeth,  eight
years  old,  had  swelling  of  the  knee  joint  of  a  scrofulous  character,
which  came  on  after  a  severe  attack  of  scarlatina.  She  suffered  severe
pain  much  of  the  time,  and  at  no  time  was  free  from  pain.  She  has
been  thus  afflicted  for  about  three  years,  and  for  the  last  six  months
unable  to  walk  without  a  crutch.  She  has  been  under  Mr.  Keely’ s
charge  for  some  ten  days.  She  has  been  free  from  pain  for  the  last
six  days,  and  walks  without  her  crutch.  She  now  sleeps  well :  pre¬
viously  she  slept  but  little,  crying  much  of  the  time.  The  swelling
of  the  knee  has  nearly  disappeared  and  all  the  soreness  is  gone.

“Peter  Geberun.

“Louisville,  Jan.  31,  1848.

“Case  10.  This  is  to  certify  that  I  have  been  afflicted  with
rheumatism  for  nearly  four  weeks,  and  for  two  weeks  scarcely  able
to  walk  about  the  house ;  could  not  dress  myself  or  comb  my  head  ;
pain  and  inflammation  in  my  limbs,  soreness  in  my  neck,  with  rigidity.
Upon  rising  to  walk,  I  was  compelled  to  stand  for  some  time  before
I  could  walk  a  step.  I  was  not  able  to  get  into  the  carriage  without
assistance,  and  when  I  came  to  Mr.  Keely’s  asylum  I  was  assisted
up  the  steps  by  two  ladies.

“Jan.  4.  I  was  magnetized  the  first  sitting,  and  was  greatly
relieved  of  my  suffering,  and  was  able  to  walk  without  assistance.  I
rested  well  and  slept  soundly  the  following  night ;  have  been  fre¬
quently  magnetized  since,  and  up  to  this  date  have  continually  im¬
proved.  I  am  now  almost  entirely  well.

“Elizabeth  Elzy.

“Louisville,  Jan.  31,  1848.


144


Mesmerism  in  the  West.


“Case  11.  This  will  certify  that  my  son,  John  Swank,  has
been  partially  deaf  for  twelve  years  ;  so  much  so  that  it  was  with
difficulty  he  could  be  made  to  hear  conversation  when  addressed  in  a
loud,  full  tone.  He  has  been  under  Mr.  Keely’s  charge  several  days,
and  has  been  magnetically  treated,  since  which  he  is  enabled  to  hear
when  addressed  in  an  ordinary  conversational  tone.  Cause  of  deaf¬
ness  from  cold.

“Elizabeth  Swank.

“Louisville,  Jan.  23,  1848.

“Case  12.  This  will  certify  that  I  have  been  suffering  from
general  nervous  debility,  morbid  sensitiveness,  and  great  depression  of
spirits.  I  cannot  describe  the  continued  deep  depression  under  which
I  have  been  suffering.  I  have  been  under  Mr.  Keely’s  charge  some
fifteen  days,  and  have  been  gradually  recovering  my  buoyancy  of
spirits.  My  general  health  is  rapidly  improving  ;  my  nerves  are
materially  corrected.  I  consider  myself  almost  if  not  entirely  cured
by  Mr.  K.’s  treatment.  My  age  is  33  years.  Occupation,  carpenter.
Have  resided  in  this  city  12  years.

“Julius  C.  Johnson.

“Louisville,  Jan.  20,  1848.

“Case  13.  This  will  certify  that  I  have  been  quite  deaf  for
about  three  years,  supposed  to  have  been  caused  by  too  frequent
bathing.  When  I  called  on  Mr.  Keely  I  could  hear  the  tick  of  a
watch  three  inches  from  my  left  ear,  and  but  faintly  when  pressed
against  my  right.  I  have  been  under  Mr.  Keely’s  charge  occasionally
for  the  last  four  weeks,  and  have  been  magnetically  treated  several
times,  and  I  am  now  able  to  hear  the  same  watch  tick  distinctly  nine¬
teen  inches  from  my  right  ear,  and  four  and  a  half  feet  from  my  left.
I  can  hear  conversation  in  an  under  tone  without  giving  more  atten¬
tion  than  others  who  never  had  any  dullness  of  hearing.  I  am  satis¬
fied  that  I  am  sufficiently  restored  for  all  practical  purposes.

“  James  M.  McDonald.

“Louisville,  Jan.  31,  1848.

“  Case  14.  This  is  to  certify  that  I  have  been  afflicted  at  times
for  the  last  three  years  with  chronic  rheumatism  in  my  shoulders.
When  I  called  on  Mr.  Keely  (Jan.  1 1)  the  pain  was  quite  severe.  I
have  been  magnetically  treated  by  Mr.  K.  for  the  last  few  days,  and
I  am  now  perfectly  well.

“  John  Barnes.

“Louisville,  Jan.  17,  1848.

“Case  15.  This  will  certify  that  I  have  been  affected  for  ten
months,  the  result  of  paralysis  of  the  entire  left  side,  and  have  not
at  any  time  been  able  to  walk  or  get  up  from  my  seat  without  assist¬
ance.  I  have  also  been  suffering  most  excruciating  pain  in  my  joints
each  day  and  night ;  I  have  not  at  any  time  been  entirely  free  from
pain.  I  have  also  been  suffering  from  palpitation  of  the  heart  for
the  last  four  months.  This  was  my  condition,  as  above  stated,  wfflen.


Numerous  Cures  of  various  Diseases  by  Mr.  Keely.  145

by  my  request,  Mr.  Keely  called  to  see  me,  and,  strange  as  it  may
seem,  in  less  than  one  hour’s  application  lie  restored  me  to  the  entire
and  perfect  use  of  my  limbs.  I  would  further  state  that  my  right
arm  has  been  almost  entirely  useless  to  me  for  the  last  three  years
from  rheumatic  affection.  To  be  brief,  I  am  free  from  pain,  have
the  perfect  use  of  my  limbs,  can  get  up  from  my  seat  with  ease,  and
use  my  limbs  as  freely  as  I  have  ever  done.  I  freely  further  state
that  I  feel  an  unusual  degree  of  strength,  and  walk  with  firmness
and  ease.

“Margaret  T.  Donne.

“We  testify  that  the  above  is  a  truthful  statement,  being  ac¬
quainted  with  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case.

“Jemima  Ott.

“John  Bradley.

“Louisville,  Jan.  6,  1848.

“  Mrs.  Donne  reports  herself  to  the  committee  as  being  per¬
fectly  restored.

“  January  30,  1848.

“  Case  1 6.  My  nephew,  Robert  Slaughter,  aged  1 1  years,  has
been  subject  to  occasional  discharges  from  the  ears  for  the  last
eighteen  months,  and  dullness  of  hearing  very  perceptible  within  the
last  six  months.  He  could  hear  the  tick  of  a  watch,  when  placed
under  Mr.  Keely’s  charge,  eight  inches  from  the  right  and  four
inches  from  the  left,  has  been  magnetically  treated  several  times,
gradually  improving.  Can  now  hear  the  same  watch  six  feet  from
either  ear.

“James  B.  Slaughter.

“Louisville,  Feb.  3,  1848.

“  Case  17.  About  1832,  I  was  first  attacked  with  inflammatory
rheumatism,  which  affected  my  system  throughout.  From  this
attack  I  recovered.  But  in  1833  wras  attacked  with  the  cholera  in
Lexington,  Ky.;  since  that  period,  from  time  to  time,  I  suffered
with  rheumatic  pains  in  various  parts  of  the  body  until  August,  1842,
when  I  was  attacked  by  paralysis  of  the  right  lower  limb,  with  a  good
deal  of  pain.  At  this  time  I  was  on  crutches,  and  visited  Philadel¬
phia  for  relief  from  some  of  the  medical  men  of  that  place,  but  was
not  at  all  benefitted.  I  returned  to  Kentucky,  and  this  crippled  con¬
dition  lasted  with  always  more  or  less  pain  in  the  limb.  Last  August
I  was  suddenly  attacked  with  a  fit,  during  which  my  left  shoulder
was  injured,  and  I  have  suffered  much  pain  in  it  up  to  the  time  I
saw  Mr.  Keely,  and  was  magnetized  some  three  weeks  since.  To-day
I  have  been  magnetized  for  the  fourth  time.  Since  I  was  first  mag¬
netized  I  have  suffered  no  pain.  I  came  to  Mr.  Keely  supported  by
a  crutch  and  cane,  which  I  have  been  compelled  to  use  for  the  last
two  years ;  for  four  years  previous  I  used  two  crutches.  After  the
first  time  I  was  magnetized  I  walked  home  without  the  use  of  my
crutch  and  cane,  and  have  not  been  obliged  to  use  them  since,  though
I  walk  generally  with  a  cane,  on  account  of  a  shortness  of  the  right


146


Mesmerism  in  the  West.


limb.  I  am  regaining  the  use  of  my  left  arm,  though  it  can  never
be  perfectly  restored ;  to-day,  on  examination,  a  dislocation  of  the
head  of  the  bone  being  discovered.  My  general  health  is  much  im¬
proved.  I  rest  well  on  either  side,  and  my  sleep  is  good.  I  can
get  in  and  out  of  bed  without  assistance,  and  can  dress  and  undress
myself  with  ease,  which  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  do  before  I  was
magnetically  treated  by  Mr.  K.,  and  I  feel  that  I  am  steadily  im¬
proving.

“Wm.  G.  Pettit.

‘‘Louisville,  Feb.  2,  1848.

“Case  18.  This  will  certify  that  I  have  been  afflicted  with
neuralgia  for  nearly  two  years,  affecting  my  whole  system.  The
pain  has  been  changing  from  one  part  to  another,  so  that  I  have  not
for  any  time  been  free  from  pain.  My  right  arm  and  left  leg  have
been  constantly  affected  since  last  March,  one  year  ago,  with  the
exception  of  three  weeks  in  last  October.  I  have  seldom,  since  the
time  I  have  been  affected,  been  able  to  sleep,  unless  I  had  a  pillow
between  my  knees.  I  have  been  under  the  treatment  of  Drs.  Gross,
Richardson,  and  Me  Dowell.  I  think  Dr.  Me  Dowell  benefitted  me,
the  others  I  am  certain  did  not.  On  Saturday,  Jan.  15,  I  called
on  Mr.  Keely,  at  which  time  I  had  not  been  able  to  sit  up  for  a  few
hours  in  each  day,  and  for  the  last  ‘/owr’  days  previous  to  seeing
Mr.  K.,  I  was  unable  to  sit  up  more  than  one  hour  each  day,  and
suffering  constantly.  It  was  with  difficulty  I  got  from  my  bed,  and
was  not  able  to  get  my  coat  on  without  help.  In  this  condition  I
saw  Mr.  K.  for  the  first  time  ;  and  at  the  first  sitting  (Saturday,
January  15)  I  was  magnetized,  after  which  I  was  entirely  free  from
pain,  could  walk  with  ease,  and  felt  strong  and  vigorous.  It  is  now
Monday,  12  o’clock,  January  17,  and  I  continue  the  same,  having
sat  up  all  day  yesterday  (Sunday),  and  also  to-day,  and  still  feel  no
disposition  to  go  to  bed.  Dr.  Pirtle  assisted  in  this  operation.  I
also  laboured  under  nervous  irritability,  which  produced  muscular
agitation,  all  of  which  have  left  me.

“Thomas  Jones.

“  The  above  statements  were  given  in  my  hearing,  and  the  im¬
provement  came  under  my  own  observation.

“Louisville,  Jan.  17,  1848.  “C.  Pirtle,  M.D.

“  I  have  been  continually  improving  since  the  first  magnetization.

“Thomas  Jones.

“January  28,  1848.

“Case  19.  This  will  certify  that  I  have  been  deaf  for  twelve
years  previous  to  being  treated  magnetically  by  Mr.  Keely.  I  could
hear  a  watch  tick  2\  inches  from  one  ear  and  in  contact  with  the
other.  I  have  been  under  his  care  for  about  four  weeks,  and  can
now  hear  the  ticking  of  the  same  watch  twenty-two  inches  from  each
ear.  My  age  is  17  years.  Deafness  caused  by  scarlet  fever.

“J.  B.  Varnum.


“Louisville,  Jan.  31,  1848.


Numerous  Cures  of  various  Diseases  by  Mr.  Keely.  147

“  Case  20.  I  hereby  certify  that  I  have  been  very  deaf  for
twenty  years  ;  that  under  Mr.  Keely’ s  treatment  I  have  been  much
improved.

“  T.  S.  Luckett.

“  Louisville,  Jan.  26,  1848.

“Case  21.  Miss  Elizabeth  Blackburn,  thirteen  years  old.  Deaf¬
ness  of  four  years’  standing.  Cause  not  certainly  known.  Before  treat¬
ment  by  Mr.  Keely,  she  could  hear  the  ticking  of  a  watch  but  two
and  three-quarter  inches  from  right  ear  and  two  from  left.  She  has
been  magnetically  treated  eight  times,  and  now  hears  the  same  watch
tick  twenty-four  inches  from  the  left  and  thirty-three  from  the  right,
and  hears  common  conversation  with  ease  when  addressed  in  a  full
conversational  tone.

“Edward  Blackburn.

“Elizabeth  Blackburn.

“The  improvement  in  the  above  case  came  under  my  observation.

“T.  H.  Caldwell,  M  D.

“Louisville,  Feb.  3,  1848.


“Case  22.  W.  H.  Sale.  Partial  deafness.  Age  fourteen  years.
Could  hear  watch  tick  six  and  a  half  inches  from  one  ear  and  three
and  a  half  from  the  other ;  has  been  magnetically  treated  by  Mr.
Keely  several  times.  Now  hears  twenty-two  inches  from  the  right
ear  and  thirteen  from  left.


“Case  23.  Miss  Jones.  Partially  deaf  for  nineteen  years  before
treatment  by  Mr.  K.  Could  hear  watch  tick  only  in  contact  with
either  ear.  Now  hears  same  watch  tick  six  inches  from  one  ear  and
three  and  a  half  from  the  other.

“Annie  Jones.

“February  1,  1848.

“Case  24.  To  Mr.  I.  I.  Keely :  I  conceive  my  health  to  be
very  materially  improved  by  human  magnetism  under  your  treatment.
For  more  than  eight  years  I  have  been  an  agonizing  sufferer  from
general  nervous  debility  and  consequent  prostration  of  all  heathful
physical  activity.  Medical  science  and  skill  of  the  most  eminent
caste  have  never  benefitted  me  a  great  deal,  though  continually  and
indefatigably  employed  during  most  of  the  time.  My  condition  on
application  to  you  was  a  1  forlorn  hope.’  I  tried  magnetism  from  a
sense  of  duty  alone.  My  confidence  in  it  was  such  that  I  was  not
inspired  with  even  an  expectation  of  good,  much  less  with  a  full
fledged  faith.  Faith,  hope,  or  fancy  have  neither  accelerated  nor
retarded  my  recovery.  I  have  improved  to  a  vigorous,  a  sudden,
and  a  buoyant  strength  of  body  and  mind,  felt  deeply  within,  and
acknowledged  with  wonder  by  all  my  friends.  My  altered  complexion,
the  disappearance  of  cutaneous  eruptions,  my  improved  vision,  all
of  which  have  taken  place  within  two  weeks,  give  me  indubitable
testimony  of  the  sudden,  wonderful,  and  delightful  remedial  agency


148


Mesmerism  in  the  West.


of  magnetism.  With  many  thanks  for  your  kindness  and  prayers
for  your  universal  success,  I  am  your  most  obliged  and  ever  grateful
friend,

“  Samuel  D.  Baldwin,  Preacher  in  charge  Wesley
Chapel  Station,  M.  E.  Church,  South.

“  Louisville,  Jan.  28,  1848.


“Case  25.  In  1843  I  was  attacked  with  a  complication  of
maladies,  such  as  neuralgia,  rheumatism,  and  an  affection  of  the
spine.  From  that  period  up  to  the  treatment  of  Mr.  Keely,  some
three  weeks  since,  I  have  been  either  confined  to  my  bed  or  totally
unable  to  walk  without  assistance,  and  unfit  for  any  practical  busi¬
ness.  I  had  never  experienced  any  permanent  relief  from  medical
skill,  though  receiving  the  best.  I  am  now  almost  entirely  well,
and,  from  my  first  subjection  to  Mr.  K.’s  skill,  I  have  been  free
from  pain ;  my  appetite  is  good ;  the  neuralgia  has  disappeared  ;  the
spinal  disease  is  gone;  only  a  vestige  of  rheumatism  remains;  and  I
can  walk  the  streets  with  my  cane  on  my  shoulder.  My  age  is  48
years:  have  been  a  citizen  of  this  place  since  1806.  Residence  on
Main-street,  between  Floyd  and  Preston.

“  L.  E.  Hall.


“Louisville,  Jan.  31,'  1848.


“Case  26.  Miss  E.  Vanvechen  became  blind  two  years  since
through  amaurosis,  and  was  subsequently  admitted  into  the  Ken¬
tucky  institute  for  the  blind  as  a  pupil.  Two  weeks  since  she
returned  from  Cincinnati,  where  for  six  months  she  has  been  under
the  treatment  of  Dr.  Taliafero,  in  the  Hotel  for  invalids,  with  slight
benefit  as  to  her  vision.  She  has  for  two  weeks  been  under  the  care
of  Mr.  Keely,  and  has  been  magnetically  treated  six  times.  She
can  now  see  the  hands  of  a  clock  and  the  figures  on  the  face  of  a
watch,  which  were  utterly  imperceptible  to  her  two  weeks  ago.  Her
general  health  is  also  much  improved  by  Mr.  K.’s  treatment.

“  B.  M.  Patton.

“Louisville,  Jan.  30,  1848.


“  Case  27.  This  will  certify  that  I  have  been  for  eight  years
labouring  under  a  most  afflicting  neuralgic  affection.  It  was  with
difficulty  at  times  that  all  the  exertions  of  an  attentive  family  could
keep  life  in  me.  Many  nights  I  have  been  in  spasms,  from  want  of
circulation  of  the  blood,  with  my  flesh  very  cold.  Many  of  the  most
eminent  physicians  have  attended  me,  and  have  exhausted  their  skill
in  vain  in  endeavours  to  restore  me.  It  affords  me  pleasure  to  say,
that,  to  the  exertions  of  Mr.  Keely,  I  am  indebted  for  complete
restoration,  the  misery  in  my  head  and  spine  having  entirely  dis¬
appeared — in  short,  I  feel  like  a  new  man.

“  T.  G.  Lloyd.

“Louisville,  Jan.  31,  1848.

“  Case  28.  An  old  coloured  woman  living  at  the  house  of  Mr.
Nimrod  Bull,  whose  right  arm  has  been  paralized  since  1832,  and


Numerous  Cures  of  various  Diseases  by  Mr.  Keely.  149

so  perfectly  dead  that  she  could  not  make  the  slightest  voluntary
motion,  and  the  fingers  clenched.  She  is  improved  by  a  few  mag¬
netizations  so  that  she  can  raise  the  arm  half  way  up,  and  bring  her
hand  to  her  mouth,  and  can  slightly  move  the  fingers  in  flexion
and  extension;  sensation  perfectly  restored,  together  with  the  natural
temperature  of  the  parts.

“  Many  other  cases  might  be  enumerated  in  which  the  magnetic
treatment  of  Mr.  K.  has  produced  benefit  to  a  greater  or  less  degree,
but  the  improvement  has  not  been  such  as  to  render  it  necessary  in
the  opinion  of  the  committee  to  particularize  them.

“Louisville,  Ky.,  Feb.  3,  1848.

“  The  undersigned  members  of  the  committee  appointed  by  Mr.
Keely’s  class  in  Louisville  to  report  on  the  cases  treated  by  him,  and
whose  report  under  date  of  Feb.  3rd,  is  before  the  public,  take
pleasure  in  stating  at  this  time,  that,  as  far  as  they  have  been  able  to
gain  information,  the  improvement  in  the  cases  reported  has  con¬
tinued  to  the  present  time  ;  some  cases  have  continued  to  improve
progressively,  others  seem  stationary  at  the  point  at  which  they
were  left,  and  if  any  have  fallen  back  it  has  been  the  combined  effects
of  negligence  in  exposure  and  not  complying  with  the  injunctions
made  by  Mr.  K.  to  have  the  treatment  occasionally  followed  up.

“Thomas  L.  Caldwell,  M.D.

“  Wm.  J.  C.  Baum,  M.D.

“  Geo.  D.  Prentice.

“Louisville,  March  31st,  1848.

“  I  have  not  seen  any  person  who  was  magnetized  by  Mr.  Keely
last  winter  for  the  cure  of  diseases,  who  has  relapsed  or  fallen  back
from  the  benefit  which  they  received  from  him.

“J.  W.  Bright,  M.D.

“March  31st,  1848.

“  I  fully  concur  in  the  above  statements,  having  no  knowledge  of
any  cases  which  have  relapsed.

“C.  PlRTLE,  M.D.”


The  equally  successful  cases  from  the  other  cities  of  Ame¬
rica  would  occupy  twenty  pages  of  The  Zoist,  and  therefore
I  shall  merely  present  their  nature  and  number.

Frankfort. — A  cancerous  sore  of  the  upper  lip  and  gum
with  severe  constant  pain,  of  two  years*  standing,  nothing
done  by  regular  practitioners  had  been  of  use,  but  mesmerism
had  already  proved  of  the  greatest  benefit, — deafness  of  11
years*  standing, — debility  with  great  muscular  agitation,  of
15  years*  standing, — deafness,  depression  of  spirits,  &c.,  many
teeth  were  extracted,  and  one  operation  upon  the  fangs  lasted
nearly  half  an  hour  without  any  pain  except  a  very  slight  pain
in  the  extraction  of  one  tooth, — headache  and  offensive  dis-


150


Mesmerism  in  the  West.


charge  from  the  ears,  with  partial  deafness, — deafness  of  30
years*  standing,  with  giddiness  and  impaired  vision;  physi¬
cians,  clergymen,  and  others,  add  their  testimony  to  this
wonderful  instance  of  the  benefit  of  mesmerism, — deafness.

Versailles. — Palpitation  and  debility, — severe  pain  of
ankle  after  an  accident, — neuralgia  of  15  years*  standing, —
tetter  of  one  year’s  standing, — sore  eyes  for  three  months,
— palpitation  and  debility  for  six  years, — scrofulous  affections
for  five  years, — deafness  for  eight  years.

Shelbyville. — Deafness  in  a  boy, — deafness  in  a  boy  of
seventeen  for  12  years.

New  Albany,  Goitre. — Spasms, — diseased  knee, — deaf¬
ness  partially  cured,  and  sore  eyes, — swimming  in  the  head, —
partial  blindness,  and  painful  affection  of  the  womb,  after
the  failure  of  all  other  treatment, — rheumatism  of  22  years*
standing  and  weak  eyes, — rheumatism  of  35  years*  standing, —
rheumatism  with  deafness  14  years.

Paris. — Rheumatism  and  deafness, — neuralgia  and  deaf¬
ness, — neuralgic  rheumatism, — aching  of  the  abdomen  with
rigidity  of  its  muscles,  and  great  debility,  of  seven  years*
standing, — intense  debility  and  nervous  suffering, — neuralgic
rheumatism, — neuralgia  and  intense  sensitiveness,  so  that  the
touch  of  an  instrument  could  not  be  borne,  but  under  mes¬
merism  the  gums  were  cut  and  teeth  extracted  without  any
suffering  or  even  the  twitch  of  a  muscle, — deafness.

St.  Louis,  Mo. — Dreadful  neuralgia  six  years,  after  the
failure  of  all  medical  treatment, — the  severest  indigestion,
with  vomiting,  headaches,  and  giddiness, — severe  general  ner¬
vous  affections  four  years,  after  the  failure  of  all  medical  treat¬
ment, — very  frequent  attacks  of  spasms  for  34  years,  after  the
failure  of  the  medical  men  in  Manchester,  England,  as  well
as  of  those  in  America, — rheumatic  neuralgia, — ophthalmia,
and  a  tooth  was  extracted  in  the  mesmeric  state  without  any
pain, — ophthalmia, — rheumatism  and  palpitation  for  6  years,
with  depression  of  spirits,  indigestion,  and  piles, — severe  neu¬
ralgia  of  8  months, — partial  deafness  13  years, — partial  deaf¬
ness  10  months, — trembling  from  tobacco  one  year,  perma¬
nently  cured  by  one  mesmerisation, — palpitation  of  4  years,
deafness  of  18  years,  and  neuralgia  and  depression  of  spirits,
after  fruitless  medical  treatment, — violent  neuralgia  of  many
years,  attacking  for  24  hours  at  a  time, — palsy  of  one  leg  and
severe  spinal  pain, — painful  abscess  in  the  arm  for  five  years, —


Numerous  Cures  of  various  Diseases  by  Mr.  Keely.  151

palpitation  and  sense  of  suffocation, — severe  rheumatism
many  years,  and  ophthalmia  16  years,  with  partial  deafness, —
opacity  of  the  cornea  for  one  year,  after  ophthalmia,  so  that  it
and  the  white  were  nearly  of  the  same  colour ,  only  the  extreme
of  light  and  darkness  could  be  discerned ,  and  she  could  not
walk  without  a  guide ;  the  woman  now  reads  large  print  and
requires  no  guide ,  and  her  cornece  are  almost  clear , — chronic
ophthalmia,  and  such  opacity  of  the  cornea  that  the  pupil  could
scarcely  be  detected, — palpitation,  indigestion,  spinal  pain  of
18  years, — giddiness  of  40  years  with  severe  pain  of  most  joints,
in  a  man  81  years  of  age, — trembling,  twitchings,  and  pains
even  disturbing  sleep,  for  20  years,  with  sudden  powerlessness
of  the  hands — partial  deafness, — debility  of  mental  and  mus  ¬
cular  powers,  &c.,  for  3  years, — partial  deafness, — great  pain
and  weakness  after  fractures, — severe  spinal  pain  of  a  year’s
standing,  confining  the  man  to  bed  in  a  horizontal  position,  and
pronounced  incurable  by  many  eminent  physicians  after  the
most  tormenting  applications ;  the  patient  was  a  confirmed
sceptic,  believing  all  was  collusion,  but,  being  carried  in  a
bed  to  Mr.  Keely’s  asylum,  was  freed  from  pain  in  a  few
minutes,  sat  upright  for  above  an  hour,  then  rose  and  sat
down  alternately  many  times,  then  walked  about  the  room
and  down  stairs  to  the  carriage,  and  soon  walked  about  every
where  and  threw  away  his  crutches,  as  several  gentlemen  tes¬
tify, — dyspepsia,  trembling,  giddiness,  &c.,  of  20  years, — scro¬
fula  and  palpitation, — ill  effects  of  chewing  tobacco, — spasms
which  had  occurred  almost  daily  in  a  boy  of  thirteen  from  in¬
fancy.  There  are  thirteen  cases  of  similar  cures  effected  by ,
persons  who  had  learnt  mesmerism  of  Mr.  Keely.


The  Messrs.  Keely  (for  there  were  two)  were  taken  before
a  magistrate  for  thus  curing  and  for  teaching  to  cure.

“  The  city  attorney  contended  that  mesmeric  lectures  and  ex¬
amples  of  the  effect  of  the  science  were  in  no  wise  different  from
✓  feats  of  legerdemain,  sleight  of  hand,  &c.,  except  in  the  fact  that
itinerant  magicians  confessed  their  tricks  to  be  deceptive,  while  mes-
merisers  contended  that  theirs  were  truthful  and  positive  effects  pro¬
duced  by  the  agency  of  this  magnetic  power  on  the  human  system.
He  stated  his  belief  to  be  that  both  were  deceptive,  that  they  were
exhibitions  of  the  same  character,  and  that  they  should  alike  be
taxed.

“  The  recorder  decided  that  Mr.  Keely’s  lectures  were  not  ex¬
hibitions  within  the  meaning  of  the  ordinance,  and  dismissed  the
defendants/’

The  editor  of  the  newspaper  from  which  I  have  extracted
this  statement  remarks, —


152


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.


“  If  the  Messrs.  Keely  had  been  arraigned  for  witchcraft,  we
should  have  considered  it  an  equally  sustainable  complaint.  If  teach¬
ing  how  the  afflicted  may  be  relieved  from  many  nervous  afflictions
is  an  exhibition  within  the  meaning  of  the  ordinance,  then  every
medical  school  in  the  city  may  be  arraigned  and  made  to  pay  for  a
license.”

John  Elliotson.


MESMERISM  IN  THE  WEST  OF  ENGLAND.

IV.  Public  Meeting  at  Bristol  to  found  a  Mesmeric  Institute.

The  West  of  England  furnished  Mr.  Wakley  to  our  metro¬
polis.  The  West  of  England  has  since  produced  a  long
number  of  able,  honest,  and  strenuous  mesmerists,  and  has
the  honour  of  being  the  first  part  of  Great  Britain  in  which
a  public  meeting  has  been  held  to  establish  a  mesmeric  in¬
stitution.  The  Earl  of  Ducie,  a  Gloucestershire  nobleman,
manfully  took  the  chair  upon  the  occasion ;  and,  when  we  con¬
sider  that  he  is  a  Lord-in-waiting  to  her  Majesty,  a  member
of  the  Bev.  Dr.  Cummings’s  Scotch  Church,  &c.,  his  conduct
is  really  above  all  praise.  Mr.  Janson,  one  of  the  speakers,
has  written  many  long,  racy,  and  fearfully-telling  articles  in
favour  of  mesmerism  in  the  Exeter  papers,  and  we  publicly
express  to  him  our  regret  that  we  have  always  had  too  many
cases  and  facts  poured  upon  us  by  correspondents  to  be  able
to  gratify  our  earnest  wish  of  transferring  his  compositions  to
our  pages.

Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.

“  A  public  meeting  was  held  on  Thursday  at  the  Rooms  of  the
Mesmeric  Society,  Park-street,  for  the  purpose  of  establishing,  or
rather  of  perfecting,  the  embryo  Mesmeric  Institute  of  this  city.
The  chair  was  taken  by  the  Right  Hon.  The  Earl  of  Ducie,  and  there
a  numerous  and  respectable  company,  which  comprised  several
members  of  the  medical  profession,  clergymen  of  the  Church  of
England,  and  Dissenting  ministers.

“  The  Chairman  said  he  had  come  there  to  fill  the  chair  at  that
meeting,  not  because  he  believed  himself  capable  of  giving  much
information  on  the  subject,  but  simply  to  bear  his  testimony  to  the
truth  of  all  the  facts  in  mesmerism  which  had  come  under  his  notice;
and  whether  it  concerned  mesmerism  or  any  other  fact  or  ‘ism’
he  should  be  always  ready  to  bear  his  testimony  to  the  truth,  and
that  whether  it  was  fashionable  or  unfashionable,  received  or  not
received  (cheers).  Persons  opposed  mesmerism  on  many  grounds;
some  would  not  believe  it  at  all,  while  others  ascribed  its  powers  to
satanic  agency  (hear).  Of  the  first  class  he  had  met  with  and  heard


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


153


a  great  many,  but  he  never  had  experienced  one  instance  in  which  the
party  objecting  had  ever  sat  himself  down  quietly  to  investigate  the
subject,  and  to  inquire  whether  there  was  truth  or  no  truth  in  it  (hear,
hear).  With  regard  to  the  second  class  of  objectors,  he  could  only  say
he  had  always  been  led  to  suppose  that  Satan  presided  more  in  our
hearts  than  in  the  ends  of  our  fingers  (hear).  At  one  time  he  was  as
great  a  sceptic  as  any  lady  or  gentleman  in  the  room  could  possibly  be.
He  had  once  laughed  at  and  ridiculed  everything  connected  with  the
science,  but  he  had  been  converted  (cheers) ;  and  he  hoped,  if  there
were  any  ladies  or  gentlemen  in  the  room  who  were  still  sceptics,
that  before  they  went  out  of  it  they  would  be  converted  too.

“  With  regard  to  his  own  conversion  he  thought  it  might  not  be  out
of  place  if  he  briefly  narrated  the  circumstances  under  which  it  took
place.  He  had  been  for  years  a  very  great  sufferer  from  rheumatic
gout,  and  one  day  a  clergyman,  a  friend  of  his,  came  to  him  with  a
smile  on  his  face  and  said  to  him,  ‘You  can  be  cured.’  He  (Lord
Ducie)  replied  that  he  was  very  glad  of  it,  and  his  friend,  who  had
been  a  sufferer  from  illness,  then  said,  *  I  was  induced  to  go  and
consult  a  clairvoyant — she  told  me  that  all  which  the  doctors  had
told  me  was  wrong,  informed  me  of  what  really  was  the  matter,  and
cured  me.  I  am  confident  that  you  may  be  cured  too,  and  I  should
very  much  like  for  you  to  go  and  see  the  lady.’  He  (Lord  Ducie)
laughed  at  the  suggestion,  upon  which  the  clergyman  said,  ‘  You
may  smile,  but  I  should  like  you  to  see  her  very  much,  if  you  are
not  afraid  to  go.’  When  he  was  asked  if  he  was  afraid,  he  felt  that
a  challenge  was  propounded,  which  he  could  not  resist;  and  he
accordingly  went  to  the  lady,  who,  when  he  took  hold  of  her  hand,
told  him  a  great  deal  about  himself  which  he  did  not  think  that  any¬
body  knew.  However,  he  thought  it  possible  that  those  matters
might  have  become  known  to  his  reverend  friend,  and  that  he  might
have  been  instructing  her,  and  therefore  he  did  not  take  any  great
account  of  that  matter.

“  Sometime  afterwards  he  experienced  a  very  severe  attack  of
rheumatic  gout,  and  as  he  was  lying  in  bed  with  a  great  deal  of
nervous  irritability,  and  without  any  power  of  sleep,  he  thought  he
would  try  mesmerism,  and  sent  for  the  lady.  The  very  first  time  he
was  mesmerised  she  succeeded,  and  left  the  room  without  his
knowing  it;  he  was  enabled  to  get  rest,  and  was  much  tranquillized.
Day  after  day  she  produced  similar  effects,  always  being  able  to  get
out  of  the  room  without  his  knowledge,  and  he  experienced  very
great  relief  from  the  mesmeric  treatment.  Owing  to  the  benefit  he
had  thus  received,  he  was  induced  every  morning  for  three  months
to  go  to  a  surgeon  in  London  who  practised  mesmerism.  While
attending  upon  him  he  saw  such  a  number  of  cases,  so  many  extra¬
ordinary  cures,  and  such  a  number  of  instances  in  which  persons
were  readily  relieved  of  intense  pain  and  suffering,  that  he  really
could  not  very  well  doubt  what  he  saw  (hear).  Indeed,  where  a
person  saw  cases  occurring  daily,  where  he  watched  them  attentively
for  three  months,  he  could  not  very  easily  be  deceived,  and  more
especially  when  he  went  to  see  them  doubtingly,  as  he  did,  and


154


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.


rather  with  a  view  to  pick  holes  in  his  neighbour’s  practice  than  with
a  frame  of  mind  favourable  to  the  reception  of  the  facts  (hear).  He
also  saw  one  or  two  clairvoyants,  and  had  an  opportunity  of  testing
their  powers,  so  that  he  really  was  constrained  to  believe,  for  he
could  not  disbelieve  what  he  saw.

“  In  the  highest  departments  or  phenomena  of  mesmerism  he  for
a  long  time  was  a  disbeliever,  and  could  not  bring  himself  to  believe
in  the  power  of  reading  with  the  eyes  bandaged  or  of  mental  travel¬
ling;  at  length,  however,  he  was  convinced  of  the  truth  of  those
powers,  and  that,  too,  in  so  curious  and  unexpected  a  way  that  there
could  have  been  no  possibility  of  deception.  It  happened  that  he
had  to  call  upon  a  surgeon  on  business,  and  when  he  was  there  the
surgeon  said  to  him,  4  You  have  never  seen  my  little  clairvoyant.’
He  replied  that  he  never  had,  and  should  like  to  see  her  very  much.
He  was  invited  to  call  the  next  day,  but  upon  his  replying  that  he
should  be  obliged  to  leave  town  that  evening,  he  said,  c  Well,  you
can  come  in  at  once;  I  am  obliged  to  go  out,  but  I  will  ring  the  bell
for  her  and  put  her  to  sleep,  and  you  can  ask  her  any  questions  you
please.’  He  (Lord  Ducie)  accordingly  went  in;  he  had  never  been
in  the  house  in  his  life  before,  and  the  girl  could  have  known  nothing
of  him.  The  bell  was  rung,  the  clairvoyant  appeared;  the  surgeon,
without  a  word  passing,  put  her  to  sleep,  and  then  he  put  on  his
hat  and  left  the  room.  He  (Lord  Ducie)  had  before  seen  something
of  mesmerism,  and  he  sat  by  her,  took  her  hand,  and  asked  her  if
she  felt  able  to  travel.  She  replied,  ‘  Yes  ;’  and  he  asked  her  if  she
had  ever  been  in  Gloucestershire,  to  which  she  answered  that  she
had  not,  but  should  very  much  like  to  go  there,  as  she  had  not  been
in  the  country  for  six  years :  she  was  a  girl  of  about  17  years  old.
He  told  her  that  she  should  go  with  him,  for  he  wanted  her  to  see
his  farm.  They  travelled  (mentally)  by  the  railroad  very  comfortably
together,  and  then  (in  his  imagination)  got  into  a  fly  and  proceeded
to  his  house.  He  asked  her  what  she  saw ;  and  she  replied,  ‘  I  see
an  iron  gate  and  a  curious  old  house.’  He  asked  her,  *  How  do  you
get  to  it  V  she  replied,  ‘  By  this  gravel  walk  :’  which  was  quite
correct.  He  asked  her  how  they  went  into  it,  and  she  replied,  ‘  I
see  a  porch,  a  curious  old  porch.’  It  was  probably  known  to  many
that  his  house,  which  was  a  curious  old  Elizabethan  building,  was
entered  by  a  porch  as  she  had  described.  He  asked  her  what  she
saw  on  the  porch,  and  she  replied,  truly,  that  it  was  covered  with
flowers.  He  then  said,  c  Now  we  will  turn  in  at  our  right  hand  ;
what  do  you  see  in  that  room  ?’  She  answered  with  great  accuracy,

‘  I  see  a  bookcase  and  a  picture  on  each  side  of  it.’  He  told  her  to
turn  her  back  to  the  bookcase,  and  say  what  she  saw  on  the  other
side;  and  she  said,  ‘I  see  something  shining  like  that  which  soldiers
wear.  She  also  described  some  old  muskets  and  warlike  implements
which  were  hanging  up  in  the  hall ;  and  upon  his  asking  her  how
they  were  fastened  up  (meaning  by  what  means  they  were  secured),
she  mistook  his  question,  but  replied,  ‘  The  muskets  are  fastened
up  in  threes,’  which  was  the  case.  He  then  asked  of  what  substance
the  floors  were  built ;  and  she  said,  ‘  Of  black  and  white  squares  ;’


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


155


which  was  correct.  He  then  took  her  to  another  apartment,  and
she  very  minutely  described  the  ascent  to  it  as  being  by  four  steps.
He  (Lord  Ducie)  told  her  to  enter  by  the  right  door,  and  say  what
she  saw  there.  She  said,  *  There  is  a  painting  on  each  side  of  the
fireplace*’  Upon  his  asking  her  if  she  saw  anything  particular  in  the
fireplace,  she  replied,  *  Yes,  it  is  carved  up  to  the  ceiling,’  which
was  quite  correct,  for  it  was  a  curious  old  Elizabethan  fireplace.
There  was  at  Tortwortli-court  a  singular  old  chesnut-tree,  and  he
told  her  that  he  wished  her  to  see  a  favourite  tree,  and  asked  her  to
accompany  him.  He  tried  to  deceive  her  by  saying,  4  Let  us  walk
close  up  to  it;’  but  she  replied,  ‘We  cannot,  for  there  are  railings
round  it.’  He  said,  ‘Yes,  wooden  railings;’  to  which  she  answered,
‘  No,  they  are  of  iron,’  which  was  the  case.  He  asked,  ‘  What
tree  is  it,’  and  she  replied  that  she  had  been  so  little  in  the  country
that  she  could  not  tell;  but  upon  his  asking  her  to  describe  the  leaf,
she  said,  ‘  It  is  a  leaf  as  dark  as  the  geranium  leaf,  large,  long,  and
jagged  at  the  edges*’  He  (Lord  Ducie)  apprehended  that  no  one  could
describe  more  accurately  than  that  the  leaf  of  the  Spanish  chesnut.
He  then  told  her  he  would  take  her  to  see  his  farm,  and  desired  her  to
look  over  a  gate  into  a  field  which  he  had  in  his  mind  and  tell  him
what  she  saw  growing.  She  replied  that  the  field  was  all  over  green,
and  asked  if  it  was  potatoes,  adding  that  she  did  not  know  much
about  the  country.  It  was  not  potatoes,  but  turnips.  He  then  said,

‘  Now  look  over  this  gate  to  the  right,  and  tell  me  what  is  growing
there.’  She  at  once  replied,  ‘There  is  nothing  growing  there;  it  is
a  field  of  wheat,  but  it  has  been  cut  and  carried.’  This  was  correct;
but  knowing  that  in  a  part  of  the  field  grain  had  been  sown  at  a  dif¬
ferent  period,  he  asked  her  if  she  was  sure  that  the  whole  of  it  had
been  cut.  She  replied,  that  she  could  not  see  the  end  of  the  field,  as
the  land  rose  in  the  middle,  which,  in  truth,  it  did.  He  then  said
to  her,  ‘Now  we  are  on  the  brow  can  you  tell  me  if  it  is  cut?’  She
answered,  ‘No,  it  is  still  growing  here.’  He  then  said  to  her,

‘  now,  let  us  come  to  this  gate,  tell  me  where  it  leads  to  ?  She
replied,  ‘  Into  a  lane.’  She  then  went  on  and  described  everything
on  his  farm  with  the  same  surprizing  accuracy,  and  upon  his  sub¬
sequently  inquiring  he  found  that  she  was  only  in  error  in  one  trifling
matter,  for  which  error  any  one  who  had  ever  travelled  (mentally)
with  a  clairvoyant  could  easily  account  without  conceiving  any  breach
of  the  truth.

“  This  case  completely  put  an  end  to  all  his  doubts,  for  he  could
not  imagine  the  possibility  of  any  collusion.  If  the  girl  had  even
known  who  he  was  and  where  his  farm  was,  she  could  not  possibly
have  known  the  state  of  his  crops,  and  that  his  field  of  wheat  had
been  cut,  for  at  the  time  he  did  not  know  it  himself  (hear).  Being
thus  convinced,  he  felt  it  to  be  his  duty  to  come  forward  and  bear
his  testimony  to  the  truth  of  mesmerism,  both  with  regard  to  its
higher  and  its  lower  powers.  Having  said  thus  much  of  his  own
belief  and  conversion  he  would  now  briefly  state  the  object  of  the
meeting.

“  A  number  of  gentlemen  of  this  city  having  formed  themselves
VOL.  VII.  N


156


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.


into  a  committee  for  the  purpose  of  investigating  mesmerism  as  a
science,  and  being  fully  convinced  of  its  truth,  of  its  advantages,  ot
the  good  which  resulted  from  its  use,  and  the  relief  it  afforded  in
disease  in  cases  which  had  not  yielded  to  medical  practice,  they  were
desirous  of  seeing  its  benefits  more  widely  diffused  and  extended  to
the  relief  of  the  poor,  and  being  mostly  gentlemen  in  business,  and
unable  to  give  up  their  time  to  the  numerous  cases  which  were  pre¬
sented,  they  now  sought  to  obtain  funds  so  as  to  enable  them  to
engage  paid  agents,  who  should  apply  themselves,  under  medical
care,  to  the  cure  of  diseases  ;  and  he  was  glad  to  find  that  there  were
medical  gentlemen  in  this  city  willing  to  superintend  the  operations
of  the  mesmerisers,  because  he  had  ever  considered  mesmerism  to  be
a  science,  the  practice  of  which  ought  to  be  carried  out  under  me¬
dical  supervision.

‘‘There  was  one  fact  he  had  omitted  to  state,  and  which  he
should  like  to  mention  in  connexion  with  the  power  of  clairvoyance.
During  the  time  of  his  attendance  on  the  surgeon  in  London  he  saw
the  clairvoyant  under  whom  he  operated,  and  one  day  he  was  sur¬
prized  to  find  her  rubbing  the  bandage  which  hung  against  the  wall
with  the  armature  of  the  magnet.  He  said  to  her,  ‘  Sarah,  what
are  you  doing  V  to  which  she  replied,  ‘O,  this  magnetizes  as  well,
and  saves  my  strength.’  He  asked  her  how  she  knew  this,  and  she
said  the  same  as  she  knew  everything  else.  About  two  months  after
this  Dr.  Gregory’s  translation  of  Reichenbach’s  work  came  out,  and
early  in  its  pages  he  stated  he  had  discovered  that  the  mesmeric
force  did  exist  in  the  magnet  separate  from  its  magnetic  power,  be¬
cause  he  found  that  his  sensitive  patients  were  affected  by  the  arma¬
ture  of  the  magnet,  the  same  as  by  the  hand.  He  thought  this
wonderful,  that  an  untaught,  ignorant  woman,  as  this  clairvoyant
was,  should,  by  her  own  clairvoyance — her  own  innate  power — dis¬
cover  that  which  had  engaged  the  attention  of  philosophers  and  men
of  science  for  many  years.

“  Mr.  Saunders,  having  apologized  for  the  absence  of  Mr.  Stone,
barrister,  who  was  unavoidably  detained,  but  who  would  otherwise
have  attended  and  given  the  object  of  the  meeting  his  fullest  support,
proceeded  to  read  the  report  of  the  committee  as  follows  : —

“  The  object  of  the  present  meeting  is  to  present,  in  a  more  public  manner,
what  has  been  lately  doing  at  Bristol  in  reference  to  mesmerism.

“  The  origin  of  the  Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute  arose  from  the  following  cir¬
cumstances  : —

“  About  two  years  since  a  few  gentlemen,  desirous  of  thoroughly  testing  the
truths  of  mesmerism,  formed  themselves  into  a  society,  under  the  name  of  the
Mesmeric  Investigation  Society.  The  committee  were  limited  in  number,  they
held  their  meetings  fortnightly,  and  on  these  occasions  invited  visitors  to  witness
their  experiments.  The  society  itself,  with  the  exception  of  one  member  who
retired  after  the  third  meeting,  all  became  satisfied  of  the  existence  and  truthful¬
ness  of  mesmeric  phenomena,  and  the  same  may  be  truly  said  of  the  various
visitors.

“  The  society  having  thus  realized  their  first  intentions,  and  during  their
investigations  seen  a  variety  of  cases  in  which  mesmerism  had  effected  great  good
as  a  curative  agent,  and  in  many  instances,  after  all  other  means  had  failed,  they
became  desirous  of  seeing  its  benefits  more  generally  extended,  and  for  this  pur-


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


1  £  *7
10/

pose  have  subscribed  their  names  as  willing  to  carry  out,  as  far  as  possible,  these
intentions.

“  To  give  the  fullest  extent  and  sanction  to  these  intentions,  the  committee
put  themselves  in  communication  with  several  parties  who  were  ostensibly  known
to  be  favoui*able  to  the  subject,  and  they  have  now  the  proud  satisfaction  of
announcing  that  their  applications  for  countenance  and  support  have  been  re¬
sponded  to  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner.  The  committee  feel  the  highest
pleasure  in  stating  that  on  application  being  made  to  their  noble  chairman,  the
president,  Earl  Ducie,  his  lordship  most  readily  responded  to  it,  and  then
announced  that  his  own  convictions  on  the  subject  were  so  confirmed,  that  he
should  not  hesitate  to  declare  them  publicly.  It  is,  therefore,  owing  to  his  lord¬
ship’s  declarations  that  we  are  indebted  to  our  meeting  on  this  occasion,  and  have
the  privilege  of  his  present  support.  The  applications  to  the  various  other
members  of  the  society  as  vice-presidents  were  equally  satisfactory,  and  their
fullest  acquiescence  has  been  shown  by  their  presence,  or  by  the  most  conclusive
reasons  for  their  inability  to  attend.

“After  what  has  lately  transpired  in  the  mesmeric  world,*  an  epitome  of
which  will  be  found  in  the  pages  of  The  Zoist,  it  would  be  superfluous  to  enlarge
further  on  mesmerism  as  a  curative  agent,  except  to  indicate  that  there  is  a  large
class  of  diseases  for  which  there  does  not  appear  so  adequate  a  remedy  as  mes¬
merism — amongst  these  will  be  found  epileptic  and  other  similar  nervous  affections  ;
there  is  also  another  important  feature  in  its  application  to  surgical  operations
without  pain.

“  It  is,  therefore,  with  a  view  to  extend  these  benefits  to  the  poorer  classes
that  the  society  now  appeals  to  the  support  of  the  public,  assuring  them  that
there  are  now  many  distressing  and  deserving  applicants,  who  are  anxiously  wait¬
ing  to  avail  themselves  of  mesmerism  in  their  particular  cases.  The  society  are
desirous  of  having  properly-qualified  mesmerists  engaged,  who  will  act  under  the
direction  of  the  medical  officers  and  acting  committee.  This,  however,  cannot
be  accomplished  for  want  of  funds.”

“Mr.  H.  U.  Janson,  of  Pennsylvania-park,  Exeter,  in  moving
the  adoption  of  the  report,  referred  to  the  progress  which  mesmeric
science  had  made  in  the  city  with  which  he  was  connected,  espe¬
cially  as  a  therapeutic  or  curative  agent;  for  that  mesmerism  did
possess  an  important  power  in  that  respect  could  not  be  doubted  by
any  one  who  had  looked  into  the  subject.  He  was  requested  the
other  day  to  attend  a  meeting  at  Tiverton,  in  which  town  there  was
a  famous  mesmeric  operator.  At  that  meeting  26  of  the  best  cases
were  selected,  and  he  (Mr.  Janson)  should  never  forget  the  effect
produced  on  his  mind.  The  cured  patients  all  came  forward  and
told  their  own  stories,  which  were  confirmed  by  many  respectable
persons  who  knew  them  well.  Several  of  those  cases  had  before
been  discharged  from  hospitals  as  incurable,  and  one  man,  who  had
been  afflicted  for  twenty  years,  told  his  tale  with  so  much  artless
gravity  that  no  one  could  doubt  it.  Some  time  ago,  Mr.  Parker,  a
talented  surgeon  of  Exeter,  whom  he  (the  speaker)  considered  one
of  the  lights  on  the  side  of  mesmerism,  had  a  case  of  aneurism,  the
operation  for  which  consisted  in  cutting  down  into  and  through  the
artery,  taking  up  the  ends,  and  tying  them  with  what  were  called
ligatures.  That  patient  had  before  been  operated  upon  at  the  Exeter
hospital,  and  his  sufferings  -were  so  intense  that  it  took  eight  men
to  hold  him.  Afterwards  the  aneurism  broke  out  again,  and  the
poor  man  was  terrified  almost  to  death  at  the  thought  of  the  pain.
Mr.  Parker  mesmerised  him,  and  his  was  a  favourable  case  (all  cases,


158


Mesmerism  in  the  IV est  of  England.


it  was  important  to  bear  in  mind,  were  not  alike).  Mr.  Parker  ope¬
rated,  divided  the  artery,  and  completed  the  operation,  made  every¬
thing  right,  and  then  awakened  the  man,  who,  up  to  the  present
moment,  had  not  the  slightest  recollection  of  the  operation  having
been  performed.  It  was  not  for  him  (Mr.  Janson)  to  say  much  of
his  own  doings,  but  he  might  state  that  he  had  practized  mesmerism
for  the  period  of  six  years,  during  which  time  he  had  had  come  under
his  personal  observation  every  mesmeric  phenomenon  which  he  had
ever  read  or  heard  of — not  only  the  lower  phenomena  of  coma,  trac¬
tion,  insensibility  to  pain,  rigidity,  &c.,  but  the  higher  phenomena,
community  of  taste,  mental  travelling,  introvision,  and  latterly  one
case  of  prevision,  which  he  conceived  to  be  the  highest  power — for
what  could  exceed  the  power  of  prophecy  ?  This  power  was  almost
too  high  to  be  mentioned  at  a  mixed  public  assembly,  for  our  pre¬
sent  state  of  knowledge  was  not  sufficiently  advanced  for  it.  In  the
case  he  referred  to  the  patient  had,  by  the  power  of  prevision,  fore¬
told  every  circumstance,  even  to  the  most  minute — not  only  the
progress  of  the  disease,  the  period  at  which  she  would  be  affected
by  particular  symptoms,  but  she  had  likewise  foretold  other  things,
in  regard  of  which  there  could  have  been  no  deception  or  collusion.
For  instance  the  patient  once  said,  ‘  I  shall  have  a  letter  delivered  to
me  next  Thursday,  at  3  o’clock.’  He  had  put  down  the  fact  in  his
note-book.  The  patient  had  told  him  what  would  be  the  contents  of
the  letter,  and  had  dictated  those  contents  word  by  word,  some  of
the  matters  treated  of  not  being  mere  common-place  matters.  He
had  written  down  the  letter  from  the  dictator,  and  when  it  after¬
wards  arrived  had  taken  the  letter  in  one  hand  and  the  note-book  in
his  other,  and  had  found  them  correspond  in  every  particular  (hear,
hear).  He  scarcely  expected  this  fact  to  be  believed — the  power
was  too  much  in  advance  of  the  present  day;  but  he  considered  it
right  to  place  before  the  meeting  all  he  knew.  Mr.  Janson  went  on
to  enlarge  on  the  value  of  mesmerism  as  a  curative  agent  in  sciatica,
neuralgia,  and  other  diseases,  and  cited  a  case  to  illustrate  its  extra¬
ordinary  power  in  mitigating  the  last-named  painful  disorder;  and,
after  relating  the  particulars  of  his  own  conversion,  he  concluded  by
expressing  the  satisfaction  it  afforded  him  to  find  the  truth  being
rapidly  accepted  by  the  class  which  had  at  first  opposed  it  with  the
greatest  degree  of  virulence — the  religious  community.  It  would  be
remembered  that  a  book  was  published  to  prove  that  mesmerism  was
a  satanic  agency;  this  feeling  had  died  away,  mesmerism  was  now
being  strongly  taken  up  by  the  very  class  which  had  most  denounced
it,  and  Dr.  Scoresby,  a  divine  well  known  by  his  writings,  and  who
was  a  member  of  the  Royal  Society,  had  recently  delivered  lectures
in  favour  of  it  at  Torquay.

“Mr.  G.  Cumberland  seconded  the  resolution,  which  passed
nem.  con.

“  Mr.  Barham  proposed,  *  That  a  mesmeric  institution  be  esta¬
blished  in  Bristol,  to  be  supported  by  voluntary  contribution.’
After  stating  the  process  by  which  his  mind  had  become  convinced
of  the  truth  of  mesmerism,  Mr.  B.  said,  he  was  once  at  a  party  at


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


159


Dr.  Elliotson’ s,  where  a  great  many  literary  and  scientific  men  were
present,  and  among  the  cases  was  one  of  a  young  lady  who  exhibited
a  high  degree  of  nervous  sensibility.  Wishing  to  try  an  experiment
which  should  be  a  complete  test  as  far  as  his  own  mind  was  con¬
cerned,  he  obtained  permission  to  operate,  and  after  making  a  few
passes,  he  produced  all  the  usual  forms  of  traction,  &c.  Suspecting
that  this  might,  after  all,  be  feigned,  he  resolved  upon  trying,  by  the
mere  force  of  mental  volition,  to  raise  her  eyelids  so  as  to  discover
the  eye.  He  stood  behind  her,  and  placed  his  hand  above  without
touching  her,  and  with  a  very  few  efforts  up  came  the  eyelids,  ex¬
hibiting  the  eyes  in  that  peculiar  state  in  which  they  were  in  the
condition  of  somnambulism,  having  a  glassy  glare,  and  ‘  no  specu¬
lation’  in  them.  He  then  tried  if  he  could  by  the  same  power  of
volition  draw  the  eyes  from  side  to  side.  He  passed  his  hand
behind  her  quietly,  so  that  she  should  not  by  possibility  hear  any
noise  or  motion  through  the  air,  and  derive  no  hint  of  what  effect  he
wished  to  produce,  but  his  will  prevailed  over  her  visual  organs,
which  followed  his  hand  with  rapidity  and  certainty  as  he  moved  it
from  side  to  side,  till  at  length  it  obtained  a  rapidity  of  lateral
motion  which  he  would  defy  any  one  not  in  a  mesmeric  state  to
equal.  Her  eyes  positively  vibrated  with  such  celerity  that  all  were
astonished,  and  regarded  the  case  as  the  most  convincing  proof  they
had  seen.  Another  case  he  would  cite  was  of  a  poor  woman  in  the
neighbourhood  of  London,  who  had  a  severe  nervous  disease,  which
had  kept  her  awake  for  ten  or  twelve  nights,  and  reduced  her  to
that  state  of  nervous  irritability  that  her  mind  was  becoming  affected,
and  she  said,  that  if  she  could  not  get  to  sleep  she  should  certainly
go  mad.  The  medical  attendants,  three  or  four  in  number,  did  all
they  could  by  way  of  medical  treatment,  and  the  strongest  narcotics
were  given  to  her  in  vain.  At  last  they  resolved  to  try  mesmerism,
and  after  one  or  two  experiments  she  was  put  into  a  sound  sleep,
which  lasted  for  three  hours,  and  she  awoke  much  better.  This
was  repeated  every  day,  and  it  was  observed  that  she  always  slept
for  three  hours  unless  when  a  few  passes  were  made  just  before  her
time  of  awaking,  in  which  case  she  would  sleep  for  three  hours
longer.  On  one  occasion  she  was  kept  sleeping  for  nine  hours,  and
at  length  she  was  completely  recovered,  grew  strong,  and  expressed
great  gratitude  for  having  had  her  life  saved.  Mr.  Barham  con¬
cluded  as  follows: — The  great  majority  of  those  who  have  carefully
investigated  this  subject  have  come  to  a  conclusion  that  there  exists
in  man,  as  one  of  his  constituent  principles,  a  certain  subtle  element,
known  by  the  names  of  animal  electricity,  animal  magnetism,  gal¬
vanism,  the  nervous  energy,  the  nervous  fluid,  &c.  This  element
occupies  a  sort  of  intermediate  position  between  soul  and  body,  and
it  is  by  means  of  this  animal  electricity  that  our  mental  will  acts  on
our  bodily  organs.  For  instance — when  I  will  to  move  my  hand,
the  mental  volition  acts  immediately  on  the  electricity  within  me,
and  that  puts  the  arm  in  motion.  It  is  moreover  proved  by  experi¬
ments  that  a  man’s  will  has  not  merely  the  power  of  circulating
electric  currents  through  his  own  body,  but  likewise  of  transmitting


160


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.


them  to  other  bodies,  so  as  to  influence  them  by  its  operations  in  a
very  remarkable  manner.  There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  this
science  of  mesmerism  or  animal  magnetism,  which  treats  of  the
nature  and  laws  of  animal  electricity,  was  more  or  less  familiar  to
the  initiated  sages  of  all  times  who  were  conversant  with  the  spi¬
ritual  energies  of  nature,  and  that  they  employed  it  as  an  effective
medicinal  agent,  and  that  by  it  they  wrought  many  wonders,  which
were  accounted  magical  and  supernatural.  Since  its  revival  under
the  genius  of  Mesmer,  it  has  been  subjected  to  the  most  rigid
scrutiny  of  the  most  distinguished  philosophers,  and  been  tested  by
all  imaginable  methods.  The  evident  palpable  result  of  this  severe
scrutiny  is  its  rapid  growth  in  public  estimation.  By  its  own  sheer
truth  and  merit — by  the  stern  force  of  facts  and  experiments — it  has
made  numberless  disciples  from  those  who  were  its  bitterest  foes.
And  it  is  most  remarkable  that  those  who  have  given  it  the  greatest
amount  of  examination  have  thereby  attained  most  faith  in  its  effi¬
cacy,  while  those  who  have  never  given  it  a  fair  and  full  trial  are
those  that  are  most  incredulous.  It  is  very  observable  that  a  belief
in  mesmerism  is  not  confined  to  any  particular  clique  or  party  of
interested  individuals,  but  that  it  has  gained  the  assent  and  pa¬
tronage  of  our  leading  thinkers  of  all  orders  and  classes.  Kings,
bishops,  noblemen,  lawyers,  and  physicians  now  openly  profess  their
convictions  of  its  truth  and  importance.  Those  who  have  given  it
full  candid  investigation  have  been  generally  obliged  to  believe  it
whether  they  liked  it  or  not,  by  observing  that  the  mesmeric  opera¬
tions  produced  similar  specific  effects  under  all  varieties  of  circum¬
stances,  and  that  no  collusion  could  possibly  exist  among  multitudes
of  the  patients  whom  it  influenced.  And  thus  the  wise,  the  learned,
the  pious,  and  philanthropic,  have  arrived  at  a  belief  in  mesmerism
— vea,  and  a  hearty  love  of  it;  for  they  see  that  its  influences  are
almost  always  of  a  benignant  and  curative  nature.  They  conscien¬
tiously  approve  of  that  magnetic  power  which  is  the  instrument  of
procuring  sleep,  mitigating  pain,  healing  disease,  and  producing  a
bland  insensibility  to  tortures  that  can  scarcely  be  sustained  without
death,  or  imagined  without  horror.  Let  us  hear  no  more,  then,  of
that  ungenerous  and  untenable  theory  respecting  mesmerism,  which
ascribes  it  to  Satan  and  denounces  it  as  diabolic.  Let  us  rather
devoutly  thank  heaven  for  a  therapeutic  power,  whereby  we  are  now
enabled  to  extend  human  happiness  and  reduce  human  misery  in
those  instances  wherein  all  other  remedies  have  failed.  And  let  us  in
future  confine  our  comminations  and  exorcisms  to  those  unmis-
takeable  specimens  of  malignity  and  vice  which  force  true  men  to
weep  and  bleed.  Neither  is  the  objection  that  mesmerism  is  no
more  than  a  peculiar  act  of  imagination  of  any  practical  value;  for
no  imagination  is  at  all  sufficient  to  produce  the  physical  phenomena
of  mesmerism,  or  the  astonishing  facts  of  clairvoyance.  Be  this  as
it  will,  the  British  government,  and  many  philosophic  individuals,
are  now  establishing  in  this  country  and  abroad  mesmeric  insti¬
tutions  and  hospitals  devoted  to  the  study  and  practice  of  mesmeric
science,  because  they  believe  its  efficacy  in  alleviating  many  diseases


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


161


aud  infirmities  of  mind  and  body.  It  seems,  therefore,  to  be  right
that  in  Bristol,  which  has  often  been  called  the  second  city  in  our
kingdom,  a  mesmeric  institute  should  be  established  for  the  culti¬
vation  of  the  science  and  the  benefit  of  persons  of  all  orders  whose
cases  may  require  mesmeric  treatment.  There  can  be  little  doubt
that  such  an  institute  will  be  of  practical  service,  and  be  found  ot
considerable  value  among  the  various  benevolent  establishments  for
which  this  city  is  jnstly  renowned.

“  Dr.  Storer  seconded  the  resolution  with  great  pleasure,  and
could  do  so  with  much  honesty  on  account  of  his  experience  as  a
medical  man.  Previous  to  his  adoption  of  mesmerism  he  was  exten¬
sively  engaged  in  practice  in  London,  and  was  attached  to  the
medical  staff  of  a  hospital  where  he  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  a
great  number  of  diseases  of  the  nervous  system.  He  was  satisfied,
and  he  was  sure  that  every  surgeon  who  would  honestly  express  his
opinion  must  agree  with  him,  that  in  nervous  disease  the  ordinary
means  of  medical  treatment  afforded  no  security.  He  had  become  a
convert  under  Dr.  Elliotson,  at  the  London  University,  and  had
since  practised  mesmerism  extensively  ;  and  he  most  unhesitatingly
said  that  he  had  been  enabled  to  control  nervous  disease  in  cases
in  which  ordinary  medical  treatment  had  proved  quite  unavailing.
Nay,  he  might  take  higher  ground,  and  state  its  reference  to  mental
philosophy;  also  that  mesmerism  was  applicable  to  cases  of  insanity;
and  he  was  happy  to  say  that  there  were  now  many  establishments
where  insanity  was  treated  on  the  principles  of  mesmerism  and  phre¬
nology,  without  a  knowledge  of  which  sciences  no  man  was  com¬
petent  to  the  treatment  of  cases  of  insanity.  In  almost  every  disease
mesmerism  had  manifested  extraordinary  power.  In  the  last  num¬
ber  of  The  Zoist  there  was  a  case  in  which  the  lady  of  the  Arch¬
bishop  of  Dublin  had  cured  a  poor  woman  in  her  neighbourhood  of
a  blindness  of  twenty-six  years’  standing.  Deafness  and  every  dis¬
ease  of  the  nervous  system  was  more  or  less  brought  under  its  influ¬
ence,  and  as  a  medical  man,  having  studied  the  old  school  of  physic
and  the  new  school,  he  could  state  that  mesmeric  provision  was
absolutely  needed  for  the  poorer  classes.  The  number  who  applied
for  assistance  was  extraordinary  :  the  society  did  all  it  could,  and
undertook  as  many  cases  as  possible;  but  a  few  hands  were  not
equal  to  the  work.  He  should  be  glad  if  every  hospital  had  a  mes¬
meric  ward,  but  as  such  was  not  the  case  they  must  endeavour  to
supply  the  want  by  an  independent  institution.

“  The  resolution  having  been  adopted,

“  The  Rev.  H.  I.  Roper  moved  the  appointment  of  the  following
officers  of  the  society — President,  the  Right  Hon.  Earl  Ducie;  vice-
presidents,  J.  A.  Gordon,  Esq.,  Naish-house;  General  White,  Bath;
H.  U.  Janson,  Esq.,  Exeter;  John  Stone,  Esq.,  Clifton;  T.  W.
Saunders,  Esq.,  London;  Brooke  Smith,  Esq.,  Bristol;  Rev.  George
Sandby,  vicar  of  Flixton ;  and  Major  Buckley,  Cheltenham;  treasurer,
Mr.  Hazard;  secretary,  Mr.  Saunders;  and  committee,  Messrs.
Sells,  Cumberland,  Howells,  Evans,  W.  Hazard,  Mathews,  Ryland,
Buck,  and  Dr.  Storer.  Mr.  Roper  said,  without  claiming  any
extensive  acquaintance  with  mesmeric  science,  he  knew  enough,  had


162


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.


read  enough,  and  had  seen  enough  to  convince  him  that  it  was  a
very  important  medical  agent  granted  to  us  by  the  mercy  of  God  for
the  relief  of  human  suffering  (applause).  The  cases  that  had  derived
benefit  from  it  were  far  too  many  and  too  well  authenticated  to  leave
any  doubt  upon  the  mind;  and  he  was,  therefore,  exceedingly  glad
that  a  mesmeric  institute  was  formed  in  Bristol,  for  the  purpose  of
diffusing  the  knowledge  of  mesmeric  science,  and  giving  the  poorer
classes  an  opportunity  of  participating  in  its  advantages.  The  sup¬
porters  of  mesmeric  science  need  not  much  disturb  themselves  on
account  of  the  prejudices  which  still  remained  in  the  minds  of  some.
It  was  the  fate  of  every  onward  movement  to  meet  at  the  outset  with
opposition.  It  seemed  almost  essential  to  every  great  advance  in
science  that  such  should  be  its  early  history  (hear).  He  did  not
doubt  that  in  a  very  few  years  mesmerism  would  occupy  the  position
which  its  friends  wished  for  it,  as  an  important  curative  means,  and
that  many  who  now  looked  at  it  with  shyness,  with  mistrust,  and
even  with  aversion,  would  be  disposed  to  view  it,  as  he  believed  it
to  be — as  a  most  important  blessing,  emanating  from  the  author  of
all  good.

“  Mr.  W.  Hazard,  in  seconding  the  resolution,  said  he  had  been
a  follower  of  mesmerism  for  sixteen  years,  and  in  bearing  testimony
to  its  power  as  a  medical  agent,  stated  a  case  in  which  he  had  cured
a  case  of  scrofulous  disease  of  the  legs  of  five  years  standing,  which
had  been  rejected  from  the  hospitals  as  incurable,  and  in  w  hich  the
wounds  extended  from  near  the  ankle  to  just  below  the  knee.  In
that  case  the  patient  predeclared  his  cure  in  nine  months,  in  which
time  it  was  actually  consummated.

“  Mr.  Henry  C.  Howells  was  then  called  upon  to  move  the  fourth
resolution.  He  said,  Mr.  Chairman,  eleven  years  ago  when  residing
in  Western  Pennsylvania,  on  the  banks  of  the  beautful  Ohio,  I  had
lent  to  me  a  strange  kind  of  book,  and  as  it  then  appeared  to  me,  a
new  thing  under  the  sun.  It  was  a  work  written  by  the  Rev.  Mr.
Townshend,  on  mesmerism.  I  read  it  with  astonishment,  and
pondered  over  every  page.  It  bore  the  impress  of  truth,  and  I  felt
satisfied  that  it  was  the  production  of  an  honest  man  ;  so  that  it
appeared  to  me,  to  require  more  credulity  to  believe  that  the  author
was  imposing  a  cheat  upon  his  readers,  than  to  admit  the  truth  of
all  the  marvellous  accounts  he  gave.  While  his  reasoning  was
natural  and  conclusive,  it  led  me  also  to  consider  what  analogy  did
mesmerism  bear  to  any  known  science:  that  of  mineral  magnetism
at  once  presented  itself.  I  then  concluded  that  if  one  mass  of  inert
matter  could  convey  its  properties  to  another,  and  that  to  a  third,
and  so  on,  if  mesmerism  were  not  true,  there  must  be  a  blank  in
human  science  ;  and  man,  the  noblest  work  of  the  Creator,  and  the
epitome  of  all  creation,  possessed  less  power  over  man  and  other
sentient  beings,  than  one  piece  of  metal  does  over  another.  This
appeared  to  be  impossible.  I  therefore,  gave  my  assent  to  mesmerism
ex  animo.  I  was  equally  satisfied  that  whatever  powers,  physically,
intellectually,  morally,  or  spiritually  man  now  possesses,  man  always
did  possess;  and,  also,  whatever  powers  man  does  possess,  must


Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.


163


have  been  the  impartation  of  a  wise  and  beneficent  Creator;  and,
finally  whatever  the  Creator  does  must  be  for  the  good  and  happi¬
ness  of  His  intelligent  creature  man;  who,  even  in  his  fallen  state,
bears  some  impress  of  the  deity.  I  therefore  came  to  the  happy
conclusion  that  mesmerism  is  the  gift  of  God.

“  A  few  months  after  this,  I  had  an  opportunity  of  witnessing  a
great  variety  of  mesmeric  phenomena  which  greatly  delighted  me,  as
an  evidence  of  the  truth  of  all  I  had  read,  but  gave  me  no  new  idea
on  the  subject.  Four  years  elapsed,  when  I  returned  to  England,  and
was  surprized  to  find  that  mesmerism  was  less  understood  and  less
believed  here  than  in  America.

“  I  felt  satisfied  that  human  magnetism  (which  I  think  is  a
better  name)  was  intended  and  bestowed  as  a  blessing  on  mankind;
that  it  was  the  primeval  curative  agent,  known  and  practised  before
man’s  ingenuity  discovered  any  other,  either  in  plants  or  minerals.
The  first  impulse  of  nature  is  now,  as  it  always  must  have  been,  on
receiving  a  contusion  or  feeling  a  pain,  to  stroke  the  hand  over  the
part ;  this  is  the  germ  of  mesmerism.  I  found  too,  that  most  me¬
dical  men  opposed  mesmerism  with  their  strongest  arguments;  a
shrug  of  the  shoulders  or  a  hearty  laugh  ;  that  religious  people  and
especially  the  most  reputedly  religious,  had  settled  it  in  their  minds
to  be  satanic  altogether.  While  I  advocated  it  as  a  natural  science,
and  therefore,  the  gift  of  Gody  some  would  look  at  me  with  a  kind
of  shrinking  horror,  and  a  prying  gaze,  as  though  my  visage  was
altered  for  the  worse,  and  some  satanic  buddings  appeared  on  my
head!  It  was  then  my  turn  to  laugh,  for  facts  and  reason  failed.  I
therefore  proposed,  to  some  of  my  religious  friends,  a  question  to
solve.  After  stating  that  mesmeric  somnolency  with  some  was
induced  without  the  intervention  of  a  second  person,  but  simply  by
their  looking  at  an  object  on  the  wall,  it  may  be  even  a  potato  on
the  end  of  a  skewer;  my  problem  was,  does  his  satanic  majesty  take
possession  of  the  skewer  or  the  potato,  so  as  to  mesmerise  the  patient.

“  My  argument  that  mesmerism  is  of  divine  origin,  because  it
removes  pain  and  heals  diseases,  is  gravely  met  by  ‘  Satan  you  know
sometimes  transforms  himself  (in  appearance)  as  an  angel  of  light.’
To  this  my  reply  was,  did  he  ever  do  so  to  relieve  suffering  humanity,
either  in  body  or  mind ;  give  me  but  one  instance,  since  the  world
began,  and  I  give  up  mesmerism  as  his  work.  But  as  none  can  be
adduced,  and  you  say  it  is  his  work,  if  it  be  so  he  certainly  must,
in  these  reforming  times,  have  undergone  a  considerable  change  for
the  better,  and  be  impelled  by  some  yearning  pity  for  those  whom
he  formerly  sought  to  destroy.  He  then  is  a  hopeful  character  after
all!

“  But  gravely,  Mr.  Chairman,  it  is  deeply  to  be  regretted,  that
the  ignorant,  the  superstitious,  and  the  hyper*religious,  have  always
brought  forward  the  Scriptures  of  truth  to  oppose  and  frustrate  the
truth  of  natural  science  ;  and  when  they  are  thus  made  antagonist
to  each  other,  the  former  must  suffer.  The  laws  of  nature  were  by
the  divine  Architect  first  established  ;  and  he  is  no  true  friend  to
religion  who  quotes  its  high  authority  to  make  void  those  laws,  any


161


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.

more  than  they  who  said,  £  lie  casteth  out  devils  by  Beelzebub,  the
prince  of  the  devils.’

“  When  blessings  come  near  home.  Sir,  we  know  their  worth ;
and  when  I  consider,  and  can  attest,  that  I  have  often  in  twenty
minutes  relieved  the  partner  of  my  life  of  excruciating  anguish,  I
long  that  every  human  being,  rich  or  poor,  should  fully  understand
and  successfully  practise  mesmerism.  Mine  is  no  narrow  creed;  as
a  member  of  the  human  family,  I  account  every  man  my  brother,  and
every  woman  my  sister,  the  wide  world  over ;  and  I  can  but  half  enjoy
my  blessing,  without  earnestly  desiring  that  it  may  be  enjoyed  by
every  being  that  bears  the  form  of  man.

“  To  all  religious  persons,  especially  who  desire  to  consider  the
subject  of  mesmerism,  I  would  respectfully  and  earnestly  recommend
the  works  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Townshend  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  Sandby,  also
•  that  invaluable  periodical  called  ‘The  Zoist.’

“I  have  spoken  of  medical  men.  They  have  generally  scoffed
at  mesmerism,  because  it  is  by  them  considered  unprofessional ;  it
is  also  within  the  reach  of  all  men  of  common  sense.  But  their
opposition  is  futile  ;  the  light  of  truth  cannot  be  confined  to  a  pill
box;  the  people  will  teach  them.  They  must  therefore,  however,
reluctantly  come  up  to  the  mark,  and  be  content  to  follow  in  the
wake  of  the  noble  Drs.  Elliotson,  Esdaile,  and  others  ;  who  for
having  cheerfully  laid  upon  the  altar  of  truth  their  professional
honours  and  their  pecuniary  interests,  have  been  subject  to  the  abuse
of  vulgar  and  narrow,  though  somewhat  educated  minds.  They  have
been  called  quacks,  because  they  have  told  plain  truth  in  plain
English.  Truly  noble  minds  need  no  meretricious  guises  of  mystery,
hieroglyphics,  and  dead  language.  What  is  beneficial  to  man,  they
desire  that  all  men  should  know.  When  medical  men  are  right  on
this  subject,  we  shall  see  mesmerisers  kept  in  all  the  hospitals  of
the  kingdom,  the  same  as  in  India  under  Dr.  Esdaile.  With  these
remarks,  Sir,  I  beg  to  move  the  adoption  of  the  following  resolution,
‘  That  a  subscription  be  opened  for  the  support  of  the  Bristol  Mes¬
meric  Institute.’

“Dr.  Stokes  seconded  the  resolution,  and  said  he  had  found
mesmerism  in  his  own  practice  to  be  emphatically  the  medicine  of
the  poor.  It  had  produced  wonderful  effects  among  them,  and
would  doubtless  continue  to  do  so,  either  alone  or  as  an  adjunct  of
the  recognized  medical  treatment.

“  The  resolution  having  been  adopted,

“  Lord  Ducie  apologized  for  the  absence  of  Mr.  J.  Adam  Gordon,
who  was  a  warm  supporter  of  the  science,  but,  having  only  just
returned  from  Paris,  had  been  prevented  from  attending.  Mr.
William  Herapath,  who  was  well  known  to  them  as  a  gentleman  of
high  scientific  attainments,  was  likewise  prevented  being  present,
although  the  cause  had  his  kindest  wishes.

“Mr.  Saunders  then  announced  a  donation  of  £10  from  Lord
Ducie,  one  of  £5  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Martyn,  of  £2  by  Mr.  Janson,
and  several  of  £1  each.  Thanks  having  been  voted  to  the  noble
chairman,  the  meeting  broke  up.”


(  165  )


Y.  Various  Mesmeric  Cures.  By  Mr.  Capern,  of  Tiverton.

A  meeting  was  held  in  the  Mayoralty  Boom  of  Tiverton,
on  Thursday,  October  5th  last,  for  the  purpose  of  investigat¬
ing  many  extraordinary  cures  effected  in  various  diseases  by
Mr.  Thomas  Capern  with  mesmerism.  A  hundred  and  twenty
ladies  were  present,  and,  besides  them,  John  Heathcote,
Esq.,  M.P.,  S.  Amory,  Esq.,  of  London,  E.  Hole,  Esq.,
George  Coles,  Esq.,  John  Barne,  Esq.,  H.  Dunsford,  Esq.,
A.  Brewin,  Esq.,  nearly  the  whole  of  the  clergy  and  the
dissenting  ministers,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  members  of
the  medical  profession,  who  had  been  especially  invited  to
attend.

The  Mayor,  John  Snell,  having  kindly  consented  to  take
the  chair,  Mr.  Capern  made  some  remarks  upon  various
branches  of  mesmerism,  and  then  introduced  successively
about  thirty  individuals,  all  of  whom  had  received  more  or
less  benefit  from  his  manipulations.  Each  stated  in  his  or
her  own  simple  language  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  disease,
and  the  amount  of  improvement,  or  the  duration  of  perfect
cure.  Among  the  diseases  removed,  and  many  in  a  space
of  time  so-  incredibly  short  that  only  the  direct  evidence  of
the  patients  themselves  could  have  sufficed  to  establish  the
facts,  were  tic  douloureux,  chronic  rheumatism,  fits,  spinal
affection,  paralysis,  and  palpitation  of  the  heart ;  some  of
the  cases  having  been  discharged  as  incurable  from  the  Devon
and  Exeter  Hospital.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  investigation,
which  lasted  nearly  three  hours,  the  Bev.  John  Spurway
moved,  and  the  Bev.  Mr.  Madgin  seconded,  a  vote  of  thanks
to  Mr.  Capern,  the  reverend  gentlemen  speaking  in  the  highest
terms  of  the  able  manner  in  which  Mr.  C.  had  treated  his  sub¬
ject,  and  also  of  the  candour  and  honour  of  the  proceeding,
by  which  every  individual  case  had  been  thus  boldly  subjected
to  the  trying  ordeal  of  a  hearing  in  the  presence  of  so  large
a  number  of  well-informed  and  professional  gentlemen.

The  entire  company,  a  considerable  portion  of  which  con¬
sisted  of  ladies  connected  with  the  principal  families  in  the
neighbourhood,  expressed  their  satisfaction  by  frequent  bursts
of  applause.

We  understand  that  Mr.  Capern  received  a  most  flatter¬
ing  letter  from  Lord  Palmerston,  expressing  the  deep  interest
felt  by  his  lordship  in  the  progress  of  the  science,  and  ear¬
nest^  requesting  a  report  of  the  proceedings  connected  with
the  meeting.  Mr.  Capern  intends  publishing  all  these  cases,
with  a  large  number  of  others.


166


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.


Elizabeth  Pope,  Wellbrook,  aged  50  years,  stated,
“  about  27  years  since,  I  bad  a  severe  attack  of  fever,  from
which  I  lost  the  use  of  my  limbs,  was  troubled  much  with
rheumatics  and  palpitation  of  the  heart,  extreme  noise  in  the
head,  and  deafness  in  one  ear.  I  have  been  under  various
surgeons,  but  they  done  me  no  good ;  and  I  was  in  the  Bristol
Hospital,  from  where  I  was  discharged  as  incurable;  I  was
not  able  to  walk  since  my  first  attack,  (until  I  applied  to
Mr.  Capern)  without  the  use  of  crutches,  and  then  only  on
tiptoe.  After  a  few  applications  to  him,  I  lost  the  deafness,
and  since  then  I  gradually  got  better,  and  am  now  able  to
walk  about,  and  do  all  my  washing,  domestic  affairs,  &c.,
and  although  living  a  considerable  distance  from  the  church,
I  have  been  able  to  walk  there  twice  a  day  ”

John  Croote,  mason,  Townsend.  “  I  caught  a  chill
through  working  in  an  oven,  from  which  I  was  ill  for  near
five  years,  during  which  time  my  sufferings  were  almost  un¬
bearable  ;  two  years  and  a  quarter  of  which  five  years  I  was
patient  of  the  Exeter  Hospital,  and  for  the  last  eight  weeks
of  the  two  years  and  a  quarter  I  was  ordered  to  drink  two
quarts  of  oil  per  week.  On  my  becoming  an  out-patient,
the  doctors  gave  it  as  their  opinion  that  I  should  never  be
able  to  perform  a  day’s  labour  again.  However  I  was  induced
to  try  the  effect  of  mesmerism,  and  applied  to  Mr.  Capern.
Immediately  after  the  passes  had  been  made,  I  walked  into
the  house  with  more  ease  than  I  did  during  the  time  of  my
illness — previous  to  the  passes  being  made  I  had  not  slept
above  an  hour  at  a  time  for  the  six  preceding  weeks.  The
effect  of  the  passes  caused  an  undisturbed  sleep  for  sixteen
hours.  The  passes  were  repeated  for  ten  or  twelve  successive
weeks,  and  the  pain  was  lessened  each  time.  At  the  expira¬
tion  of  that  period  I  was  able  to  resume  my  daily  labour,  and
I  am  now  as  strong  and  as  well  as  ever  I  was  in  my  life.  It
is  a  year  and  a  half  since  I  was  cured.

“  My  wife  had  been,  he  further  stated,  a  cripple  seventeen
years,  and  confined  to  her  bed  for  five  years  from  rheuma¬
tism.  She  was  unable  to  do  auything.  She  experienced
very  considerable  relief  from  the  passes  being  made,  so  much
so,  that  she  was  able  to  use  her  needle,  which  she  had  not
done  for  six  years  before/’

John  Leithbridge,  labourer,  Westexe.  “  Whilst  at
work  in  a  hay  field  (occupied  by  Mr.  Ford)  in  the  summer,
1847,  I  felt  a  sudden  attack  of  inflammation  of  the  knee.
The  swelling  was  so  rapid  that  my  friends  were  compelled  to


Various  Cures ,  by  Mr.  Capern,  of  Tiverton.  1G7

cut  my  clothes  from  me.  I  was  confined  to  my  bed  and
under  the  surgeon’s  care  for  six  weeks :  from  thence  I  was
removed  to  the  Exeter  hospital,  where  I  was  a  patient  nine
weeks.  There  was  also  a  contraction  of  the  muscles  of  the
knee.  An  issue  was  burnt  near  the  knee,  and  thirty  peas
daily  were  placed  in  it,  for  the  purpose  of  opening  a  wound.
This  caused  me  great  pain.  At  the  time  of  my  leaving,  a
consultation  of  surgeons  was  held,  and  the  case  pronounced
hopeless  and  incurable ,  and  they  stated  I  should  be  crippled
for  life.  And  I  was  compelled  to  walk  with  two  sticks.  I  met
with  Mr.  Capern  in  Westexe,  and  he  observing  the  pain  and
difficulty  I  had  in  walking,  offered  to  make  a  few  passes
over  me,  whch  he  did,  and  in  five  minutes  I  was  enabled  to
walk  without  the  assistance  of  my  stick.  Within  a  few  weeks
the  pain  left  me,  but  the  stiffness  was  not  removed  for  10  or
12  weeks,  after  which  time  I  was  enabled  to  resume  my  daily
labour,  and  am  now  as  well  as  ever  I  was  in  my  life.”

William  Isaacs,  Back  Lane,  Tiverton.  In  the  employ
of  Messrs.  Heathcoat  and  Co.  “  I  had  an  attack  of  pain  in
the  knee;  it  was  so  severe  that  I  was  confined  to  my  bed  for
six  weeks.  I  applied  to  surgeons,  who  made  incisions  above
and  below  the  knee,  which  afforded  me  but  very  little  relief,  but
after  some  time  I  was  able  to  walk  with  the  assistance  of
crutches.  On  applying  to  Mr.  Capern  he  made  a  few  passes
over  the  knee  :  immediately  after  I  found  myself  free  from  pain.
I  then  shouldered  my  crutches  and  walked  to  my  shopmates,
saying  I  should  immediately  resume  my  labour.  This  took
place  on  a  Friday,  and  I  went  to  work  the  Monday  following.
1  have  been  from  that  day  to  this  entirely  free  from  pain.”

Robert  Hole,  labourer,  Harland’s  Court.  “  I  suffered
rheumatic  pains  in  the  arm  and  shoulder  for  six  weeks,  during
which  time  I  was  unable  to  work,  or  even  use  my  arm  at  all.
I  had  surgeon’s  attendance  during  that  time,  who  continually
applied  blisters.  On  the  first  time  I  saw  Mr.  Capern,  I  had
four  blisters  up,  but,  after  a  few  passes  were  made,  I  felt  great
relief.  This  was  on  a  Friday,  and  on  the  following  Monday
I  was  able  to  resume  my  daily  labour .  I  am  now  as  well  as
ever  I  was.”

William  Manley,  mason,  Hammett’s  Lane.  “  I  had
paralysis,  and,  although  able  to  walk,  I  lost  the  entire  use  of
my  arm.  I  felt  relief  from  the  first  application,  and  on  each
succeeding  one  I  gained  strength.  I  am  now  able  to  do  my
work,  and  am  quite  recovered.”

John  Norrisii,  shoemaker,  Hammett’s  Lane,  aged  17


168


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England .


years.  “  Whilst  amusing  myself  with  other  youths,  I  was
thrown  into  the  river  Lowman,  from  which  I  took  a  chill,
which  brought  on  severe  rheumatism,  and  prevented  me  from
labour.  I  was  attended  by  surgeons  here,  who  did  not  afford
any  relief.  I  obtained  a  recommendation  to  the  Exeter  Hos¬
pital,  but  such  was  the  nature  and  severity  of  the  complaint,
that  they  neither  did  or  attempted  to  relieve  me ;  they  gave
me  no  medicine,  or  put  me  in  the  baths.  After  remaining
for  one  month,  I  came  out  pronounced  as  incurable.  I  applied
to  Mr.  Capern  on  a  Friday ;  when  lie  first  made  passes  I  felt
relief,  and,  by  their  being  repeated  the  Sunday  week  following ,
the  pains  left  me,  and  I  am  now  quite  recovered.  There  was  a
consultation  of  six  or  seven  surgeons  at  Exeter .”

John  Ferris,  yeoman,  Bolliam.  “  I  had  been  afflicted
with  rheumatic  pains  for  upwards  of  20  years,  so  much  so
that  I  have  been  unable  to  do  any  work  or  cut  my  food  at
times ;  nothing  afforded  me  relief  until  I  applied  to  Mr.  Capern,
who  made  a  few  passes  over  me,  and  I  was  immediately  relieved,
and  have  never  felt  them  since,  but  slightly  on  catching  cold,
when  I  apply  to  him,  who  relieves  me  immediately.”

Mrs.  Turner,  wife  of  Mr.  John  Turner,  schoolmaster,
aged  63.  “  I  was  troubled  with  rheumatic  pains  for  five  years.
I  could  not  walk  about  the  house  without  crutches.  After
the  passes  had  been  made  five  times,  I  was  quite  recovered  ”

Elizabeth  Allen,  wife  of  John  Allen,  Bickleigh.  “  I
was  nearly  blind  through  weakness  for  four  years.  For  twelve
months  could  not  read  or  thread  a  needle  without  spectacles ;
the  sight  of  the  left  eye  was  almost  gone.  After  a  few  appli¬
cations  to  Mr.  Capern,  I  was  able  to  go  home  and  read  the
smallest  print  and  thread  a  needle  without  them,  and  my
sight  is  now  perfectly  restored  ”

Susan  Hawkins,  St.  Andrew  Street.  “  Confirmed  tic
douloureux  of  seven  years’  duration.  For  twelve  months  pre¬
vious  to  applying  to  Mr.  Capern,  I  was  not  able  to  perform
any  kind  of  labour,  but  after  a  few  passes  I  was  quite  reco¬
vered .”

“My  son  John,  aged  14  years,  took  a  chill  in  the  eyes
while  in  Ireland  with  his  father  (a  soldier).  Had  the  opinion
of  several  private  as  well  as  regimental  surgeons  there;  also
applied  to  various  surgeons  here ;  and  he  has  been  in  the
Exeter  and  Bristol  Infirmaries ;  but  the  case  was  pronounced


Various  Cures,  by  Mr.  Caper n,  of  Tiverton.  169

as  incurable.  A  film  was  formed  on  both  eyes ;  at  times  blind
for  three  months  together :  such  was  the  inflamed  state  of  his
eyes,  that  I  could  scarcely  bear  to  look  at  him.  After  the
repeated  application  of  passes  over  him  by  Mr.  Capern,  he  is
quite  restored ;  a  little  redness  of  the  eye-lashes  only  appears
occasionally.”

John  Bowden,  labourer,  in  the  employ  of  William  Talley,
Esq.  “I  have  had  rheumatic  pains  for  13  years.  On  meeting
Mr.  Capern  in  the  street,  he  observed  me  walking  in  so  much
pain,  and  offered  to  make  a  few  passes  over  me,  which  he  did.
I  immediately  found  relief,  and  was  able  to  walk  with  more
ease  than  I  had  done  during  the  13  years ;  since  that  a  few
more  applications  have  been  made  and  I  am  now  quite  reco^'
vered.

Mrs.  Duane,  Bampton  Street.  “  I  had  confirmed  tic  dou¬
loureux  for  upwards  of  five  years  so  bad  that  I  have  been  con¬
fined  to  my  bed  six  months  at  a  time  with  three  surgeons  attend¬
ing  me  at  once,  and  at  last  they  pronounced  me  incurable.  I
have  had  a  gallon  of  water,  night  and  morning,  thrown  over
my  head,  it  being  so  excessively  hot.  I  applied  to  Mr.  Capern,
and,  after  passes  frequently  made  by  him  on  me,  I  am  now
quite  recovered .”

Mrs.  Hoare,  Frog  Street.  “  I  had  a  violent  tooth-ache  for
four  years,  occasioned  by  a  fever.  I  could  not  rest  night  or
day  my  gums  were  so  painful ;  and  I  was  so  salivated  that,  at
times,  I  could  almost  pull  every  one  of  them  out.  I  was
quite  restored  by  three  successive  sets  of  passes  being  made  on
me  by  Mr.  Capern.”

Mrs.  Zelley,  Westexe.  “In  consequence  of  a  cold,  I  lost
my  voice  for  upwards  of  five  weeks,  but  after  a  few  passes
being  made  on  me  I  recovered  it.

“  My  son  was  troubled  with  palpitation  of  the  heart.  He
was  ordered  by  the  surgeons  to  be  carried  up  and  down  the
stairs,  fearing  the  exertion  might  be  too  much  for  him.  After
a  few  passes  the  motion  subsided  and  he  is  now  quite  re¬
covered.”

Mrs.  Gibbings,  St.  Andrew  Street.  “  Disease  of  the
side.  The  surgeons  stated  it  to  be  a  tumor  forming.  I  was
in  a  very  weak  state  for  some  time.  After  a  few  passes  had
been  made  I  found  great  relief,  and  by  a  succession  of  them
am  now  quite  free  from  pain.”


170


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England,


John,  son  of  the  above,  aged  3  years.  “  He  being  in  snob
an  enervated  state,  I  applied  to  surgeons  both  private  and  regi¬
mental  at  Plymouth,  as  well  as  surgeons  here,  who  gave  him  up
as  ever  being  able  to  walk :  but  after  continual  application  of
passes  on  him  he  is  now  quite  recovered  and  able  to  walk  as

well  as  any  other  child.”

«/

Richard  Thorne,  son  of  John  Thorne,  tinman,  St.  An¬
drew  Street,  aged  2J  years.  “  Confirmed  dropsy.  Medical
gentlemen  gave  it  as  their  opinion  he  would  never  be  restored ;
and  the  last  resource  was  to  try  mesmerism,  which  was  ac¬
cordingly  done.  After  the  first  time  the  passes  were  made
be  was  able  to  walk  (which  he  never  did  before),  and  in  five
weeks  he  was  quite  restored .”

Harriett  Harris,  aged  27  years.  “  Paralysis  brought
on  from  hooping-cough.  In  extreme  enervation  and  weak¬
ness,  so  much  that  I  was  unable  to  carry  a  light  weight.  I
felt  relief  shortly  after  the  passes  had  been  made,  and  con¬
tinued  to  improve,  and  am  now  quite  recovered .”

/

Leale  Wood,  Westexe,  aged  14  years.  “  Disease  of  the
brain,  supposed  to  be  water.  Under  medical  attendance  for
some  time,  and  had  my  head  shaved,  but  found  no  relief :
I  had  also  fits.  By  continual  repetition  of  the  passes,  I  felt
the  disease  quite  different,  and  the  fits  are  less  violent.”

Mrs.  Martin,  Frog  Street.  “  I  was  troubled  with  rheu¬
matism  for  three  years ;  almost  obliged  to  use  crutches.  I
felt  relief  immediately  after  the  passes  had  been  made,  and
after  three  sittings  I  was  quite  recovered .”

Charles  Sydenham,  Hammett’s  Lane.  “  I  suffered  from
rheumatic  pains  for  several  months ;  but  after  the  passes  had
been  made  a  few  times  I  was  quite  recovered .”

William  Parsons,  mason,  Barrington  Street.  “A  cart
laden  with  quarry  stones  by  accident  passed  over  the  inside
of  my  foot,  and  cut  the  boot  through,  so  that  I  could  not
stand.  I  was  obliged  to  be  carried  home.  Mr.  Capernmade
a  few  passes  over  me,  and  I  then  felt  relief ;  but  after  three
times  I  was  quite  recovered.”

Mrs.  Quick,  wife  of  John  Quick,  Townsend.  “  I  suf¬
fered  violent  pain  in  my  head  and  face  for  tivelve  months.  I
felt  relief  after  the  passes  were  first  made,  and  after  three  or
four  times  repeated  I  was  quite  recovered


Great  benefit  in  a  Spinal  Affection.  171

“  Richard,  son  of  the  above,  suffered  from  rheumatic  in
feet,  and  subject  to  fits  for  three  or  four  months.  He  could
scarcely  walk.  From  repeated  application  of  the  passes,  in
less  than  a  month  he  was  quite  recovered

The  following  is  a  copy  of  a  letter  received  from  Mr.  Ste¬
vens,  of  Landside  Farm,  in  the  parish  of  Sampford  Peverell,
and  read  at  the  meeting : —

“  Gentlemen, — This  is  to  certify,  after  being  a  great  suf¬
ferer  upwards  of  nine  months  in  my  shoulder  from  the  fall  of
a  horse,  I  was  persuaded  to  apply  to  Mr.  Capern,  Peter  Street,
Tiverton,  to  be  mesmerised ;  and  so  I  did,  and  within  a  fort¬
night  I  was  perfectly  sound.

“  I  remain,  Gentlemen,

“  Your  most  obedient  Servant,

“  Thomas  Stevens.

“  Sampford  Peverell,  Oct.  5th,  1848.

J.  Snell,  Chairman .”


YI.  Great  benefit  in  a  Spinal  Affection.  By  Miss  Love.

Communicated  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

34,  Portland  Square,  Plymouth,
June  11th,  1849.

Sir, — In  fulfilling  my  promise  to  send  you  some  account  of
my  experience  in  mesmerism,  it  may  be  necessary  to  give  an
outline  of  the  course  which  had  been  followed  in  the  earlier
stages  of  my  illness,  previously  to  the  commencement  of  that
mode  of  treatment,  from  which,  I  believe,  so  much  benefit
has  resulted.

At  first  the  case  was  regarded  as  one  of  consumption,  but
was  afterward  considered  to  be  a  form  of  spinal  disease.

Eight  years  of  great  suffering  were  spent  in  the  trial  of
every  available  means,  but  without  any  relief  being  gained.
At  two  different  times,  a  rigorous  system  of  cauterizing  was
resorted  to,  with  no  other  effect  than  that  of  reducing  the
little  remaining  strength,  while  courses  of  tonics,  with  liberal
diet,  proved  equally  useless.  Electricity  was  tried,  with  all
the  advantage  that  zeal  and  skill  in  its  application  could  give,
and  everything  that  medical  science  could  suggest  seemed
not  merely  to  fail,  but  to  leave  the  symptoms  aggravated  ra¬
ther  than  otherwise.  At  various  times,  several  of  the  medical
men  of  our  neighbourhood  were  consulted.  They  generally
took  a  discouraging  view  of  the  case ;  and  our  own  family
surgeon,  after  the  most  assiduous  efforts  to  relieve,  seemed

VOL.  VII.  o


172


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.


to  regard  it  as  almost  hopeless.  Two  years  had  been  spent
in  simple  rest,  without  any  attempt  except  to  keep  up  the
general  health,  when  galvanism  was  proposed,  with  many
encouraging  cases  to  induce  a  trial  of  its  merits.  Accounts
too  were  reaching  us,  from  time  to  time,  of  the  wonderful
effects  produced  by  mesmerism,  and  several  friends  kindly
interested  themselves  to  procure  so  much  of  information  on
the  subject  as  should  enable  us  to  form  a  judgment  of  its
suitability  to  my  own  case.

We  felt  anxious  to  make  some  effort,  and  at  length  de¬
cided  on  a  trial  of  galvanism,  with  the  alternative  of  mes¬
merism,  in  case  the  former  should  fail.  Just  at  this  time
some  friends,  whom  I  highly  esteemed,  but  who  shared  the
general  distrust  on  the  subject,  hearing  we  were  seriously
thinking  of  trying  mesmerism,  sent  me  Charlotte  Elizabeth's
Letters ,  and  other  works  written  against  it,  and  strongly  re¬
commended  a  consideration  of  the  objections  advanced.  The
charges  brought  in  opposition  were  of  a  very  serious  character,
and  seeing  that,  were  the  alternative  laid  before  me,  I  should
have  felt  no  hesitation  in  the  choice  between  suffering  through
life,  and  restoration  by  any  means  that  I  had  reason  to  be¬
lieve  were  not  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God,  I  felt  it
to  be  my  duty,  so  far  as  I  had  the  means,  to  examine  the
evidence  on  both  sides,  earnestly  desiring  to  be  led  to  a  right
decision.  Accordingly,  I  read  most  of  the  published  works,
and  corresponded  with  several  friends  who  had  had  oppor¬
tunities  for  forming  an  opinion,  and  the  result  was  that  I
felt  no  conscientious  objections  to  its  use ;  but,  as  many  of
my  friends  preferred  galvanism,  and  I  was  myself  very  hopeful
in  reference  to  it,  we  determined  to  give  it  the  first  trial.  So
far  from  being  beneficial,  however,  its  application,  although
under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  appeared  to  be  in¬
jurious,  and  at  the  end  of  three  months  its  use  was  discon¬
tinued.

Several  weeks  were  allowed  for  any  excitement  of  the
system,  which  might  have  been  caused  by  galvanism,  to  pass
off ;  and  then  the  friend  who  had  kindly  consented  to  conduct
the  mesmeric  treatment  began  his  operations.  He  attended
daily  for  a  fortnight,  with  no  other  visible  result  than  a  slight
traction  of  the  eyelids ;  when,  being  called  from  home,  he
kindly  procured  a  person  to  fill  his  place.  At  the  end  of
another  fortnight,  the  eyes  closed  under  the  operations,  and
a  general  feeling  of  repose  seemed  to  pervade  the  whole  system;
but  neither  then,  nor  at  any  subsequent  time,  was  the  effect
sufficiently  strong  to  overcome  consciousness.  During  the
next  few  weeks  the  influence  increased,  accompanied  with  a
slight  degree  of  rigidity  and  attraction.  The  manipulations


Great  benefit  in  a  Spinal  Affection.  173

were  made  for  an  hour  daily,  and  were  general  rather  than
local.

After  about  six  or  seven  weeks,  we  noticed  a  change  in
the  complexion,  the  very  palid  hue  giving  place  to  a  somewhat
healthful  appearance,  the  appetite  and  digestion  improved,
pain  was  lessened,  and  natural  sleep  became  more  refreshing ;
and  at  the  end  of  two  months,  we  observed  a  yielding  of  the
lateral  curvature.  All  these  cheering  symptoms  continued
until  the  treatment  had  been  carried  on  for  four  months,  and
much  progress  had  been  made,  when  a  temporary  interruption
was  caused  by  the  absence  of  the  mesmerist.  I  felt  the  dis¬
comfort  of  the  sudden  cessation  not  a  little  at  first,  but  after
a  short  time  found  that,  though  I  could  not  digest  food  so
well  as  when  regularly  mesmerised,  I  still  retained  a  large
amount  of  benefit.  We  were  unable  to  obtain  a  successful
operator  for  the  next  three  months.

At  length  a  person  was  found  who  was  able,  and  kindly
willing,  to  give  the  necessary  time  and  effort,  and,  the  former
mesmerist  shortly  after  returning  and  wishing  to  resume  the
case,  we  gladly  accepted  the  services  of  both,  considering
there  was  no  objection  to  two  operating  at  different  parts  of
the  day.  With  this  double  assistance  we  made  good  progress ;
my  general  health  improved  greatly,  and  pain,  which  had  been
for  so  many  years  my  constant  companion,  now  became  only
occasional ;  while  the  voice,  which  had  failed  for  a  long  time,
was  greatly  strengthened.  The  hip  soon  shewed  symptoms
of  improvement,  and  the  foot,  which  had  been  swollen  to  a
very  large  size,  became  much  smaller.  Some  of  the  medical
gentlemen  who  saw  me  about  this  time  expressed  great  sur¬
prize  at  the  change  that  had  taken  place,  and  they  recom¬
mended  the  application  of  mesmerism  locally  to  the  spine,
considering  it  to  be  the  seat  of  the  complaint.

About  the  end  of  the  year  another  interruption  happened,
in  consequence  of  the  illness  of  my  kind  and  indefatigable
operator  :  the  first  having  again  left  the  town.

In  this  case,  however,  my  appetite  and  digestion  continued
good.  Shortly  after  Mr.  Hicks  came  to  Plymouth  to  lecture,
and,  finding  he  intended  to  remain  some  months,  we  gladly
secured  his  services.  Mr.  H.  began  to  make  passes  down
the  spine,  and  soon  produced  a  degree  of  rigidity  which  in¬
creased  and  assisted  greatly  in  strengthening  the  muscles  and
straightening  the  spine.  The  contracted  limb  became  con¬
siderably  relaxed,  and  the  other  began  to  shew  some  effect
from  passes  made  over  it.

As  these  symptoms  advanced,  the  pain  in  all  the  muscles,
of  the  right  limb  particularly,  was  intense,  although  not  the

o  2


174


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England .


slightest  mechanical  force  was  used,  nor  were  the  passes  even
made  with  contact.  By  continuing  this  local  mesmerism,
rigidity  and  the  power  of  motion  were  produced,  the  left  limb
always  manifesting  every  change  before  the  contracted  one.
Soon  the  spine  had  become  so  greatly  strengthened  as  to  allow
of  my  raising  myself  on  my  elbows  for  a  few  moments.  When
we  had  reached  this  point  Mr.  Hicks  left  Plymouth,  and  I
was  removed  into  Cornwall  in  the  hope  that  the  change  of
air  might  prove  a  useful  auxiliary.  We  were  not  at  all  dis¬
appointed  in  this  expectation,  and  a  friend  most  promptly
undertook  to  continue  the  mesmeric  treatment.  In  June  I
began  to  try  a  reclining  posture  for  a  short  time  daily,  and  as
soon  as  my  returning  strength  admitted,  I  was  removed  oc¬
casionally  to  a  chair  so  constructed  as  to  admit  of  the  back
having  any  inclination  that  was  desired.  Finding  I  continued
rapidly  to  improve,  the  chair  was  placed  on  wheels  and  I  was
taken  frequently  out  of  doors.

It  was  a  long  time  before  I  was  able  to  sit  erect  without
support,  and  as  it  caused  pain  we  were  very  careful  not  to  try
the  spine  by  the  attempt.  Sensation  and  the  power  of  motion  in
the  limbs  had  almost  entirely  returned,  and  yet  I  was  now —
nearly  at  the  end  of  the  second  year  of  my  recovery — quite
unable  to  stand.  As  the  autumn  advanced,  the  air  of  Corn¬
wall  appeared  too  bleak,  and  I  was  advised  to  return  into
Devonshire.

After  this  the  use  of  mesmerism  was  given  up.  During
the  winter  the  lungs  appeared  to  be  very  delicate,  and  my
efforts  to  walk  were  as  much  impeded  by  the  difficulty  of
breathing  which  followed  the  smallest  exertion,  as  by  remain¬
ing  muscular  weakness.

On  the  return  of  warmer  weather,  I  began  to  sponge  daily
with  cold  water,  which  contributed  greatly  to  the  increase  of
general  vigour,  and  I  soon  became  able  to  walk  unassisted  in
the  house.  In  July  my  chair  was  first  dispensed  with  occa¬
sionally,  and  before  the  close  of  the  season  I  had  the  great
pleasure  of  uniting  in  several  excursions  in  our  neighbourhood.
There  is  still  an  inequality  of  two  inches  or  more  in  the  length
of  the  limbs,  caused  partly  by  remaining  curvature  in  the
spine,  and  partly  by  contraction  of  the  right  leg  or  rather  dis¬
placement  of  the  hip  joint ;  but  encouragement  is  held  out
that  this  last  difficulty  may  in  time  be  removed.  It  is  now
more  than  a  year  since  the  use  of  mesmerism  was  discontinued,
and  I  am  thankful  to  be  able  to  say  that  I  enjoy  as  good  gen¬
eral  health  as  I  ever  did.  On  several  occasions  I  have  walked
as  many  as  five  or  six  miles  in  the  day,  not  without  consider¬
able  fatigue  certainly,  but  without  permanent  inconvenience.


Mr.  W.  Hazard’s  Cures.


175


The  case  affords  little  or  no  testimony  to  the  so  called
higher  phenomena  of  mesmerism,  but  the  slight  degree  in
which  I  ever  became  affected  may  account  for  this,  apart  from
this  circumstance  that,  in  accordance  with  my  positive  request,
they  were  never  sought.  That  there  may  be  much  of  truth
in  them,  and  that  their  further  investigation  may  throw  light
on  some  of  the  least  ascertained  subjects,  I  have  no  desire  to
dispute ;  but,  as  neither  the  satisfying  of  curiosity  nor  the  de¬
termining  of  doubtful  questions  was  the  object  in  view,  and
might  have  considerably  interfered  with  the  end  aimed  at,  I
felt  much  obliged  by  the  ready  compliance  with  my  wishes  in
this  respect  which  my  friends  ever  yielded.

To  those  who  so  unweariedly  interested  themselves  on  my
behalf,  I  feel  I  owe  a  large  debt  of  gratitude,  but  especially
to  Him  from  whom  proceed  alike  the  healing  power  and  the
blessing  which  alone  can  make  any  means  effectual.

Hoping  that  this  account  is  as  detailed  as  you  would  wish,
and  expressing  my  readiness,  at  any  time,  to  give  what  fur¬
ther  information  I  may  be  able,

I  remain,  Sir,  yours,  &c.,

Agnes  Love.


VII.  Mesmeric  Cures.  By  Mr.  William  Hazard,  17,  Avon

Crescent,  Hotwells,  Bristol.

1.  Ophthalmia. — May  26th,  1847.  Bhoda  Aldridge,  24,
had  been  suffering  under  severe  inflammation  of  the  eyes  for
many  years,  and  had  tried  almost  everything,  under  several
medical  men,  to  obtain  relief,  with  no  avail;  she  came  to
me  on  the  20th  of  May.  I  began  by  making  local  passes,
and  in  a  few  minutes  saw'  she  was  susceptible  of  the  mesmeric
influence.  I  then  acted  upon  her  by  gazing,  and  in  ten  minutes
she  was  in  the  state  of  conscious  coma,  but  had  not  the
power  to  open  her  eyes.  Continued  the  local  passes  for  twenty
minutes,  awoke  her  with  the  transverse  action :  she  said  her
eyes  were  less  burning.  I  continued  the  same  process  four
times  a  week  for  one  month ;  and  those  who  knew  her  before
the  mesmeric  treatment  were  astonished  at  her  improvement,
from  the  inflamed,  sore,  and  weeping  eyes,  to  those  of  a
healthy  appearance.  She  also  suffered  from  severe  head¬
aches,  which  were  cured  by  the  some  power.

2.  Quinsey. — May  28th,  1847.  H.  Aldridge,  aged  26,
husband  of  the  last-named  patient,  a  strong  healthy  man,
five  feet  ten  inches  in  height,  broad  chest,  muscular,  and
well-proportioned.  He  had  been  working  in  the  sun,  had


176


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.


taken  off  his  coat,  waistcoat,  and  neckcloth,  and  was  in  a
high  state  of  perspiration.  Being  called  from  the  open  air
to  do  some  work  required  in  the  factory,  he  went  as  he  was.
The  transition  from  the  sun  to  shade  and  a  current  of  cool
air  checked  the  perspiration,  and  he  soon  felt  his  throat  be¬
come  dry  and  husky ;  at  night  he  could  not  sleep,  and  the
usual  symptoms  followed,  high  fever,  difficulty  of  respiration,
and  painful  deglutition.  The  ensuing  day  he  was  too  ill  to
work ;  and  in  the  evening,  when  he  called  upon  me,  he  could
scarcely  speak.  I  commenced  with  passes  over  the  part
affected,  and  the  effect  was  such  that  in  twenty  minutes  he
was  asleep.  I  let  him  remain  so,  and  continued  for  another
twenty  minutes  making  local  passes.  I  then  awoke  him ;  he
said  he  felt  better  and  could  swallow  more  easily.  Mesmerised
him  twice  a  day  for  three  days,  and  on  the  morning  of  the
fourth  he  returned  to  work,  perfectly  cured.

3.  Intense  Head-ache. — June  8th.  Isabella  Ewers,  aged
16,  suffering  from  severe  head-ache,  called  on  me  this  day.
I  mesmerised  her  locally  for  twenty  minutes,  when  she  said
it  had  entirely  left  and  was  quite  easy.

4.  Scrofulous  Sore  Leg  of  Five  Years  duration. — Oct.  6th.
Mary  Cornish,  aged  13,  had  been  afflicted  for  upwards  of
five  years,  with  a  scrofulous  sore  leg,  of  a  most  severe  de¬
scription.  The  wound  extended  from  the  ankle  to  within  a
hand's  length  of  the  knee.  She  had  been  under  medical
treatment  the  whole  of  the  time,  both  in  hospitals  and  dis¬
pensaries  ;  had  also  tried  the  cold  water  system  for  eighteen
months,  with  little  or  no  relief.  She  was  emaciated  and
could  not  walk.  The  pain  arising  from  the  wound  at  times
prevented  her  sleeping.  I  mesmerised  the  diseased  part  daily,
and  in  a  week  she  felt  a  soothing  sensation  in  the  leg,  and  it
was  easier.  On  the  13th  she  fell  into  deep  coma  for  half
an  hour.  16th,  put  to  sleep  by  gazing,  in  five  minutes.
Through  the  whole  treatment  I  never  neglected  mesmerising
the  leg  at  least  twenty  minutes.  This  evening  she  told  me
in  her  sleep-waking  that  nothing  but  what  I  was  doing  would
cure  her,  but  that  it  would  take  nine  months.  On  the  20th,
I  took  her  with  me  from  the  Hotwells,  where  she  lives,  to
the  Mesmeric  Society  at  Clifton.  The  leg  was  so  much
easier  that  already  she  could  slowly  walk  this  short  distance.
Her  hand  could  be  closed  and  opened,  the  mouth  fixed  and
opened,  and  sleep  induced,  by  the  will;  and  her  arms  and
legs  made  rigid  by  a  few  passes.  Many  times  have  I  entered
the  little  dwelling  and  found  her  in  the  greatest  agony,  the


Mr.  W.  Hazard’s  Cures .


177


leg  inflamed  from  the  ankle  to  the  knee ;  but  I  have  as  in¬
variably  seen  that  inflammation  subside  in  fifteen  minutes
with  the  passes,  and  the  leg  assume  a  healthy  appearance.
Her  expression  was,  as  my  hand  passed  over  the  leg,  “  It*s
going,  it’s  going, ”  alluding  to  the  painful  heat  and  sensa¬
tions.  There  has  been  an  exfoliation  of  the  tibia ;  and
I  now  possess  two  pieces  of  the  bone,  full  of  dark  spots,
and  perforated  like  lace  work :  one  piece  is  two  inches  long,
and  five-eighths  wide,  coming  to  a  point  at  each  end ;  the
other,  one  inch  and  a  quarter  by  three-eighths.  The  wounds
gave  forth  a  thick  discharge,  with  small  pieces  of  white  sub¬
stance,  like  the  curd  of  milk.  Three  times  she  had  a  large
swelling  in  the  groin,  which  her  mother  said  appeared  to  be
full  of  matter.  These  were  dispersed  by  local  mesmerism.
I  often  had  occasion  to  cleanse  the  wound  and  apply  caustic ;
but  this  was  done  without  the  slightest  suffering  to  the  pa¬
tient,  the  limb  being  made  insensible  to  pain  by  a  few  passes ,
in  the  waking  state.  As  the  summer  advanced,  the  wound
rapidly  healed ;  and  by  the  middle  of  J uly,  the  time  she  had
predicted,  the  cure  was  complete.  Her  health  improved,
her  colour  returned,  and  she  is  now  able  to  be  variously
employed.

5.  Hypochondriasis. — Dec.  23rd,  1847.  James  C.,  aged
20,  a  powerful-looking  young  man,  of  five  feet  eight  inches,
temperament  sanguine-lymphatic,  had  despondency,  flatu¬
lency,  acid  eructations,  giddiness,  palpitations,  and  dimness
of  sight,  with  black  spots  always  floating  before  the  eyes ;  he
became  unable  to  attend  to  business.  I  made  passes  from
the  top  of  the  head  to  the  epigastrium  for  half  an  hour,  when
he  felt  a  little  drowsy.  I  mesmerised  him  every  evening.

Jan.  1st.  Semi-coma  was  produced  in  fifteen  minutes  by
gazing.  He  felt  himself  better,  and  the  floating  spots  were
less  vivid,  and  his  spirits  better.

10th.  Went  to  his  business,  and  in  the  evening  he  said
he  felt  himself  quite  a  different  being,  more  lively,  and  free
from  the  giddy  sensations.  Coma  was  produced  in  eight
minutes,  and  he  slept  half  an  hour.

25th.  Felt  himself  entirely  free  from  all  his  former  dis¬
tressing  symptoms,  in  fact,  quite  cured.

Up  to  the  present  period,  which  is  one  year  and  four
months,  he  has  not  had  the  slightest  return.

6.  Severe  Pains  in  the  Hip  and  Thigh. — March  14th,  1848.
Mr.  Wild,  of  Bower  Ashton,  near  Bristol,  had  his  leg  frac¬
tured  by  the  kick  of  a  horse  about  fifteen  months  ago.  The


178  Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.

fracture  in  due  course  of  time  healed,  and  he  could  with  the
aid  of  a  stick  resume  his  employment,  but  suffered  most
acutely  when  he  retired  to  rest  at  night :  not  in  the  fractured
limb,  but  in  the  hip  and  thigh.  I  mesmerised  the  part  for
twenty  minutes,  and  did  so  twice  a  week  for  one  month,  when
he  said  he  could  sleep  well  and  the  pain  was  gone.

7.  Cure  of  Dropsy  and  Nervous  Head-aches ,  with  decided
Clairvoyance. — Sept.  29th,  1848.  Ann  Bateman,  aged  25,
had  been  advised  to  try  mesmerism,  as  from  medical  aid  she
found  no  relief ;  she  had  been  a  long  time  in  the  Infirmary,
and,  when  I  first  saw  her,  she  had  no  appetite,  was  inactive,
had  oppression  of  chest  with  cough,  aud  general  febrile  ex¬
citement.  I  commenced  with  passes  from  the  head  to  the
epigastrium ;  in  a  few  minutes  she  was  susceptible.  I  mes¬
merised  her  by  look,  and  in  ten  minutes  she  was  in  deep
sleep ;  I  mesmerised  her  afterwards  locally  for  half  an  hour.
She  attended  at  my  house  four  times  a  week  for  seven  months,
up  to  last  April.  She  is  now  quite  well.

She  was  phreno-mesmeric  in  the  highest  degree ;  the  ex¬
pression  of  the  face  beautifully  coincided  with  the  organ  ex¬
cited.  Tune  and  Time  were  large,  and,  when  excited,  were
difficult  to  subdue.  She  has  an  excellent  voice,  and  would
often  sing  spontaneously.  Her  arms  and  legs  were  easily
rendered  rigid,  either  by  a  few  passes  with  the  hand  or  with
a  magnet,  and  made  flexible  by  reverse  passes  or  changing
the  poles.  Community  of  Taste,  Touch,  and  Smell  wonder¬
fully  acute;  by  traction,  any  limb  could  be  acted  upon,  or
her  whole  person  brought  in  any  direction  required.  I  could
induce  coma  by  the  will,  crystals,  the  magnet,  or  by  elec¬
tricity.  As  a  clairvoyant  she  had  often  given  proofs,  by  de¬
scribing  what  was  passing  in  the  adjoining  room  or  elsewhere ;
and  one  fact  above  others  I  must  not  omit,  incredible  as  it
may  appear,  but  which  is  supported  by  such  an  amount  of
testimony,  both  as  regards  time  and  place,  that  it  cannot  be
doubted.

She  resided  next  door  to  a  lady  whom  I  was  attending
for  ophthalmia.  After  mesmerising  the  lady,  I  sent  for  her,
and  put  her  to  sleep  in  an  easy  chair.  The  lady,  Mrs.  C.,
was  the  wife  of  the  commander  of  a  large  ship,  which  had
recently  left  Bristol  with  emigrants  for  New  Orleans,  on  the
9th  of  November,  1848.  Mrs.  C.  said,  “Do  ask  Ann  if  she
can  tell  you  where  Capt.  C.  is  now.”  I  excited  Concentra-
tiveness,  Ideality,  Individuality  and  Locality,*  and  then  put


*  Was  all  this  at  all  necessary  ? — Zoist.


Mr.  W.  Hazard’s  Cures.


179


the  questions.  She  said  yes  she  could,  but  he  was  a  great
way  from  here  ;  and  she  would  tell  me  in  five  minutes.  This
was  in  the  evening  of  the  17th  of  November.  At  the  expira¬
tion  of  the  five  minutes  she  spoke.  She  said,  “  Ah  !  there's
the  ship ;  but  oh  !  how  dark ;  how  she  tumbles ;  I  shall  be
sick,  (at  the  same  time  she  was  in  that  kind  of  unsteady
motion  so  usual  to  persons  unaccustomed  to  the  sea ;)  how
the  wind  roars,  and  the  sea  so  high  and  black ;  it's  dreadful !"
“  Do  you  see  Capt.  C.  ?"  “  Yes,  there  he  is  on  a  high  deck,

calling  to  the  men ;  now  there's  an  Irish  woman  at  the  cabin
door  asking  for  medicine ;  others  saying  they  would  all  be
drowned  ;  now  there’s  Capt.  C.  leaning  over  a  rail,  saying,
Go  down  my  good  women,  there's  no  danger."  Now  she
said,  “  There's  such  a  noise  down  stairs ;  there's  a  man,  he
looks  like  a  parson  or  a  Quaker,  with  a  great  flat  hat  on,  talk¬
ing  to  the  people ;  now  he  has  put  a  large  tin  horn  to  his  ear,
and  is  lifting  up  his  hand."  This  and  much  more  was  said
by  her.  I  let  her  remain  calm  after  dispelling  the  influence
of  the  excited  organs,  for  ten  minutes.  She  awoke,  was  un¬
conscious  of  having  spoken,  and  said  she  had  had  a  nice  sleep.

The  test  of  the  foregoing  is  as  follows.  Mr.  C.  wrote  to
her  husband  at  New  Orleans  by  the  mail  packet  of  the  fol¬
lowing  month,  December,  wishing  to  know  what  kind  of
passage  he  had,  and  particularly  requesting  him  to  state  the
weather  and  general  transactions  of  the  night  of  the  1 7th  of
November,  without  stating  her  reason  for  so  doing.  Mrs.  C.
received  an  answer  to  this  letter  on  the  6th  of  February,  1849;
Capt.  C.  observing  that  the  mail  for  January  had  unfortunately
left  before  he  could  write.  In  this  letter,  which  I  have  seen,
he  says,  that  on  the  morning  of  the  17th  of  December  to
that  on  the  18th  it  was  blowing  a  gale  of  wind,  but  quite  fair
for  them;  they  were  to  the  westward  of  Madeira;  that  there
was  a  very  heavy  sea  rolling,  and  the  ship  laboured  a  great
deal ;  the  emigrants  were  very  sick  and  frightened,  and  the
most  troublesome  person  was  an  itinerant  deaf  preacher,  who
was  constantly  exhorting  them  much  to  their  annoyance ;  that
he  was  on  the  poop  deck  the  whole  of  the  night ;  and  never
did  the  ship  run  such  a  distance  as  she  did  in  the  twenty-four
hours  of  the  17th  and  18th  of  November,  1848.

Mrs.  C.  has  since  seen  her  husband  at  Liverpool,  and  has
told  me  that  everything  stated  by  the  somnambulist  had  been
fully  corroborated  by  him.

8.  Great  Relief  and  Strength  imparted  to  the  Thigh  and
Leg. — Dec.  18th,  1848.  James  Chinnock,  one  of  the  Bristol
dock  men,  had  taken  a  chill  in  the  right  thigh  and  leg.  His


180


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.


sufferings  were  extreme ;  he  was  compelled  to  leave  his  work,
and  become  an  inmate  in  the  Infirmary  for  eleven  weeks.  He
had  blisters  applied  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  thigh  and
leg,  and  went  out,  after  enduring  this  torture,  no  better  than
when  he  went  in.  I  mesmerised  him  by  gazing,  and  in  ten
minutes  he  was  in  a  calm  sleep.  He  knew  not  what  mes¬
merism  was,  and  he  knew  not  what  nervousness  was.  He
weighs  at  least  thirteen  stone.  From  the  first  sitting  he  felt
relief,  and  daily  improved  in  strength,  and  is  now  working
on  the  docks,  after  having  been  mesmerised  twenty-seven
times.

9.  Pain  in  the  Leg. — December  20th,  1848.  George
Mills,  aged  40,  was  employed  in  a  timber  yard ;  had  a  com¬
pound  fracture  of  the  leg  by  a  piece  of  timber  falling  on  it ;
was  taken  to  the  Infirmary  and  remained  there  until  cured,
but  endured  excruciating  pains  from  the  seat  of  fracture  to  the
toes  for  months  afterwards,  and  walked  with  crutches.  He
came  to  me  to  be  mesmerised.  I  acted  upon  the  limb  by  passes
from  the  knee  to  the  toes.  In  three  or  four  days  he  began  to
find  relief.  On  the  sixth  day,  while  locally  mesmerising,  I  occa¬
sionally  fixed  my  eyes  on  his  for  some  minutes,  and  a  peculiar
kind  of  twinkling  began,  more  marked  as  the  operation  pro¬
ceeded  ;  finally,  the  orbicular  muscle  contracted  strongly
several  times,  the  globe  of  the  eye  gave  a  few  rotatory  move¬
ments,  the  eyelid  fell,  and  he  was  in  a  deep  sleep.  Being
regularly  mesmerised  he  continued  to  gain  strength,  the  pains
gradually  decreased,  he  has  thrown  away  his  crutches,  and
now  recently  the  stick  he  walked  with,  and  at  the  present
time  is  following  the  occupation  of  a  water  carrier,  free  from
his  sufferings  but  with  a  slight  limp — the  natural  effect  of  a
broken  leg.

10,  Nervous  Headaches. — January  5th,  1849.  Mary  Ann
Mills,  daughter  of  the  last  named  patient,  aged  19,  had  long
been  afflicted  with  this  sad  complaint ;  been  under  medical
treatment  a  long  time,  and  taken  a  great  quantity  of  medicine.
I  mesmerised  her  three  times  a  week.  During  the  first  three
weeks  she  had  the  headache  four  times,  the  following  three
weeks  twice,  the  next  fortnight  not  at  all, — two  months  having
elapsed  from  the  first  application  up  to  the  2nd  of  March.
She  never  experienced  the  slightest  sensation,  nor  was  at  all
drowsy.

March  2nd.  This  evening  I  placed  her  in  a  chair  on  my
insulated  platform,  and  gave  her  the  chain  from  the  positive
conductor  of  a  powerful  electrical  machine.  This  was  set  in


Mr.  W.  Hazard’s  Cures.


181


motion,  and  I  directed  a  brass  pointed  instrument  to  her  head,
forehead,  and  eyes.  In  three  minutes  from  the  commence¬
ment  she  was  in  a  sound  sleep,  lost  consciousness,  and  became
phreno-mesmeric,  and  is  so  still.  She  is  now  cured  of  the

nervous  headaches,  and  her  health  greatly  improved.

*

11.  Severe  Headaches  and  other  nervous  affections. — I  will
give  the  patient’s  own  words.

“  I  suffered  intensely  from  severe  nervous  headaches,  and
sometimes  great  mental  debility  and  irritability ;  I  very  often
felt  quite  unfit  for  my  duties ;  my  appetite  was  bad,  and  my
nights  most  painfully  restless.  At  the  solicitation  of  my
friend,  T  consented  to  try  the  effect  of  mesmerism,  though,
to  be  candid,  I  had  very  slight  hopes  of  receiving  any  benefit
from  it,  as  medical  aid  had  been  tried  in  vain.  At  the  first
sitting  my  eyes  closed  and  became  fixed,  as  did  also  my
mouth ;  a  delightfully  calm  and  soothing  sensation  stole  over
me ;  I  retained  consciousness,  but  was  unable  to  speak  until
Mr.  Hazard  had  demesmerised  my  mouth.  The  next  evening
I  was  mesmerised  at  the  same  hour,  my  eyes  and  mouth
became  fixed  as  before  ;  and,  Mr.  H.  continuing  to  mesmerise
me,  I  soon  passed  into  the  state  of  sleep-waking.  When
demesmerised,  I  retained  no  memory  of  anything  that  had
transpired,  and  was  perfectly  astonished  when  told  I  had
been  talking  and  giving  Mr.  H.  directions  as  to  what  par¬
ticular  kind  of  passes  he  was  to  make  in  order  to  relieve  a
severe  headache  of  which  1  complained.  After  a  few  even¬
ings  I  was  delighted  to  find  that  I  had  lost  the  feeling  of
oppression  and  intense  pain  at  the  top  of  the  head,  which
had  so  much  troubled  me.  My  nights,  however,  were  still
sleepless,  though  not  so  distressingly  restless  as  before ;  my
appetite  also  remained  bad.  My  mesmeriser,  I  was  informed,
used  to  make  me  promise  ere  I  woke  that  I  would  eat  more
next  day,  and  try  to  sleep  better.  Strange  to  say,  these
promises  were  always  fulfilled ;  but  I  knew  nothing  of  the
cause  of  my  increased  appetite  and  comfortable  rest  until  I
was  told.

“I  had  been  mesmerised  almost  daily  for  about  three

*

weeks,  and  was  altogether  much  better,  when  one  afternoon
I  had  invited  a  friend  to  tea,  after  which  we  had  agreed  to
go  to  Mr.  Hazard’s  in  order  that  I  might  have  my  usual  mes¬
merism  :  about  six  o’clock,  however,  I  was  seized  with  acute
pains  under  the  left  breast,  which  continued  till  seven,  when
they  became  more  violent,  passing  through  to  the  back,  and
catching  the  breath,  so  that  I  was  obliged  to  cry  out  with
anguish.  I  was  much  alarmed  and  wished  to  send  for  a  me-


182


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.


dical  man,  but  my  friend,  not  waiting  for  my  consent,  went
for  Mr.  Hazard,  and  he  was  speedily  with  me.  Seeing  me
in  great  agony,  (large  drops  of  perspiration  standing  on  my
brow,)  he  immediately  passed  me  into  the  magnetic  sleep.
In  an  hour  I  was  demesmerised,  and  awoke  free  from  pain ;
though  feeling  somewhat  weak.  During  the  trance  I  had
been  violently  sick,  but  knew  nothing  about  it  when  awoke,
and  was  much  amazed  when  shewn  what  I  had  thrown  off
my  stomach.  I  had  a  charming  nights  rest,  and  awoke  in
the  morning  quite  well.  From  this  time  I  began  to  get
stronger,  and  I  am  now  able  to  eat  heartily,  take  long  walks,
and  sit  alone  for  hours  reading  or  writing ;  the  nervous  head¬
aches  have  left  me,  and  I  hope,  and  believe,  that  ere  long  I
shall  be  quite  a  different  being  to  what  I  have  recently  been.

“Hotwells,  May  22,  1849.”

I  was  forewarned  of  the  attack  described;  for,  on  Wed¬
nesday,  March  21st,  while  in  the  mesmeric  trance,  she  said,
“  I  shall  not  be  able  to  attend  next  Wednesday,  I  shall  have
a  very  severe  attack  ;  a  crisis  will  then  take  place,  and  it  will
require  much  energy  on  your  part  to  subdue  it.  Will  you
attend  me  ?”  I  said  it  was  a  duty  incumbent  on  me  to  do  so.
She  said,  “  I  am  satisfied.”  A  short  time  after  I  awoke  her.
She  attended  as  usual  every  day.  The  ensuing  Tuesday,  in
her  sleep  she  again  said,  “  I  shall  be  very  ill  to-morrow  night.”
I  said,  “I  hope  you  will  be  mistaken.”  “No,”  she  replied,
“  I  am  sure  of  it, — very  ill.”  When  I  awoke  her  I  asked  if  I
should  see  her  to-morrow  (Wednesday) ;  she  said,  “  Certainly,
why  do  you  ask  ?”  I  made  an  evasive  reply.  As  the  evening
of  Wednesday  the  28th  came,  I  was  positively  certain  all
would  happen  as  she  had  predicted.  When  her  lady  friend
came  for  me  I  was  ready,  and  arrived  at  the  patient's  house
at  a  quarter  after  seven.  She  was  in  the  state  she  has  des¬
cribed.  I  asked  a  few  questions,  then  put  her  into  the  mes¬
meric  sleep.  I  made  long  passes  from  the  head  to  the  feet,
breathed  and  placed  my  hand  on  the  head  and  epigastrium,
with  passes  down  the  spine,  and  asked  how  she  felt.  She
answered,  “  Easier  as  regards  the  shooting  pains,  but  I  shall
have  a  fit  in  a  short  time,  and  you  must  continue  breathing
and  making  passes  over  the  region  of  the  heart  and  at  the  top
of  the  head.”  She  soon  had  the  fit,  which  was  rather  violent.
I  acted  as  had  been  directed  for  ten  minutes,  when,  with  a
scream,  the  fit  left  her.  She  now  desired  me  to  give  her
some  mesmerised  water,  but  said  that  I  must  be  careful  not
to  let  the  glass  touch  her  teeth,  or  she  was  sure  she  should
bite  and  break  it.  I  mesmerised  a  glass  of  water,  put  my


Mr.  W.  Hazard's  Cures.


183


silk  handkerchief  round  it,  and  gave  her  to  drink.  In  less
than  two  minutes  violent  eructations  ensued,  she  said,  “Now
I  am  much  easier,”  told  me  to  give  her  more  of  the  water  as
she  had  on  the  stomach  that  which  must  be  thrown  off,  and
the  mesmerised  water  would  do  it.  A  basin  was  brought  and
the  water  administered,  which  instantly  had  the  effect.  She
threw  off  a  quantity  of  blood — dark  and  very  thick.  Directly
afterwards  she  got  up,  walked  into  the  next  room  in  the  dark
and,  from  her  chest  of  drawers,  brought  a  clean  white  hand¬
kerchief  and  sat  down,  wiped  her  face,  and  said,  “  Now  that
is  off  my  stomach  I  shall  get  better  every  day.”  I  continued
making  passes  with  alternate  breathings  until  a  quarter  past
eight,  when  I  demesmerised  her.  She  felt  rather  weak,  but
was  free  from  pain  and  ate  her  supper.

She  displayed  almost  all  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism,  viz.,
— phreno-mesmerism  beautifully  displayed,  community  of  taste,
touch  and  smell,  rigidity,  catalepsy,  traction ;  she  was  put
to  sleep  by  the  will,  the  magnet,  crystals,  and  electricity.
The  magnet  had  the  same  result  on  her  as  that  mentioned  in
Case  7.  As  a  clairvoyant  few  surpass  her :  she  can  read  and
write  in  the  dark,  with  bandages  folded  four  times  over  her
eyes,  and  cannot  bear  the  light  of  a  fire  or  candle.

She  is  still  under  mesmeric  treatment,  and  continues  to
gain  health  and  strength.

EXPERIMENTS  WITH  CRYSTALS,  THE  MAGNET,  AND  ELECTRICITY.

Crystals . — In  a  jar  I  place  and  cover  with  water  a  large
crystal  of  carbonate  of  lime,  crystallized  in  double  liexatiedral
pyramids :  a  cover  is  fitted  to  the  top,  with  a  curved  piece  of
brass  wire,  the  size  of  a  stair  rod,  passing  through  it,  and
the  bottom  touching  the  crystal.  On  the  main  rod,  a  little
below  the  cover,  is  adjusted  another  piece  of  brass  rod  turned
at  right  angles,  so  that  three  points  are  immersed  in  the  water.
To  that  part  of  the  main  rod  above  the  cover,  brass  chains
are  attached,  and  passed  from  the  apparatus  to  the  patient's
hands;  cases  7,  9,  10,  and  11  were  invariably  sent  to  sleep
in  a  few  minutes,  when  put  in  connection  with  it.  A  young
gentleman,  seeing  the  action  on  many  of  my  patients,  took
one  of  the  brass  handles  connected  with  the  chain  without
my  knowledge.  He  called  me,  and  said  he  could  not  let  it
go,  and  I  saw  his  hand  had  become  perfectly  rigid ;  I  blew
on  it  as  I  would  to  dispel  the  mesmeric  action,  when  it  be¬
came  flexible.  I  have  used  this  in  numerous  instances  with
satisfactory  results.

The  Magnet. — A  rather  powerful  magnet  is  suspended  from


184


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.


a  brass  rod,  and  a  small  iron  chain  is  attached  to  the  bar ;
the  chain,  being  held  in  the  patient's  hand,  produces  rigidity
and  coma.  The  demesmerising  passes  dispel  these  effects.

Electricity. — I  place  a  chair  upon  an  insulated  platform,
and,  a  chain  from  the  positive  conductor  of  my  powerful  elec¬
trical  machine  being  held  in  the  hand  of  many  of  my  patients
%  and  of  others  not  under  mesmeric  treatment,  coma  is  produced.
When  the  chain  is  held,  I  set  the  machine  in  motion ;  then
with  a  curved  pointed  brass  instrument  I  extract  the  fluid
from  the  head,  forehead,  and  eyes,  holding  the  point  about
four  inches  from  the  person ;  the  effect  is  a  delightful  cool
soothing  sensation.  I  have  tried  its  effect  so  often,  that  in
seven  cases  out  of  ten  I  have  induced  coma,  and  in  many  in
less  than  three  minutes.  A  person  only  a  few  days  ago,  who
had  never  seen  an  apparatus  of  the  kind,  was  in  a  deep  uncon¬
scious  coma  in  four  minutes.  The  air  contiguous  to  an  elec¬
trified  point,  being  in  a  similar  state  of  electricity  by  contact,
repels  and  is  repelled  by  the  point ;  it  consequently  flies
off,  when  another  portion  of  air  immediately  fills  the  vacancy ;
the  constant  succession  of  the  repulsion  gives  rise  to  the  idea
of  the  cool  air  being  blown  from  the  point.


VIII.  Case  of  Scrofula  much  alleviated.  By  the  Rev.  E.  C.

Topham,  Combe  Down,  near  Bath.  Communicated  by

Dr.  Elliotson.

“  Primum,  igitur,  non  artiura  modo,  sed  omnium  omnino  humanarum  rerum
dignitatem  atque  prsestantiam  ex  fine,  ad  quern  earum  quseque  dirigitur,  pendi
ac  spectari  arbitror  oportere  :  ut,  quanto  cuj usque  finis  prsestantior  ac  divinior
est,  tanto  ipsa  cseteris  excellere  judicetur.” — Muretus.

Francis  Barrow  was  the  son  of  John  and  Susannah  Barrow
of  the  village  of  Monkton  Combe,  near  Bath.  He  had  en¬
joyed  very  good  health  up  to  the  beginning  of  April,  1845,
when  he  was  seized  with  a  pain  in  his  knee  accompanied  with
general  debility.  In  consequence  of  this,  he  became  for  a
short  time  an  in-door  patient  of  the  Bath  Casualty  Hospital.
His  parents  attributed  his  illness  to  bathing  in  the  previous
summer  when  in  a  state  of  profuse  perspiration.  In  addition
to  his  other  ailments,  a  swelling  in  the  groin  made  its  ap¬
pearance  and  ultimately  burst,  discharging  upwards  of  a  pint
of  thick,  unctuous,  cream-like  matter,  but  which  afterwards
changed  to  a  thin,  watery  flux.  In  the  following  June,  he
became  again  an  in-door  patient  of  the  same  hospital  for  three
months.  His  knee,  during  this  period,  was  punctured,  and
a  copious  discharge  of  a  bloody  flux  or  corruption  followed.


Scrofula  much  alleviated ,  by  the  Rev.  E.  C.  Topham.  185

After  this  he  was  attended  by  the  surgeon  of  the  Union,  and
continued  to  be  so  to  the  day  of  his  death.  In  May,  1847,
his  foot  was  affected  in  the  same  manner  as  the  groin,  and
there  was  a  similar  discharge.  His  case — one  of  decided
scrofula — was  considered  to  be  perfectly  hopeless,  and  the
only  medicines  he  took  were  an  aperient,  or  tonic,  when  ne¬
cessary.  His  appearance  was  that  of  one  worn  down  to  the
brink  of  the  grave  by  disease :  his  only  mode  of  locomotion
was  shoving  himself  along  the  floor  of  the  room.

Such  was  the  condition  of  the  poor  sufferer  when  I  first
saw  him,  in  the  early  part  of  October,  1847.  In  the  latter
part  of  the  previous  September,  I  had  undertaken  the  spiritual
charge  of  a  portion  of  the  parish  of  Monkton  Combe,  and,
although  I  had  almost  made  up  my  mind  not  to  undertake  a
case  of  mesmerism  myself — in  consequence  of  the  strong  pre¬
judice  which  still  exists  to  a  great  extent  against  it,  and  for
fear  such  prejudice  might  injure  me  as  a  minister  amongst  my
little  flock,  yet,  when  I  beheld  this  poor  fellow  in  the  de¬
plorable  condition  I  have  described,  I  could  not  bear  the  idea
of  visiting  him  ministerially  only,  whilst  conscious  of  my
power  to  relieve  his  temporal  wants,  and  therefore,  without
hesitation,  commenced  the  mesmeric  process.

Although  I  have  witnessed  numerous  cases  of  mesmerism
— and  especially  the  highly  interesting  one  of  Horner  reported
in  The  Zoist,  Yol.  V.,  p.  123,  and  indeed  have  had  two  or
three  other  cases  of  my  own,  yet  the  experienced  practitioner
will  doubtless  detect  some  ignorance  of  the  subject  displayed
in  the  following  recital.  At  the  very  outset,  a  case  of  such
long  standing  must  be  acknowledged,  on  all  hands,  to  be  a
most  difficult  one  to  deal  with.  However,  I  determined  so
to  husband  my  time  as  to  devote  one  hour  each  day  to  my  pa¬
tient,  notwithstanding  he  was  living  at  a  distance  of  two  te¬
dious  miles  from  my  own  abode.

At  the  end  of  a  week,  although  there  were  no  apparent
approaches  towards  mesmeric  sleep,  still  he  acknowledged  that
he  felt  himself  stronger  and  occasionally  drowsy,  especially
for  some  time  after  I  had  left  him.  It  is  a  striking  fact  that,
from  the  first  day  of  my  attempting  to  mesmerise  him,  his
hands  were  cold ,  clammy ,  and  wet  when  I  commenced  the
passes ;  but  always  warm ,  dry ,  and  of  the  same  temperature
as  my  own  long  before  the  hour  had  expired.  This  was
equally  the  case  even  when  I  had  not  come  into  actual  contact
with  him.  In  a  few  days  more  his  spirits  revived  wonderfully,
and  he  was  enabled  to  sit  upon  a  chair  with  his  foot  resting
upon  a  stool,  chatting  with  all  the  vivacity  and  cheerfulness
of  an  invalid  conscious  of  returning  health.  These  symptoms


186  Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.

were  highly  encouraging ;  but  I  had  taxed  my  powers  beyond
my  strength,  and  was  obliged  to  desist  from  sheer  exhaustion.
For  two  days  his  sister  supplied  my  place,  but  without  his
experiencing  the  after  drowsiness,  &c.  After  this  short  inter¬
mission  I  resumed  my  labours,  restricting  them  to  about  half
an  hour  at  each  seance.  In  a  day  or  two  I  found,  from  a  sort
of  nodding  of  the  head  and  gentle  starting  of  the  frame,  that
I  was  gradually  gaining  power  over  him.  Moreover,  he  him¬
self  became  conscious  of  the  influence,  and  always  told  me
when  he  felt  it  the  most, — his  account  invariably  coinciding
with  my  own  feelings  and  strength  at  the  time.  A  change
also  took  place  in  the  effusion  from  his  body.  That  which
had  hitherto  been  a  thin,  limpid  running,  now  became  a  thick,
yellow,  unctious  matter, — a  change  which  his  medical  adviser
pronounced  to  be  for  the  better.  The  drowsiness,  I  have
already  mentioned,  was  no  longer  confined  to  a  few  hours
after  my  exertions,  but  continued  throughout  the  day  and  the
whole  of  the  following  morning.  His  sleep  during  the  night,
before  my  seeing  him,  had  never  exceeded  two  or  three  hours.
His  father,  who  had  often  anxiously  watched  his  restless  nights,
now  told  me,  with  tears  of  gratitude  and  joy,  that  his  son’s  sleep
during  the  night  was  sound,  deep,  and  unbroken.

About  three  weeks  from  the  time  of  my  first  visit,  his  eye¬
lids  slowly  closed  with  a  tremulous,  quivering  motion,  and  he
dropped  into  a  quiet  sleep  in  25  minutes.  His  sleep  was  not
very  profound,  since  he  was  conscious  of  all  that  passed  and
could  recall  the  conversation  which  had  occurred  during  his
sleep.  It  will  be  seen  in  the  sequel  that  this  consciousness
never  forsook  him.  He  described  the  sensation  as  most  sooth¬
ing,  delightful,  and  refreshing ;  but  loud  conversation  broke
in  upon  his  pleasing  slumber,  and  his  otherwise  placid  and
happy  countenance  contracted  into  a  frown.  He  could  always
hear  me  or  any  other  person  speaking  to  him,  but  could  not
return  an  answer,  his  eyes  and  his  tongue  being  spell-bound
and  hermetically  sealed.  The  first  time  he  slept  an  hour  and
a  quarter,  and  awoke  with  a  smile  playing  upon  his  counte¬
nance.  Three  days  from  this  time  he  went  off  into  coma  in
five  minutes,  and  in  ten  days  the  time  was  gradually  dimin¬
ished  to  one  minute  and  sometimes  even  less  than  that.  Find¬
ing  his  strength  increase  wonderfully,  he  was  allowed,  with
the  approval  of  his  medical  man,  two  glasses  of  port  wine  one
day,  a  pint  of  porter  the  next,  and  so  on  in  rotation.  His
sleep  varied  from  one  hour  to  two,  and  was  always  most  plea¬
sant  ;  so  much  so  that  he  awoke  sometimes  whilst  attempting
to  sing.

He  had  now  been  about  a  month  under  my  treatment,


Scrofula  much  alleviated,  by  the  Rev.  E.  C.  Topham .  187

and  my  success  had  exceeded  my  most  sanguine  expectations.
The  whole  family  were  astonished  at  the  change  wrought  in
him,  and  all  thought  him  gradually  advancing  towards  a  re¬
covery.  He  could  go  up  and  down  the  stairs  with  little  or  no
fatigue,  slept  soundly  during  the  night  and  sometimes  in  the
day  in  addition  to  the  mesmeric  sleep,  his  wounds  also  assumed
a  more  healthy  appearance.  Ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the
disease  under  which  he  laboured,  I  cannot  say  whether  the
profuse  perspiration  which  he  now  experienced  during  the
night  was  a  favourable  symptom  or  not ;  but,  during  the  day,
his  skin  wore  a  more  natural  hue  and  was  not  so  moist  on  the
surface,  cold,  nor  clammy  as  heretofore  :  in  fact,  his  counte¬
nance  wore  a  much  more  healthy  and  congenial  aspect,  and
had  in  a  great  measure  lost  that  sunk  and  careworn  look  and
livid  hue  which  was  so  striking  when  first  I  saw  him.  All
this,  too,  when,  from  other  engagements,  I  could  sometimes
only  devote  a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  him  each  day, — my  gene¬
ral  practice  being  to  continue  the  process  a  full  half  hour  each
day  after  sleep  had  been  induced.

A  protuberance  in  the  neck,  caused,  he  said,  by  taking
cold  whilst  watching  the  hay-making  from  his  window  in  the
summer,  burst  a  fortnight  ago  ;  and,  contrary  to  all  his  pre¬
vious  experience,  the  wound  had  healed  up  again  in  a  few
days.

His  sisters  who  resided  at  some  little  distance,  and  con¬
sequently  had  not  seen  him  since  mesmerism  had  been  tried,
were  astonished  at  his  improved  condition.  As  they  had  seen
nothing  of  the  powers  of  that  wonderful  agent,  I  tried  one  or
two  experiments  for  the  first  time, — his  restoration  to  health
being  my  only  motive  for  devoting  so  much  of  my  time  to  him.
He  was  insensible  to  pain,  so  far  as  could  be  ascertained  by
violent  pinching,  &c.  I  put  sugar  in  my  mouth  without  the
possibility  of  his  seeing  me  had  he  been  awake,  and,  as  soon
as  I  tasted  the  sweet,  there  was  a  movement  of  his  mouth
and  action  of  the  salivary  glands,  followed  by  deglutition  cor¬
responding  with  my  own, — his  face  gradually  brightening  up
into  a  smile  as  if  really  enjoying  the  sweet.  I  then  sipped  a
little  vinegar.  Gradually  his  brows  contracted,  until  at  length
his  visage  assumed  that  form  which  is  usual  after  something
extremely  nauseous  or  disagreeable  has  come  across  the  palate.
This  was  followed  by  a  laugh,  as  if  at  the  idea  of  a  trick  hav¬
ing  been  played  him ;  a  little  more  sugar,  however,  taken  for
my  own  sake  as  well  as  his,  gradually  restored  him  to  a  happy
smile.

At  this  period  his  medical  attendant  expressed  his  aston¬
ishment  at  the  improved  condition  of  Barrow,  and  pronounced

VOL.  VII.  p


188


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.


1  ‘  a  change  to  have  latterly  taken  place  in  him  very  much  for
the  better ;  that  his  wounds  were  somewhat  improved,  but  that
changes  of  that  kind  would  take  place  in  various  stages  of  the
disease  when  there  was  indeed  no  hope  for  an  ultimate  recov¬
ery  ;  that  the  complaint  was  too  deeply  rooted  in  his  system  to
hope  for  that.”  He  ordered  him  acid  tonics,  as  I  understood
from  Mrs.  Barrow.

On  the  19th  of  November,  a  clerical  friend  accompanied
me,  and  as  usual,  upon  such  occasions,  I  proceeded  to  show
him  a  few  experiments.  I  mesmerised  two  sovereigns  for  a
minute  or  so,  and  placed  one  in  each  of  my  patients  hands,
desiring  him  to  hold  them.  In  two  minutes  he  was  asleep,
and  then  clutched  the  gold  most  firmly  so  that  no  one  could
rescue  them  from  his  rigidly  clenched  hands.  Silver,  I  found
afterwards,  produced  the  same  effect.  I  opened  his  mouth,
and  by  passes  partly  fixed  his  lower  jaw.  I  drank  water,  &c.,
and,  as  before  stated,  there  was  a  corresponding  deglutition
on  his  part.  At  this  time  his  sleep  was  deeper,  so  that  he
could  not  hear  the  carts  as  they  rumbled  close  past  the  house.
His  countenance  had  become  much  altered — especially  the
lips.  At  the  outset,  they  were  extremely  thick  and  swollen
as  well  as  drawn  in,  differently  from  those  of  any  person  I
had  ever  seen :  for  some  time  past,  they  have  become  more
natural  and  much  thinner.  This  change  struck  me  very  forci¬
bly.  His  hands  are  not  so  cold  by  far  as  heretofore ;  his  eye¬
lids  have  lost  that  tremulous  motion  which  existed  in  the  first
stage  of  the  mesmeric  sleep.

Some  friends,  who  had  no  faith  in  the  mesmeric  power,
accompanied  me  on  the  24th  of  November,  when  I  rendered
his  arm  rigid  as  a  bar  of  iron ;  at  their  request  I  awoke  him,
and  put  him  to  sleep  again  immediately :  they  were  perfectly
convinced  of  the  truth  of  mesmerism.  I  found  afterwards
that  I  could  produce  rigidity  in  the  limbs  whilst  he  was  awake.
On  the  27th  of  Nov.,  before  proceeding  to  mesmerise  him,
his  hands  were  of  a  natural  warmth  and  dryness,  although
he  had,  contrary  to  his  usual  custom,  been  sitting  up  stairs
in  the  cold  without  a  fire.

On  the  2nd  of  Dec.,  I  had  put  him  to  sleep  as  usual  in
a  minute  or  two,  and  deepened  the  sleep  about  a  quarter  of  an
hour,  when  suddenly  his  countenance  changed;  there  was  a
heaving  of  the  chest  and  contortion  of  the  features,  as  if  in
violent  agony.  I  instantly  redoubled  my  efforts,  making
passes  over  the  region  of  the  heart  and  head  with  all  the
energy  I  could  muster.  In  half  a  minute  he  lay  as  calm  and
placid  as  usual ;  but  not  before  he  had  with  difficulty  given
utterance  to  some  few  words :  the  only  time  he  ever  spoke


Scrofula  much  alleviated,  by  the  Rev.  E.  C.  Topham.  189

when  in  the  mesmeric  sleep.  I  heard  a  door  open  and  shut
down  below,  immediately  before  his  convulsive  movements
commenced,  but  nothing  more.  He  slept  an  hour  and  a
quarter,  and  when  he  awoke,  said  that  he  had  not  slept  so
well  in  consequence  of  his  sisters  crying,  and  that  he  was
afraid  his  brother-in-law  (then  in  the  hospital  at  Bath)  was
dead.  This  was  really  the  case ;  his  mother  and  sister  having,
at  the  moment  he  was  so  violently  agitated,  returned  from
Bath.

On  the  6th  of  Dec.,  he  was  very  much  troubled  with  sick¬
ness  and  a  head-ache,  which  the  mesmeric  sleep  entirely  re¬
moved .  On  the  8th,  I  could  not  conveniently  attend  him ;
consequently  the  ensuing  night  he  lay  awake  three  hours,
and  slept  ill :  this  occurred  more  than  once.

His  sister,  at  my  request,  mesmerised  a  sovereign,  and
during  her  brother’s  sleep  placed  it  in  one  of  his  hands,
whilst  he  held  in  the  other  hand  another  sovereign  which
had  been  mesmerised  by  me.  I  could  not  by  manual  force,
or  breathing  upon  the  hand  which  held  the  sovereign  she  had
mesmerised,  obtain  it ;  neither  could  she,  by  similar  means,
obtain  that  which  I  had  mesmerised  :  but  the  latter  opened
almost  immediately  when  I  breathed  upon  it,  as  well  as  the
former  when  she  did  the  like.  Unknown  to  him,  I  desired
his  sister  to  pinch  me,  which  he  evidently  felt  very  acutely.

I  urged  him  in  strong  terms  to  speak  to  me  during  the
mesmeric  sleep ;  but  he  could  not  do  so,  though  conscious  of
my  wish,  and  anxious  to  gratify  it.  When  he  awoke,  he  said
the  exertion  he  had  made  to  comply  with  my  request  disturbed
his  sleep  very  much.  The  communication  of  taste  I  found
had  now  ceased,  and  he  had  also  become  sensible  to  pain ;  a
change  I  could  not  comprehend,  since  he  was  still  as  much  as
ever  under  my  power,  so  far  as  rigidity,  &c.,  -were  concerned.

On  the  19th  of  Dec.,  I  sat  by  him,  and,  without  contact,
willed  him  to  sleep  in  the  usual  time.  The  following  day,  I
sat  down  in  the  corner  of  his  bed-room,  and  again  used  simple
volition.  He  laughed  at  me  the  while,  but  slept  in  four
minutes,  more  than  double  the  usual  time.

It  should  be  observed,  that  I  could  not  affect  him  in  the
least  when  his  mind  was  kept  upon  the  qui  vive  in  close  con¬
versation  with  me.  I  now  tried,  by  simple  volition,  to  put
him  to  sleep  from  Bath ;  but  his  sister  told  me  that  the  con¬
versation  was  kept  up  more  than  usual  about  the  time  I  had
fixed,  and  no  effects  were  produced.

On  the  ensuing  evening,  his  sister  contrived  to  get  him
into  his  bed-room  about  8  o’clock, — the  time  I  had  named, —
and  at  quarter  past  he  fell  asleep,  and  slept  half  an  hour.

p  2


190


Mesmerism  in  the  West  of  England.


The  same  course  was  pursued  the  following  evening,  accom¬
panied  by  a  similar  result.  He  described  the  sleep  to  me  as
different  from  natural  sleep,  and  precisely  the  same  as  that
which  he  experienced  when  I  was  present.

On  the  24th  of  Dec.,  I  was  confined  to  the  house  with  a
violent  attack  of  influenza.  The  effect  upon  my  poor  patient
was  very  extraordinary.  He  nearly  fainted,  and  became  weak
and  exhausted ;  much  more  than  he  would  have  done  had  he
been  suddenly  deprived  of  some  strong  and  nourishing  food.
His  parents  in  great  distress  sent  to  me  to  know  what  was  to
be  done ;  I  advised  his  sister,  who  had  some  little  experience
in  the  art,*  to  mesmerise  him  twice  a  day,  until  I  was  strong
enough  to  resume  my  labours.  She  did  so  until  the  29th  of
Jan.,  1848;  the  sleep  after  each  seance  averaging  during  that
period  from  half  to  three-quarters  of  an  hour.

On  the  6th  of  Jan.,  1848,  I  was  enabled  to  see  my  patient,
when  his  father  said  to  me,  “  It’s  answered  very  well.  Sir ;
Frank  has  gone  to  sleep  every  night  at  8  o’clock  !”  This  sur¬
prized  me,  as  I  had  not  tried  to  affect  him.  Upon  questioning
him,  I  found  that,  under  the  impression  I  was  about  to  mes¬
merise  him  from  Bath,  he  had  retired  to  his  room  every  night
a  little  about  8  o’clock  with  a  candle,  which  he  kept  burning.
That  he  invariably  fixed  his  eyes  upon  some  one  object,  and
gradually  a  mist  appeared  to  fill  the  room,  until  all  objects
became  indistinct :  at  last  he  could  not  even  see  the  candle,
and  he  then  dropped  into  a  gentle  sleep — I  suppose  a  sort  of
Braidism  or  hypnotism. t  ,

On  the  29th  of  Jan.,  I  thought  myself  strong  enough  to
take  my  patient  under  my  own  charge  again,  and  consequently
mesmerised  him  about  half  an  hour  each  day  for  a  week;  al¬
though  he  slept  in  two  or  three  minutes,  it  was  very  exhaust¬
ing  to  me,  and  not  attended  with  my  former  success,  as  he
never  slept  longer  than  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  and  rarely

*  On  the  13th  Nov.,  1847,  her  husband,  James  Griffin,  returned  from  a
visit  to  his  friends  to  my  parish  in  a  most  deplorable  condition.  He  was  in  the
last  stage  of  consumption,  dropsical, — in  fact,  the  victim  of  a  complication  of
diseases.  I  never  saw  a  more  likely  subject  for  mesmerism,  and  requested  his
wife  to  try  if  she  could  affect  him.  Under  my  superintendence,  she  mesmerised
him  twice  a  day  for  ten  days,  and  he  slept  upon  an  average  two  hours  after  each
stance  !  His  sleep  during  the  night,  before  confined  to  two  or  three  hours,  became
sound,  and  his  appetite  increased  wonderfully.  On  the  eleventh  day  he  was
removed  into  the  hospital  in  Bath  by  order  of  his  surgeon,  and  died  the  following
day.  His  widow  is  fully  convinced  that  the  process  prolonged  her  husband’s  life
some  few  days,  that  his  pain  was  much  alleviated,  and  his  last  days  rendered
much  more  comfortable  than  any  he  had  experienced  for  months  before.

t  Brom  my  candidly  stating  to  an  experienced  physician  this  fact,  so  detri¬
mental  to  what  would  have  been  the  most  astonishing  feature  in  the  case,  he
could  not  but  acknowledge  his  full  and  implicit  credence  to  the  whole  narrative.*

*  Mere  imagination  explains  this.  See  No.  IX.,  p.  47. — Zoist.


Scrofula  much  alleviated ,  by  the  Rev.  R.  C.  Topham.  191

less  than  that  period.  Upon  one  of  these  days,  when  I  had
just  completed  my  allotted  time,  and  left  him  in  a  deep  sleep,
his  medical  adviser  called.  Not  wishing  to  disturb  his  slum¬
bers,  nor  to  renew  my  exertions,  I  determined  not  to  awake
him.  The  surgeon  requested  to  see  him  :  he  did  so ;  felt  my
patient's  pulse,  and  entered  into  a  description  of  the  hopeless
condition  of  the  poor  boy,  stating  that  there  was  no  chance
whatever  of  his  recovery ;  that  latterly  he  had  become  much
worse,  and  that  ultimately,  in  all  probability,  he  would  go  off
in  a  decline.  Had  the  sleep  been  natural,  he  would  not  have
heard  this  statement,  but  he  distinctly  remembered  the  whole
of  the  conversation  when  he  awoke.

At  the  end  of  the  week,  I  felt  that  I  had  resumed  my
labours  too  soon,  and  a  second  attack  of  the  influenza  fol¬
lowed,  which  hung  upon  me  for  some  weeks.  My  patient's
brother-in-law  tried  to  mesmerise  him,  but  with  little  or  no
effect ;  moreover,  the  disease  had  even,  when  I  last  mesme¬
rised  him,  preyed  upon  the  bone,  and  the  effluvia  in  conse¬
quence  became  quite  overpowering  ;  occasionally  afterwards
I  relieved  him  from  pain  and  weariness,  by  putting  him  to
sleep  for  twenty  minutes  or  half  an  hour  during  his  now  fast
sinking  state.  He  lingered  until  the  29th  of  March  following,
when  he  quietly  turned  upon  his  pillow,  and  died  without  a
struggle.

I  cannot  close  this  statement  without  bearing  testimony
to  the  amiable  disposition  and  fervent  piety  of  my  highly
interesting  patient.  The  solemn  admonitions  and  warnings
which  he  gave  to  his  parents  and  friends  around  him,  will
never  be  foregotten.  Upon  one  occasion,  during  the  time  I
was  unwell,  his  father  observed  to  him,  “  We  all  think,  Frank,
if  Mr.  Topham  had  not  been  ill,  you  would  have  recovered."
He  replied,  “  I  think  I  should,  father,  but  it  is  God's  will ;
had  He  intended  me  to  be  well,  He  would  not  have  made
Mr.  Topham  ill."

We  beg  to  add  our  united  testimony  to  the  correctness  of
the  foregoing  statement ;  Monkton  Combe,  Jan.  24th,  1849.

John  Barrow.

Susanna  Barrow.

The  foregoing  statement  would  be  a  very  unsatisfactory
one  to  adduce  as  a  proof  of  the  wonderful  powers  of  mes¬
merism,  as  there  is  much  in  it  which  one  disposed  to  carp
and  cavil  might  attribute  to  natural  causes.  It  is  for  no
such  object  I  have  consented  to  its  being  brought  before  the
public;  but  simply  because  there  are  features  in  the  case


192


Mesmerism  in  the  Rest  of  England.


somewhat  unusual,  and  which,  therefore,  will  be  interesting
to  those  for  whom  it  is  intended;  viz.,  the  readers  of  The
Zoist.

Edward  C.  Topham.

Prior-Park  Buildings,  Bath.


MESMERISM  IN  THE  REST  OF  ENGLAND.

IX.  The  removal  of  Dreadful  Pain  of  long  standing  from  the
Eyes  of  a  Parishioner.  By  the  Rev.  Jos.  Cautley,
Curate  of  Thorney,  Cambridgeshire.  Communicated  to
Dr.  Elliotson.

June  11,  1849.

My  dear  Sir, — I  beg  to  send  you  the  following  case  of  im¬
mediate  and  permanent  relief  by  the  employment  of  mes¬
merism.  I  had  been  attending,  ministerially  a  man  and
his  wife,  named  Harrison ;  both  were  very  ill.  The  subject
of  this  note  is  the  husband,  the  wife  is  since  dead.  Harrison
is  a  labouring  man,  of  good  character,  aged  about  58.  He
has  been  for  the  last  two  or  three  years  subject  to  almost  in¬
cessant  pain  in  his  eyes.  So  great  was  his  suffering,  his
wife  has  told  me,  that,  when  he  returned  from  his  work,  he
would  throw  his  hat  across  the  house,  and  rush  to  the  table
to  place  his  arms  upon  it  for  the  support  of  his  head.  When
I  began  to  visit  the  house  he  was  complaining  very  much  of
his  eyes.  His  wife  said  neither  of  them  could  get  any  sleep,
he  was  so  restless  from  the  pain.  Though  I  have  used  mes¬
merism  with  almost  unfailing  success  amongst  my  friends  and
acquaintances  for  the  relief  of  pain,  I  have  been  very  cautious
in  introducing  it  amongst  the  cottagers,  lest  they  should  regard
it  superstitiously — to  the  injury  of  my  ministerial  usefulness.
However,  one  day  in  March,  on  entering  HarrisoiPs  cottage,
I  saw  the  poor  man  stretched  upon  chairs,  covered  over  with
a  shawl,  and  his  wife  told  me  he  was  nearly  mad  with  pain.
1  asked  him  to  sit  up.  He  did  so.  His  suffering  wTas  at
once  apparent ;  he  could  not  bear  the  light,  nor  open  his
eyes,  and  described  the  pain  as  piercing  through  to  the  brain.
I  saw  it  was  useless  to  read  to  him  whilst  his  attention  was
absorbed  by  his  own  agony;  at  the  same  time  a  strong  feeling
came  across  my  mind,  that,  if  mesmerism  possessed  the  won¬
derful  power  I  had  been  led  to  suppose,  and  which  I  had  to
some  extent  experienced,  I  was  not  justified  in  letting  the
poor  man  suffer  without  attempting  to  relieve  him.  I  would
not,  however,  tell  the  man  or  his  family  what  I  proposed  to


Removal  of  Pain  in  the  Eyes,  by  Rev.  Jos.  Cautley.  193

do,  but  told  the  man  I  would  hold  my  hand  to  one  of  his
eyes,  and  see  whether  the  warmth  of  my  hand  would  ease
the  pain.  I  did  so ;  occasionally  drawing  my  hand  down  the
face  to  the  chin  and  throwing  off  the  pass.  I  also  made
tractive  passes  from  the  eye.  In  ten  minutes  he  told  me  the
pain  was  nearly  gone  from  that  eye,  but  seemed  to  have  gone
more  to  the  head.  This  shewed  me  the  cause  of  the  pain
was  influenced  by  the  passes.  Thus  encouraged,  I  commenced
with  both  hands,  one  to  each  eye,  just  as  I  had  been  doing
to  the  one  eye.  In  little  more  than  ten  minutes  he  told  me
all  his  pain  was  gone  from  his  eyes,  but  he  had  considerable
pain  in  the  head.  I  then  commenced  upon  the  head  :  in  less
than  half  an  hour  from  the  commencement  of  the  passes  to
the  eye,  he  was  free  from  pain  both  in  his  eyes  and  head.
The  next  day  when  I  called,  before  I  could  utter  my  anxious
enquiry,  whether  the  pain  kept  off,  his  wife  exclaimed,  “  Oh,
what  a  blessing  it  is,  Sir,  to  have  such  a  kind  friend  as  you.
Why,  Sir,  we  slept  for  five  hours  last  night,  the  first  time  .
we  have  had  a  good  night  for  months.”  As  Harrison  com¬
plained  of  pain  in  his  head,  I  put  him  into  the  mesmeric
sleep,  and  he  woke  refreshed  and  free  from  pain.  I  saw  him
a  few  days  ago — and  though  he  is  a  worn  out  man,  and  cannot
live,  I  should  think,  many  months,  as  he  has  no  appetite  and
is  daily  becoming  weaker,  yet  he  has  continued  free  from  that
dreadful  agony  in  his  eyes,  which  there  is  every  probability
would  have  attended  him  to  his  grave.  He  has  had  no  return
of  the  pain,  and  it  is  now  nearly  three  months  since  it  was
removed.  It  was  your  noble  and  courageous  advocacy  of
mesmerism,  dear  Dr.  Elliotson,  which  induced  me  to  examine
it  for  myself;  and  being  convinced  of  its  truth  and  of  its
great  power  as  a  curative  agent,  I  dare  to  advocate  it  and  to
employ  it.  I  have  not  met  with  one  opponent  to  mesmerism
who  has  examined  into  it.  I  meet  with  hundreds  who  vent
their  childish  censures,  which  have  no  other  basis  than  their
own  imaginations.

I  instruct  any  body  in  the  employment  of  this  natural
power,  who  I  believe  to  be  well  disposed  and  earnest  to  use
it  for  good.  I  discourage  every  other  employment  of  a  power
so  great,  and  in  improper  hands  fraught  with  possible  evil.

I  send  this  as  my  first  contribution  to  The  Zoist,  and  will
only  add  that,  in  all  directions  around  me,  prejudices  are
giving  way  and  opponents  are  becoming  advocates.

I  am,  my  dear  Sir,

Yours  sincerely  and  gratefully,

Jos.  Cautley.


(  194  )


X.  Cure  of  Palpitation  of  the  Heart.  By  a  beneficed  Cler¬
gyman  of  the  Church  of  England.  Communicated  to
Dr.  Elliotson.


- Vicarage,  Surrey,  12th  June,  1849.

My  dear  Sir, — I  have  long  laboured  under  the  sense  of  a
heavy  obligation  due  to  those  who,  with  yourself,  seek  to  es¬
tablish  a  truth  much  assailed,  and  shall  feel  relieved  of  a  great
weight,  if  you  will  permit  a  humble  individual  like  myself  to
be  heard  in  favour  of  that  mighty  fact — vital  or  zoistic  mag¬
netism.  It  is  with  deep  shame  that  I  call  to  mind  the  (for  a
time)  unsuccessful  attempt  of  one  of  the  brightest  ornaments
of  the  profession  to  which  I  belong,  to  induce  me  to  lay  aside
the  prejudice  of  intense  ignorance,  and  seek  to  become  en¬
lightened  upon  a  subject  which  has  been  investigated  by  minds
of  the  highest  order,  and  pronounced  to  be  one  of  the  greatest
blessings  which  a  God  of  mercy  and  love  has  bestowed  upon
his  suffering  people.  I  have,  indeed,  reason  to  be  thankful
that  at  last  the  scales  fell  from  my  eyes,  and  that  the  result
of  a  painstaking  enquiry  was  the  establishment  of  that  truth
of  which  you  have  always  shewn  yourself  the  undaunted  and
consistent  champion.

Having  been  once  satisfied  of  a  fact  which  for  years  I  had
ridiculed  as  a  miserable  fiction,  it  will  hardly  surprise  you  to
be  told  that  I  sought  to  benefit  my  fellow  creatures  by  carry¬
ing  it  out.  I  will  not  weary  you  with  my  alternations  of  suc¬
cess  and  failure.  Many  are  the  cases  in  which  I  have  suc¬
ceeded  beyond  my  fondest  hopes,  and  in  many,  I  am  bound
to  state,  I  have  met  with  failure  and  disappointment.

Amongst  the  former  is  the  following  case  of  palpitation  of
the  heart.  I  have  suppressed  the  names  by  desire  of  the  par¬
ties  concerned ;  but  permission  has  been  given  me  to  afford
every  information  in  my  power,  in  private,  to  those  who  may
desire  it.

On  the  14th  of  last  December,  I  received  a  letter  of  which
the  following  is  a  copy, —

“ - Parsonage.

Dear  Sir, — You  will,  I  trust,  pardon  the  liberty  that  I —
a  stranger — take  in  addressing  you,  but  the  circumstances
of  the  case  will,  I  trust,  excuse  me.

“  As  you  are,  I  believe,  aware,  my  beloved  father — the

JEtev. - ,  has  been  suffering  for  some  months  past.  We

were,  however,  rejoicing  in  perceiving  such  a  decided  amend¬
ment  in  him  last  week,  as  to  give  us  every  assurance  of  his
restoration;  but  this  happiness  was  but  transitory,  for  on
Saturday  night  last  he  was  attacked  far  more  violently  and


%


Cure  of  Palpitation  of  the  Heart,  by  a  Clergyman.  195

alarmingly  than  before.  Medical  advice  has  done  but  little  in
alleviating  his  excruciating  agony,  and  he  himself  appears  to
think  that  the  only  hope  of  giving  him  temporary  relief  is  in
the  skill  the  Almighty  has  bestowed  upon  you.  Will  it  then
be  asking  too  much,  to  beg  that  you  will  come  to  us  and  use
it  for  a  Christian  brother?  We  shall  indeed  esteem  it  a  pe¬
culiar  and  never-to-be-forgotten  favour,  your  doing  so  at  your
earliest  convenience ,  as  each  moment  is  precious.

“  Pray  pardon  us,  dear  Sir,  this  unreasonable  request,
and  allow  me  to  subscribe  myself,

“  Yours  truly,

(C  *  ^  *

“  To  the  Bev. - ,

“ - Vicarage.”

The  afternoon  of  the  same  day  saw  me  at  the  bed-side  of
my  patient.  His  pulse,  tested  by  a  medical  gentlemen  pre¬
sent,  was  120,  and  I  found  him  unable  to  move  in  his  bed
without  intense  suffering ;  his  breathing  was  short  and  rapid,
and  I  must  confess  that,  for  the  moment,  I  looked  upon  the
case  as  hopeless, — so  indeed  did  his  medical  attendants.  As,
however,  the  Rev.  Mr.  -  earnestly  desired  to  be  mes¬

merised,  I  lost  no  time,  and  he  fell  into  the  sleep-waking
state  in  a  very  few  minutes ;  his  pulse  rapidly  fell  to  80,  and
his  breathing  became  regular.  By  the  usual  tractive  passes
I  drew  him  to  an  upright  position  in  his  bed,  and  you  will
easily  imagine  the  intense  astonishment  of  his  family  and
friends,  when  they  saw  the  body  of  the  patient  follow  the
hand  of  the  mesmeriser  with  as  much  readiness  as  the  needle
follows  the  magnet ;  and  further,  his  countenance,  which  had
hitherto  been  agonized,  became  perfectly  calm  and  tranquil.
To  the  question,  “  Do  you  suffer  any  pain  ?”  he  replied  in¬
stantly,  “  None  whatever;  it  is  quite  gone.”

That  night  I  slept  at  the  house  of  my  patient,  and  the
following  morning,  shortly  after  breakfast,  was  hastily  sum¬
moned  to  his  bed-side,  as  he  had  announced  .to  his  friends
his  conviction  that  he  had  but  a  very  short  time  to  live.

Under  the  impression  that  some  great  change  was  taking
place  in  him,  which  was  mistaken  for  the  approach  of  death,
and  yet  not  willing  to  urge  hastily  a  repetition  of  the  pre¬
ceding  evening’s  treatment,  I  proceeded  (you  will,  I  doubt
not,  remember  the  occasion)  to  obtain  your  valuable  opinion
and  advice.  On  this  I  acted,  and  the  result  was,  that  the
manipulations  were  again  resorted  to,  and  with  the  same  or
even  more  beneficial  effects.  The  patient  supposed  to  be  al¬
most  at  his  last  gasp,  fell  as  before  into  a  most  refreshing  sleep.


196


Mesmerism  in  the  Rest  of  England.


I  was  satisfied,  upon  liis  awaking,  that  we  had  good  cause  to
hope  that  mesmerism  would  be  blessed  as  the  instrument  of
his  restoration  to  health ;  and  so  it  proved.  His  amendment
was  steady  and  visible  to  his  friends,  and  on  the  28th  of  the
same  month  I  received  the  following  most  gratifying  and  wel¬
come  intelligence  : —

“  My  dear  Sir, — You  will  I  fear  consider  me  very  remiss
in  not  fulfilling  my  promise  of  writing  to  you  ere  this,  but
when  I  assure  you  that  my  apparent  negligence  arose  from  a
servant's  carelessness  in  omitting  to  post  a  letter  I  despatched
to  you  on  Saturday,  you  will,  I  trust,  excuse  me.  I  am,  how¬
ever,  happy  in  having  the  additional  favourable  intelligence
of  some  days  to  give  you.  As  regards  my  dear  father's  pro¬
gression,  he  appears  to  be  gaining  ground  steadily,  although
he  has  exerted  himself  much  in  seeing  several  of  his  poor
people.  We  do  indeed  owe  you  a  large  and  lasting  debt  of
gratitude,  for  we  can  distinctly  trace  his  amendment  to  the
time  when  you  first  operated  upon  him,  when  indeed  he  ap¬
peared  to  us  as  past  reasonable  hope.

“  Yours  most  truly,

“  To  the  Rev. - ,

- Vicarage."

Thus  in  little  more  than  a  fortnight,  having  been  mes¬
merised  six  times  in  all,  was  this  great  sufferer  permitted  to
derive  a  cure  from  that  much-reviled  “  therapeutic  agent,"
mesmerism.

It  has  been  my  privilege  within  these  few  days  to  receive
and  welcome  my  dear  friend  and  fellow-labourer  in  the  Lord's
vineyard  at  my  own  residence,  and  to  hear  this  faithful  and
devoted  servant  of  God  put  forth  with  his  usual  power  and
energy  from  my  own  pulpit  the  truth  in  all  its  fulness.

I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  with  much  respect.
Yours  very  faithfully,

A  beneficed  Clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England.
To  J.  Elliotson,  Esq.,  M.D.,  &c.,  &c.


XI.  Cure  of  Blindness.  By  Miss  Wallace.

Alexander  Mason,  aged  8,  was  brought  to  me  Dec.  5,  1846,
by  his  mother — Mrs.  Child,  the  wife  of  a  tailor  residing
in  Curtain  Road.  She  stated  that  his  eyes  did  not,  according
to  her  nurse,  appear  at  all  diseased  at  his  birth,  but  that


Cure  of  Blindness,  by  Miss  Wallace.


197


some  hours  after,  observing  lie  did  not  open  them,  she  raised
the  lids.  Inflammation  ensued,  followed  by  a  discharge  of
matter.

Three  weeks  after  her  confinement,  she  took  the  child
to  Mr.  Alexander,  the  oculist  in  Cork  Street.  After  exa¬
mination,  father  and  son  agreed  that  the  sight  of  the  right
eye  was  entirely  lost,  but  that  the  other  might  be  materially
improved,  and  that  this  was  the  utmost  that  could  be  ex¬
pected;  adding,  that  even  of  this  Mrs.  C.  should  feel  very
thankful.  A  course  of  treatment  under  the  Messrs.  Alex¬
ander  was  then  commenced,  and  it  was  ascertained  that  the
child  could  distinguish  colours,  &c.,  when  held  quite  close  to
the  left  eye.  Finding  the  improvement  not  progressive,
Mrs.  C.  took  her  son  to  various  hospitals  and  medical  prac¬
titioners  without  any  great  results,  and  all  were  of  opinion
that  one  eye  was  gone  beyond  redemption.  The  child  was
finally  received  into  the  Ophthalmic  Hospital,  King  William
Street,  Strand,  where  he  underwent  the  most  horrible  torments
termed  surgical  operations,  and  the  gentlemen  by  whom  they
were  performed  were  doubtless  of  the  opinion  of  that  portion
of  medical  practitioners  who,  like  Hr.  Copland,  consider  pain
a  wise  provision  of  nature  and  beneficial  accompaniment  of
their  practice,  for  no  means  were  taken  to  render  the  unhappy
child  insensible  to  the  horrors  of  being  strapped  down  to
a  table  surrounded  by  a  number  of  students,  and  where  he
felt  as  if  his  eyes  were  turned  out  on  his  cheeks  and  a  burning
liquid  poured  into  the  sockets.  This  operation  was  repeated
different  times  :  he  was  then  put  to  bed,  his  eyes  bandaged  up,
the  nostrils  being  open  for  respiration.  After  the  lapse,  I
think,  of  three  months,  one  of  the  nurses  told  his  mother  that
she  believed  the  sight  was  totally  destroyed,  but  if  it  was  not
it  would  be,  and  cautioned  her  to  remove  him  without  com¬
promising  her,  as  she  gave  the  advice  from  motives  of  hu¬
manity  at  the  risk  of  losing  her  place.  The  child  was  removed
and  found  to  be  “  stone  blind.”  After  a  time,  partial  sight
of  the  left  eye  was  recovered,  so  that  if  a  bright  object  was
held  close  it  could  be  dimly  distinguished  and  one  colour
known  from  another.

Mrs.  Child  having  heard  from  her  brother-in-law,  who
lived  servant  with  us,  of  the  various  cures  he  had  seen  me
perform  on  blind  persons,  brought  her  over  to  me  on  the  5th
of  December,  1846.  Fie  was  led  into  the  room,  the  front  of
his  cap  being  broken  as  he  had  knocked  his  head  against  a
lamp-post  or  tree.

After  my  mesmerising  him  a  few  minutes  he  went  into  the
mesmeric  sleep,  and  was  found  to  be  insensible  to  the  usual


198


Mesmerism  in  the  Rest  of  England.


tests  of  pricking  with  a  pin,  tickling,  &c.  I  rendered  his
arm  rigid,  and  it  remained  extended  during  about  an  hour
and  a  half.  At  the  end  of  that  time  I  roused  him,  when  he
exclaimed  that  he  saw  !  I  desired  him  to  describe  what  he
saw.  He  said  he  saw  his  uncle  with  his  hands  in  his  pockets,
described  the  dress  of  a  lady  present,  said  her  mitts  were  the
colour  of  her  hands  (they  were  flesh  coloured).  Several
things  were  shewn  him,  of  which  he  did  not  know  the  names.
A  silver  fork  he  called  a  spoon,  &c.  A  large  bible  lay  on  the
table,  and  to  the  astonishment  of  all  he  named  most  of  the
letters  in  the  holy  bible.

I  found  from  his  mother  that  at  the  infant  school  at  Shore¬
ditch  he  had  learned  some  of  the  letters  by  feeling,  as  the
blind  are  taught.


A  sensation  of  awe  and  wonder  pervaded  all  present :  his
mother  burst  into  tears,  and  expressed  the  most  heartfelt
thankfulness  to  God  for  this  apparent  miracle.

The  next  morning  I  took  the  child  to  Dr.  Elliotson.  Dur¬
ing  the  drive,  I  asked  if  he  could  distinguish  any  objects  in
the  shop  windows,  but  he  could  see  nothing  but  what  he
called  a  white  board  in  a  well,  (it  was  a  round  tin  bathing
tub.)  I  think  that  Dr.  Elliotson  said  there  was  a  cataract  of
one  eye  and  opacity  of  the  cornea  in  the  other.

Before  I  mesmerised  him  at  Dr.  Elliotson's  house,  he
could  not  distinguish  distant  objects,  and  only  saw  those  held
close  to  his  eyes.  When  roused,  he  described  Dr.  E/s  large
dog  without  knowing  at  first  what  it  was,  and  on  returning
to  Kensington  I  found  he  could  distinguish  everything  in  the
shop  windows,  describe  all  the  carriages  that  passed,  whether
there  were  figures  on  them,  colour  of  the  horses,  &c.,  &c.
From  this  time  forward  his  sight  continued  gradually  to  im¬
prove,  and  in  a  few  days  he  described  the  impression  on  a  seal
as  a  head,  but  not  a  head  like  ours — a  stag's  head,  and  saw
the  letters  on  the  inside  of  a  watch.

He  exhibited  many  curious  mesmeric  phenomena, — previ¬
sion  as  to  the  periods  at  which  he  would  be  able  to  see  certain
things — attacks  of  illness  to  which  he  would  be  subject,  &c.
One  very  singular/^  I  cannot  avoid  mentioning.  He  and  Mary
Bower,  the  girl  whose  cure  of  a  scalded  arm  and  bad  fall  are
mentioned  among  my  cases  in  The  Zoist  of  January,  1847,
would  both  tell  me  either  sleeping  or  waking,  together  or  sepa¬
rate,  the  card  out  of  three  that  I  mesmerised  by  thought  only,
and  this  experiment  they  often  repeated  successfully  without
one  failure  through  the  whole  pack  of  cards.  With  the  usual
uncertainty  of  clairvoyance  some  days  they  could  not  succeed
at  all.


Cure  of  Blindness,  by  Miss  Wallace.


199


Being  anxious  to  know  what  Mr.  Alexander  would  say  to
the  cure  effected,  I  took  the  boy  to  his  house,  and  found  he
recollected  him.  On  my  telling  him  his  sight  was  restored,  he
looked  at  his  eves,  and  said  he  could  not  see  much  with  the
right  eye, — the  one  with  which  he  did  see  and  which  others
pronounced  incurably  blind.  Alick  abruptly  declared  he  saw
much  better  with  that  eye  than  the  other ;  which  fact  he  an¬
nounced  very  soon  after  his  sight  was  restored.  Mr.  A.  then
enquired  by  what  means  sight  had  been  restored.  When  I
replied  by  mesmerism,  he  immediately  denounced  The  Zoist
as  an  atheistical*  publication  which  he  never  read,  and  said

mesmerism  was  a  d - d  humbug,  and  if  it  was  anything  it

came  from  the  devil;  pronounced  all  the  reports  of  Dr.  Esdaile's
cases  as  imposition,  &c.  &c.  When  I  enquired  by  what  agency
he  supposed  Alick' s  sight  had  been  restored  after  only  an  hour
and  half's  mesmeric  sleep,  he  replied  “  by  an  effort  of  nature."

I  have  not  heard  anything  of  Alick  since  about  six
months  after  the  cure  was  effected.  I  then  heard  his  sight
continued  to  improve,  and  that  he  was  to  learn  the  watch¬
making  business  from  an  uncle.

This  is  the  case  referred  to  in  the  Family  Herald,  in  the
same  article  in  which  the  cure  by  the  lady  of  the  Archbishop
of  Dublin  is  noticed,  in  which  case  I  took  a  special  interest,
having  heard  the  commencement  of  the  cure  three  years  ago
in  a  letter  addressed  by  Mrs.  Whately  to  a  friend  in  Chelten¬
ham.  The  editor  of  the  Family  Herald,  who  is  equally  distin¬
guished  for  his  high,  moral,  and  intellectual  attainments,  and
by  whose  talents  that  most  useful  and  entertaining  periodical
has  attained  the  enormous  circulation  of  130,000  weekly,  has
attested  the  reality  of  the  cure  in  his  editorial  capacity.  The
case  is  attested  by  the  following  witnesses.

M.  Child,  Curtain  Road,

William  Child,  Tailor,  Curtain  Road,

*  The  best  have  been  called  Atheists  by  their  foes.  In  the  Dictionnaire  des
Athtes  are  the  following  names  so  stigmatized : — ‘  ‘  The  Anglican  divines,  Berkeley,
Clarke,  Cudworth,  Hall,  Sherlock,  and  Whitby  ; — the  foreign  protestant  theolo¬
gians,  Pierre  Dumoulin,  Jurieu,  Basnage,  and  Beausobre ; — the  religious  re¬
formers,  Wickliffe,  Luther,  Melancthon,  Beza,  and  Osiander ; — the  religious
philosophers,  Grotius,  Locke,  Newton,  Leibnitz,  and  Lambert ;  and  Descartes,
Malebranche,  and  Pascal ; — the  intolerant  Justus  Lipsius  ; — the  pre-adamitical
La  Peyrere;  the  half-witted  Postel ; — the  popish  theologians,  Cardinals  Baronius,
and  Bellarminus,  the  intolerant  Bossuet,  the  mystic  Fenelon,  the  pious  sceptics
Hirnhaym  and  Huet,  the  cabalistical  Gaffarel,  the  turn-coat  Pelisson,  and  a  host
of  other  zealots,  Garasse,  Mersenne,  Jansenius,  Arnauld,  Houteville,  &c.,  &c.
We  have  even  most  of  the  fathers  of  the  church ;  Augustinus,  Chrysostomus,
Athanasius,  Gregorius  Nazianzenus,  Lactantius,  Dionysius  Areopagita,  Cyprianus,
Minucius  Felix,  Tertullianus,  and  Justinus  !  ;  nay,  St.  Paul  of  Tarsus,  and  the
evangelist  St.  John ! ! ;  and,  to  crown  all,  the  venerated  name  of  Jesus  ! !  !” — Zoist.


200


Mesmerism  in  the  Rest  of  England.


Ellen  Wallace,

Mary  Baner,

Samuel  Baker,

Clarissa  Caporn,"!  ^  Gloucester  Terrace,  Kensington.
Martha  Cole,  J

I  hope  to  send  for  the  next  number  of  The  Zoist  another
cure  of  blindness,  effected  three  years  ago,  on  a  girl  of  11
years  old,  whom  I  also  cured  of  fits,  and  who  lost  the  sight  of
one  eye  from  small  pox  when  a  year  old.

Eliza  Wallace.

48,  Regent  Street,

June  21st.


P.S.  I  regret  to  say  that  in  the  frequent  changes  of  residence  that
have  occurred  to  me  for  the  last  two  years,  that  portion  of  my  mes¬
meric  journal  relating  to  the  cure  of  Alexander  Mason’s  blindness  has
been  lost  or  mislaid,  and  I  am  consequently  obliged  to  limit  myself
to  such  details  as  memory  will  supply.

For  the  last  two  years  I  have  been  engaged  in  maturing  and  bring¬
ing  out  the  various  inventions  embodied  in  my  patent.  These  pur¬
suits  brought  me  into  contact  with  several  practical  men  of  science,
and  among  these  I  have  made  some  valuable  converts.  First  on  the
list  I  feel  proud  of  placing  the  name  of  Mr.  Robertson,  the  highly
talented  editor  of  the  Mechanics'  Magazine — a  work  which  Lord
Brougham  compliments  as  having  spread  scientific  knowledge  through¬
out  the  land  by  means  within  the  reach  of  all.  I  cannot  recall  to
memory  several  other  high  authorities  who  bear  testimony  to  the
utility  of  this  widely  circulating  scientific  journal  so  ably  edited  by
Mr.  Robertson  for  25  years.

I  commenced  Mr.  Robertson’s  conversion  by  directing  his  atten¬
tion  to  the  cases  of  Dr.  Esdaile  and  others  contained  in  The  Zoist ;
and  Mr.  Sandby’s  valuable  book,  Mesmerism  and  its  Opponents ,
completed  the  work  I  had  begun.  This  book,  he  observed,  contained
such  a  body  of  evidence  as  must  bring  conviction  to  any  reasoning
mind  unbiassed  by  prejudices.  He  lent  the  volume  to  his  friend,
Mr.  Hudson,  a  highly  distinguished  mathematician,  who  was  con¬
vinced  by  its  forcible  reasonings,  commenced  experimenting  for  him¬
self,  and  succeeded  in  perceiving  some  highly  satisfactory  mesmeric
phenomena,  and  Mr.  Robertson  expects  soon  to  rank  mesmerism
among  the  physical  sciences ,  and  thus  enable  it  to  assume  a  place  in
the  Mechanics'  Magazine  !

Mr.  Robertson  says  he  “  is  spreading  mesmerism  right  and  left
among  his  mathematical  friends,”  and  requests  his  name  may  be
added  to  the  list  of  subscribers  to  the  Mesmeric  Hospital.

I  cannot  conclude  without  congratulating  Dr.  Elliotson,  as  the
head  of  our  great  cause,  on  the  powerful  allies  who  are  daily  flocking
to  our  standard.  The  editor  of  the  Family  Herald  assures  me  that.


Success  of  Mesmerism  in  Mr.  Parsons’s  Case.  201


since  the  publication  of  the  cure  of  cancer  and  Mrs.  Whately’s  cure
of  blindness,  he  is  inundated  with  letters  on  mesmerism ;  but  his
notices  of  the  subject  must  necessarily  be  limited  from  the  character
of  the  paper.

In  his  editorial  capacity  he  will  satisfy  any  correspondents  as  to
the  reality  of  Alexander  Mason’s  cure,  as  he  witnessed  the  gradual
improvement  of  his  sight ;  and  this  is  the  case  he  mentions  in  the
article  relating  to  Mrs.  Whately’s  cure.  What  a  happiness  it  is  for
the  world  at  large  that  a  publication  like  the  Family  Herald  spreads
the  knowledge  of  such  an  astonishing  science  as  mesmerism  over
the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land,  while  what  are  termed  the  leading
journals  of  the  day  dignify  themselves  by  advertizing  quack  medicines,
and  devote  whole  columns  to  the  balls  of  Lady  A.,  and  the  dinners
of  Lord  B. !

Time  will  show  whether  the  prophecy  of  some  of  my  Cheltenham
friends  (?)  will  prove  correct;  they,  I  understand,  having  predicted
that  my  “ patent,  like  mesmerism,  will  end  in  smoke!”

I  have  just  learned,  through  the  medium  of  a  highly  respectable

medical  man  in  T - Street,  who  saw  “the  great  Dr.  Elliotson’s”

carriage  at  my  house,  and  was  employed  at  St.  Thomas’s  Hospital
when  i)r.  Elliotson  was  physician  to  it,  that  his  popularity  among
the  patients  was  so  great  that  the  Irish  considered  him  next  to  God
in  the  cure  of  disease  and  felt  disposed  to  invoke  him  as  a  saint !


XII.  Ultimate  Success  of  Mesmerism  in  Mr.  Parsons’s  Case
of  Cataleptic  Insanity.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

I  am  delighted  to  forward  the  following  conclusion  of  Mr.
Parsons’s  case.  Let  our  adversaries  bear  witness  that  we  are
anxious  for  truth  only,  and  that  all  our  difficulties  and  failures
are  faithfully  detailed.  Mr.  Parsons’s  candour  was  shewn  forth
in  the  last  number,  and  now  he  meets  with  the  reward  of  his
truthfulness,  benevolence,  and  perseverance.

J.  Elliotson.

Royal  Marine  Library,
June  12th,  1849.

My  dear  Sir, — It  is  time  that  I  should  report  to  you  that
the  case  of  Frank  Walker,  which  was  stated  as  concluded  in
No.  XXV.,  page  1,  of  The  Zoist,  but  which  there  appears  to
have  an  unfavourable  termination,  has  since  been  committed
to  my  care  again,  and  I  can  pronounce  him  cured.

My  last  notice  of  him  was  dated  March  7th,  page  21  :  a
few  lines  will  suffice  to  conclude  the  case.

March  22nd.  The  mother  sent  a  beseeching  message  to
me  to  come  to  her  boy,  as  he  wras  dreadfully  ill  and  had  been
insensible  for  some  hours.


202


Mesmerism  in  the  Best  of  England.


This  was  occasioned  by  a  shock  from  a  distressing  family
matter,  which  was  of  a  nature  to  wound  him  in  his  weak
point — pride ;  and,  on  hearing  of  it  he  was  so  shocked  that
he  immediately  went  raving  mad,  and  then  fell  into  a  rigid
fit  of  insensibility,  in  which  condition  he  had  remained  for
four  hours  when  I  arrived.

I  mesmerised  him,  and  soon  obtained  complete  control
over  him.  He  directed  in  his  sleep -waking  that  he  should  be
“  mesmerised  again  to-morrow,  but  no  more  to-day.”

March  23rd.  He  was  raving  mad  all  day  yesterday  after  I
left  him,  but  has  been  quite  sane  to-day ;  at  his  request  he
was  mesmerised  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  His  description  of  his
state  is,  that  the  top  of  his  head  (Veneration)  was  most  hurt
this  time,  and  only  a  little  darkness  at  Self-esteem ;  but  that
all  was  fast  passing  off,  and  he  would  be  quite  well  to-morrow.

March  24th.  He  has  had  no  return  of  his  fits,  and  says
that  he  will  not  want  mesmerising  after  to-day :  he  was  only
kept  asleep  10  minutes.  I  left  him  now,  and  he  continued
well.

On  the  12th  of  April  he  came  to  see  me,  and  was  looking
very  well,  and  had  had  no  relapse.  He  told  me  that  he  had
abstained  from  coming  because  he  felt  that  he  should  not  be
able  to  keep  awake ;  but  now  feeling  within  himself  that  the
susceptibility  was  abated,  if  not  vanished,  he  ventured  to  call
on  me.  He  took  the  precaution  of  putting  copper  into  his
pockets,  but  he  did  not  go  to  sleep  when  it  was  removed
at  my  request.

I  saw  him  again  during  the  first  week  of  this  month  (June),
and  he  continues  in  his  usual  health,  or  as  he  says,  better
than  he  was  before  his  attack.

You,  my  dear  Sir,  and  every  other  helper  in  the  cause,
will,  I  know,  rejoice  with  me  that  mesmerism  has  not  been
deprived  of  its  fair  honours  in  this  interesting  case.  I  feel
assured  that  time  will  consolidate  the  cure,  and  the  longer
he  remains  without  a  shock  calculated  to  bring  on  a  relapse,
the  less  power  such  matters  will  have  to  disturb  his  health ;
and,  if  at  any  time  a  relapse  should  be  untowardly  occasioned,
the  remedy  is  well  known  and  simple,  and  we  can  predict,  as
confidently  as  it  is  possible  in  human  affairs,  that  it  will  be
speedily  effectual.

I  am,  dear  Sir,

Yours  very  sincerely,

W.  H.  Parsons.


To  Dr.  Elliotson.


(  203  )


XIII.  Review  of  Mr.  G.  Cornewall  Lewis’s  Strictures  on  Mes¬
merism  and  Phrenology.  By  the  Rev.  George  Sandby,
M.A.,  Vicar  of  Flixton,  Suffolk.

“  In  the  study  of  nature  and  its  laws,  we  ought  at  once  to  make  up  our
minds  to  dismiss  as  idle  prejudices,  or  at  least  suspend  as  premature,  any  pre¬
conceived  notion  of  what  might,  or  what  ought ,  to  be  the  order  of  nature  in  any
proposed  case,  and  content  ourselves  with  observing  as  a  plain  matter  of  fact,
what  is.” — HerschelVs  Preliminary  Discourse ,  p.  79.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Flixton,  Suffolk,  June  5,  1849.
Str, — Dugald  Stewart,  in  his  Outlines  of  Moral  Philosophy ,
among  the  “  causes,”  that  he  offers,  “  for  the  slow  progress
of  human  knowledge,”  specifies  “a  disposition  to  grasp  at
general  principles,  without  submitting  to  the  previous  study  of
'particular  facts”  p.  10.  Perhaps  no  subject  has  suffered
more  from  this  tendency,  or  would  more  sustain  the  truth¬
fulness  of  the  philosopher's  remark,  than  that  of  mesmerism.
In  writing  upon  mesmerism,  an  author  finds  it  far  easier  to
dispose  of  the  question  by  a  “  reverence  for  great  names ,  and,
under  the  influence  of  local  institutions ,”  (to  quote  Dugald
Stewart's  causes  again;)  than  to  exercise  an  independent  self-
relying  judgment,  and  to  pass  through  this  “ previous  study  of
particular  facts.”  Inquiry  demands  time,  industry,  patience  ;
a  little  off-hand  speculation,  from  his  easy  chair,  uncorrected
by  the  troublesome  revision  of  practical  experience,  answers
the  immediate  purpose  of  many  a  writer,  and  enables  him  to
assume  all  the  importance  of  close  investigation,  especially  if
his  pages  be  well  packed  with  copious  citations  from  works  of
authority.  A  solemn  sentence  is  thus  pronounced,  with  all
the  pomposity  of  a  pedant,  but  at  the  same  time  with  all  the
haste  of  a  school-boy,  “full  of  sound,  but  signifying  nothing;”
and  the  only  truth  to  be  learned  is,  that  the  author  himself
presents  an  additional  illustration  of  the  justice  of  his  own
remarks,  should  he  have  aimed  at  enlightening  the  public
with  explanatory  views  on  the  “  slow  progress  of  human
knowledge.”

I  have  been  led  into  these  observations  by  the  perusal  of
a  clever,  pleasant,  and  not  uninstructive  book,  written  too
in  an  agreeable  vein,  but  exhibiting  a  scholastic  parade  of
various  reading,  and  much  philosophic  pretension.  It  is  a
thick  octavo,  calling  itself,  An  Essay  on  the  Influence  of  Au¬
thority  in  Matters  of  Opinion.  The  writer,  Mr.  G.  Cornewall
Lewis,  is  a  well-known  character  in  the  bureau-cratic  world ;
he  has  before  appeared  as  an  author  with  some  effect ;  for  a
few  years  was  one  of  that  formidable  triumvirate  at  Somerset

VOL.  VII.  Q


204  Mr .  Lewis’s  Strictures  on  Mesmerism  and  Phrenology.

House,  whose  dicta  decided  such  momentous  questions  on
pauper  diet  and  discipline ;  and  he  is  now  comfortably  esta¬
blished  at  Whitehall,  as  Under-Secretary  of  State  for  the
Home  Department,  and  is,  moreover,  a  Member  of  Parlia-
men  for  the  county  of  Hereford.  Our  readers,  therefore,  can
see  at  a  glance,  that  he  is  a  man  of  might, — one  who  expects
to  be  listened  to, — one,  too,  who  has  been  for  some  time  in
the  habit  of  “  laying  down  the  law,”  ivith  or  without  a  reason.
Perhaps,  too,  they  would  think  that,  with  his  official  and
parliamentary  duties  our  ex-dictator  (as  The  Times  would  call
him)  had  enough  on  his  hands :  but  no,  he  finds  time  to
indite  this  goodly  volume,  containing  allusions  to  almost  every
subject  under  the  sun, — and  amongst  the  topics  on  which  he
condescends  to  assist  us  in  our  judgment,  are  the  interesting
questions  of  mesmerism  and  phrenology.

These  our  author  with  grave  authority  pronounces  to  be
“mock  sciences,”  “pseudo-sciences,”  “spurious  sciences,”
(p.  51,  &c.,)  and  fortunately  gives  us  his  reasons  for  so  de¬
scribing  them.  I  shall  confine  my  remarks  to  the  subject  of
mesmerism,  and  analyse  those  reasons  in  succession ;  the
reader  will  not  find  them  very  formidable  or  conclusive,  and
will  probably  think  that  Mr.  Lewis  has  shewn  more  haste
than  knowledge  in  thus  propounding  them.

I.  He  says,

“  Mesmerism  and  phrenology  have  now  been  before  the  world  a
sufficient  time  to  be  fully  and  fairly  examined  by  competent  judges;
and  as  they  have  not  stood  the  test  of  impartial  scientific  investiga¬
tion,  and  therefore  have  not  established  themselves  in  professional
opinion,  they  may  be  safely,  on  this  ground  alone,  set  down  under
the  head  of  mock  sciences ;  though,  as  in  the  case  of  alchemy,  the
researches  to  which  they  give  rise,  and  the  new  hypotheses  which
they  promulgate,  may  assist  in  promoting  genuine  science.”  p.  51.

I  quite  agree  with  Mr.  Lewis,  that  mesmerism  “  has  now
been  before  the  world  a  sufficient  time  to  be  fully  and  fairly
examined  by  competent  judges ;”  but  if  these  refuse  so  to
examine  it,  is  “  time”  the  test  ?  and  query,  what  time  ?
Twenty  years  ?  fifty  years  ?  or  a  century  ?  “  Time”  is  a  dan¬

gerous  doctrine,  and  may  be  pushed  much  farther  than  our
author  now  purposes ;  nay,  he  himself  shall  presently  furnish
the  best  reply  to  his  own  statement.  But,  in  the  first  place,
is  mesmerism  proved  not  to  he  a  fact  in  nature  ?  and,  secondly,
how  long  has  it,  as  a  study,  really  been  before  the  world  ?
To  date  from  the  days  of  Mesmer  himself,  rather  more  than
sixty  years :  (a  strong  argument  one  would  rather  think  to
prove  its  reality;)  but  if  we  calculate  from  the  period  in
which  it  has  really  been  brought  forward  in  a  philosophical


By  the  Rev.  Georye  Sandby.


205


way,  scarcely  thirty  :  and  what  is  this  “  time”  in  the  history
of  a  science,  against  which  the  strongest  prepossessions  and
the  most  powerful  influences  showed  themselves  from  the  very
first  ?  Have  not  the  same  tedious  lapse  of  time  and  the  same
slow  growth  of  opinion  been  manifested  over  and  over  again,
on  numerous  other  subjects,  which  are  now  firmly  esta¬
blished  ?

Take  electricity.  Dr.  Lardner,  in  his  history,  tells  us  that
centuries  elapsed  from  the  first  indication  or  discovery  of  that
principle,  before  it  grew  into  anything  like  an  admitted  fact.
In  truth,  it  has  been  only  within  comparatively  recent  times,
that  any  close  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  subject  by  the
scientific  world :  and  now  how  vast  is  its  empire  !

Look  at  certain  of  the  Newtonian  discoveries,  and  see
their  early  history  !  Mr.  Lewis  is  too  well  read  in  science
not  to  be  familiar  with  that  chapter :  to  some  of  our  readers,
however,  the  following  curious  passage  may  be  new.

Professor  Playfair,  in  the  Third  Dissertation,  Encyclo¬
paedia  Britannica,  (section,  Astronomy,)  speaking  of  “  the
splendour  of  Newton's  discoveries,  and  the  beauty  and  gran¬
deur  of  the  system  they  unfolded,”  particularly  as  they  refer
to  his  views  on  the  motion  of  comets  in  preference  to  the
older  theory  of  Descartes,  says,  “  One  would  hardly  doubt
that  to  be  received ,  it  required  only  to  be  known,  and  that  the
establishment  of  the  Newtonian  philosophy  all  over  Europe
would  very  quickly  have  followed  the  publication  of  it.”  But
he  adds,  “  that  for  more  than  thirty  years  after  the  publica¬
tion,  the  system  of  vortices  kept  its  ground  •”  and  it  is  now

known  that  the  views  of  Newton  were  onlv  introduced  into

«/

the  University  of  Cambridge  by  a  curious  literary  stratagem,
viz.,  the  publication  of  a  Cartesian  work,  with  notes  opposing
and  refuting  the  text,  and  explaining  the  opinions  of  Newton
(p.  566).

Professor  Playfair  adds,  after  Voltaire,  that  though  “the
author  of  the  Principia  survived  the  publication  of  that  great
work  nearly  forty  years,  he  had  not,  at  the  time  of  his  death,
twenty  followers  out  of  England.”  (p.  567.)

It  is  needless,  however,  to  pursue  this  line  of  argument,
and  produce  other  instances  :  Mr.  Lewis,  at  the  expense
unluckily  of  his  consistency,  shall  furnish  the  best  answer  to
his  own  doctrine  of  “  time ;”  and  if  we  be  asked,  why  it  is
that  mesmerism  has  not  “  yet  established  itself  in  professional
opinion  ?”  we  can  reply  with  our  author,  that

“  Men  are  influenced  by  the  prevailing  fashion.  They  fear  sin¬
gularity  more  than  error;  they  accept  numbers  as  the  index  of  truth,
and  they  follow  the  crowd.  The  dislike  of  labour,  the  fear  of  unpo-

Q  2


i


206  Mr.  Lewis’s  Strictures  on  Mesmerism  and  Phrenology .

pularity,  the  danger  even  of  setting  op  individual  opinion  against
established  convictions,  and  the  voice  of  the  multitude  contribute  to
strengthen  this  inclination.”  (p.  15.)

Again,  he  says,

“  There  may  be  an  excessive  reverence  for  scientific  doctrines
handed  down  from  a  former  age,  and  received  among  existing  philo¬
sophers,  which  may  check  the  due  force  of  investigations,  perpetuate
error,  prevent  originality  of  thought  and  the  discovery  of  new  truths,
and  maintain  science  in  a  stationary  and  unimproving  state.”

How  true  this  is  !  and  liow  well  expressed ! — and  if  we
wanted  further  argument,  we  should  find  it  in  his  own  notes
to  this  very  passage,  in  his  extracts  from  Bacon,  Cicero,  &c.,
&c.,  (p.  367.)

Mr.  Lewis  writes  so  well,  and  answers  his  own  arguments
so  completely,  that  he  must  not  think  it  tedious  to  be  quoted
again.

“  Opinions  are  propagated  at  a  slower  rate  of  velocity.  .  .  .  When
the  general  agreement  of  competent  judges  has  accredited  a  new
opinion,  it  is  not  diffused  instantaneously  by  their  authority.  .  .  .
Being  addressed  to  the  understanding,  and  being  founded  on  an
induction  of  facts,  often  numerous ,  dissimilar  and  complex,  the
examination  and  verification  of  the  reasons,  &c.,  is  a  tedious  pro¬
cess.”  (p.  392.)*

The  above  extracts  adequately  meet  the  assertion  of  Mr.
Lewis,  that  mesmerism  has  now  had  “  a  sufficiency  of  time  •”
and  to  these  may  be  added  the  constant  persevering  refusal
of  our  leading  medical  and  scientific  men  even  to  witness  the
effects  of  mesmerism.  Not  content  with  broaching  a  priori
arguments  against  the  possibility  of  its  existence,  they  actually
decline  all  personal  examination  of  the  subject :  and  then
mesmerism  is  set  down  by  Mr.  Lewis  “  under  the  head  of  a
mock-science,”  because  it  is  not  yet  “  established  in  profes¬
sional  opinion.”  With  the  pertinacity  that  men  have  hitherto
displayed  in  avoiding  the  study  as  an  inconvenint  truth,  it
would  be  difficult  to  say,  how  it  could  be  yet  established.

But  Mr.  Lewis  adds,  that  mesmerism  “  has  not  stood  the
test  of  impartial  scientific  investigation.”  Indeed?  Who
tells  him  so  ?  Who  is  his  “  authority  in  the  matter  of  this
opinion  ?”  and  does  he  speak  after  competent ,  and  honest  tes¬
timony  ?  “  Well-placed  confidence ,”  he  tells  us  at  the  con¬

clusion  of  his  book,  is  “  one  of  the  main  elements  of  civiliza¬
tion,”  and  to  teach  us  where  to  place  it,  is  the  purport  of  his
whole  volume  :  I  think,  therefore,  that  I  may  very  naturally

*  Mr.  Lewis  here  gives  us  a  note  on  the  slow  diffusion  of  knowledge,  with
reference  to  Professor  Whewell  inspecting  the  reception  of  the  Newtonian  theory,
of  the  Linnsean  system,  of  Harvey's  discovery,  &o.


By  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.


20  7


ask  him,  who  is  his  authority  for  this  somewhat  bold  asser¬
tion  ?  Is  it  his  medical  man  ?  and  does  he  (to  use  a  homely
but  expressive  phrase)  make  a  pope  of  his  apothecary — of  one,
who  perhaps  has  reasons  of  his  own  for  decrying  this  very
study,  and  pours  into  the  ear  of  his  literary  familiar  the  pre¬
judiced  feelings  of  uninquiring  pride?  or  does  Mr.  Lewis
rely  on  his  own  judgment  and  experience  ?  Surely,  not !
Our  learned  under-secretary  himself  admits,  that  “  no  man  is
a  competent  judge  on  all  subjects;”  (p.  165)  and  that  “  every
subject  has  in  its  turn  its  own  peculiar  set  of  competent
judges  which  vary  for  each ;”  (p.  167,)  and  he  must,  there¬
fore,  allow  me  to  tell  him  in  reply,  that  when  mesmerism
has  been  examined  by  “impartial  and  scientific”  men,  ivho
have  not  been  afraid  of  following  it  up,  it  has  not  been  found
wanting,  (unless,  perhaps,  we  make  an  exception  for  clair¬
voyance  ;)  and  that  great  names  could  be  mentioned,  as
believers  in  its  truth.  But  as  I  suspect  that  Mr.  Lewis  is
sadly  ignorant,  for  an  author,  of  the  present  status  and  pros¬
pects  of  mesmerism,  and  of  the  vast  progress  which  it  has
recently  made  in  public  opinion, — he  must  allow  me  to  ask
him  one  or  two  questions.

For  instance,  does  he  know  of  the  “  gigantic  surgical  ope¬
rations”  that  have  taken  place  in  India,  under  the  manage¬
ment  of  Dr.  Esdaile,  more  than  a  hundred  in  number  ?

Does  he  know  that  many  more  than  200  operations  have
also  taken  place  in  England  and  France,  during  the  mes¬
meric  state, — for,  thanks  to  chloroform,  insensibility  to  pain
is  no  longer  regarded  as  an  incredible  fact  in  physiological
annals  ?

Does  Mr.  Lewis  know  of  the  numerous  cures  that  have
occurred  and  are  now  occurring  under  mesmeric  treatment,
cures  of  blindness,  epilepsy,  tic  douloureux,  insanity,  rheu¬
matism,  &c.  ?

Does  he  know  who  and  what  are  the  class  of  persons,  who
superintend  or  carry  on  this  treatment,  numerous  medical,
philosophical  and  scientific  men,  whose  adhesion  would  do
honor  to  any  study  ?

Does  he  know  that  a  quarterly  journal  ( The  ZoistJ  exists
for  the  purpose  of  recording  mesmeric  facts  as  they  arise,  and
that  this  journal  is  now  in  the  seventh  year  of  its  publication?

Does  he  know  the  altered  language  of  medical  journals
on  this  subject  ?  and  that  the  British  and  Foreign  Medical
Review,  an  old  opponent,  lately  said,  that  the  “  evidence
respecting  mesmerism  is  now  of  such  a  character  that  it  can
no  longer  be  philosophically  disregarded  ?”

Of  all  this,  and  sundry  other  essential  points,  our  busy


208  Mr.  Lewis’s  Strictures  on  Mesmerism  and  Phrenology.

ex-commissioner  probably  knows  little ;  but  being  assured
that  mesmerism  is  merely  advocated  by  a  few  eccentric  par¬
ties,  he  rushes  to  a  general  assertion  “  without  submitting  to
the  previous  study  of  particular  facts,”  unmindful  of  a  golden
observation  made  by  Sir  John  Herschell :  viz.,  that  by  “  Pre¬
judices  of  opinion,  we  mean  opinions  hastily  taken  up,  either
from  the  assertions  of  others ,  from  our  own  superficial  views ,
or  from  vulgar  observation.”  (P.  E.  80.)

II.  Mr.  Lewis  next  observes,  that,

“  True  sciences  connect  themselves  with  other  true  sciences  :
analogies  and  points  of  contact  between  the  new  truth,  and  truths
formerly  known  are  perceived.  Pseudo-sciences,  on  the  other  hand,
remain  in  an  equivocal  state.  No  analogies  or  affiliations  with  ge¬
nuine  sciences  are  discovered;  ...  if  any  connexion  is  attempted  to
be  proved,  it  is  with  another  spurious  science,  as  in  the  case  of
phreno-mesmerism,  where  one  delusion  is  supported  by  another.”

It  might  have  been  thought,  that  when  two  such  studies
as  phrenology  and  mesmerism,  perfectly  independent  the  one
of  the  other,  presented  an  unexpected  harmony  and  “  point
of  contact,”  that  a  doubt  might  arise  with  even  the  most  scep¬
tical,  as  to  whether  both  might  not  be  true :  but  as  it  appears
according  to  this  new  school  of  “  authority,”  that  that  is  an  ar¬
gument  why  both  are  false ,  we  must  pass  onwards  from  the
extraordinary  phenomena  developed  by  phreno-mesmerism,
and  see  if  we  cannot  discover  some  more  orthodox  “  affilia¬
tion”  with  “  true  science.”

And  is  Mr.  Lewis  unaware  of  the  close  analogy  that  ob¬
servers  have  detected  over  and  over  again  between  sundry
phenomena  of  mesmerism,  and  certain  effects  educed  in  elec¬
tricity,  galvanism,  and  magnetism, — so  close,  indeed,  that
the  terms  “  animal”  or  “  vital  magnetism”  are  regarded  by
many  as  the  more  appropriate  appellations  for  our  science,
and  that  the  Germans  have  invented  the  name  “electro¬
physiology”  for  its  title  ?  Has  Mr.  Lewis  read  Reichenbach’s
Treatise  on  a  Supposed  New  Imponderable,  with  Professor
Gregory’s  comments  ?  Has  he  read  Mr.  Chauncy  Townsend’s
work  on  Mesmerism,  with  the  chapter  on  the  “  Mesmeric  Me¬
dium,”  M.  Charpignon’s  Etudes  Physiques  sur  le  Magnetisme
Animal,  M.  Petetin’s  Electricite  Animate,  &c.,  and  sundry
other  French  and  English  works,  all  pointing  to  an  analogy
so  striking,  that  our  author  would  have  shewn  a  judicious
caution  in  not  rejecting  them  ?

Of  course,  in  experiments  upon  the  living  human  frame,
we  cannot  predict  the  same  accuracy  of  result  as  the  phi¬
losopher  obtains  in  dead  matter.  Our  infinite  diversity  of
constitutions,  our  changes  in  health,  strength,  and  suscepti-


By  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.


209


bility,  &c.,  all  render  a  close  approximation  between  the
truths  of  the  exact  sciences  and  the  truths  of  mesmerism  un¬
certain,  if  not  unattainable.  But  on  this  point,  I  prefer
quoting  the  judicious  views  of  our  author  himself.

“  There  are  departments  of  physics,  in  which  observation  is  more
difficult,  and  in  which  many  of  the  phenomena  elude  our  powers  of
investigation.  .  .  .  Such,  for  example,  is  physiology.  The  functions
of  the  living  body  are  in  great  part,  withdrawn  from  the  observation
of  the  senses,  &c.  .  .  .  There  is  uncertainty  as  to  the  influence  of
medicines,  regimen,”  &c.  (p.  136.)

Here,  in  his  own  words,  is  the  cause  why  “  a  point  of  con¬
tact  between  our  new  truth  and  truths  formerly  known  is  not
more  closely  perceived  :”  the  nature  of  things  forbids  it :  still
an  approximation  is  being  discovered  every  day ;  and  yet  Mr.
Lewis,  in  ignorance  of  this  fact,  and  in  forgetfulness  of  his
own  reasonings,  calls  mesmerism  a  “mock  and  spurious
science.”

III.  Our  author  next  says,

“  Another  means  of  distinguishing  real  from  unreal  sciences  may
be  found  in  the  character  and  objects  of  the  persons  by  whom  they
are  respectively  engaged.  The  professors  of  genuine  sciences,  for
the  most  part,  make  the  investigation  of  truth  their  primary  object.
.  .  .  The  charlatan  is  actuated  by  the  love  of  gain.  His  purpose  is
to  dupe  the  world,  and  to  extract  money,  &c.  Of  this,  Mesmer
affords  an  example  on  a  large  scale.  Occasionally,  there  may  be  a
love  of  attracting  attention,  but  gain  is  the  leading  motive.”

A  more  unfortunate  reason,  perhaps,  never  escaped  from
any  writer.  To  pass  over  this  hit  at  Mesmer,  on  a  point  in
which  there  is  considerable  doubt,  I  would  admit,  that  there
are  mercenaries  in  the  camp  of  magnetism,  as  among  every
other  body  of  inquirers.  Astronomy  and  geology  have  their
itinerant  lecturers,  who  are  “  actuated  by  a  love  of  gain,”  and
a  necessity  of  living  :  chemistry  has  its  votaries  who  have  to
feed  upon  something  else  beside  “  truth ;”  and  we  have  yet  to
learn  that  “professors  even  of  the  genuine  science”  of  anatomy
are  the  most  disinterested  and  pure  minded  of  mortals  :  but
to  tax  mesmerism  with  being  a  pseudo-science,  in  consequence
of  the  “  character  and  objects ”  of  the  parties  by  whom  it  is
pursued,  shews  an  absence  of  information  that  ought  to  be
mortifying  to  an  honourable  mind.  To  test  mesmerism  by
this  rule,  would  bring  it  out  of  the  fire  the  truest  and  most
exact  of  sciences.  We  could  desire  no  better  ordeal.  Per¬
haps  no  single  study,  in  the  history  of  the  world,  has  ever,
within  a  given  period,  brought  out  more  gratuitous,  unbought,
unpurchasable  labour  for  the  benefit  of  man,  than  the  practice
of  this  art.  Perhaps,  in  no  single  subject,  has  an  unadulterated


210  Mr.  Lewis's  Strictures  on  Mesmerism  and  Phrenology.

love  of  truth,  for  its  own  sake  and  in  spite  of  ridicule  and  in¬
jury,  been  more  strikingly  or  more  frequently  exhibited.  It
is  notorious,  that  numerous  mesmerists  go  from  house  to
house  amongst  their  poorest  and  humblest  neighbours,  through
weeks  and  weeks  of  unremitting  toil  and  anxiety,  seeking  to
assuage  the  crudest  and  most  tedious  maladies,  without  a
wish,  or  a  prospect,  or  a  thought  of  remuneration  !  I  name
no  names,  or  what  a  list  of  Christian  philanthropists — male
and  female — might  be  placed  before  our  author  !  “  Gain  their
leading  motive,  and  a  love  of  attracting  attention  \”  Mr.
Lewis,  in  his  snug  and  well  paid  quarters,  and  surrounded  by
those  tomes  of  learning  with  which  he  would  appear  to  be
solely  conversant,  has  no  belief  in  that  retiring  but  practical
benevolence,  which  renders  mesmerism  one  of  the  greatest
boons  to  the  afflicted,  or  he  would  have  spared  observations
that  are  at  once  unfounded  in  fact  and  no  more  applicable  to
a  mesmerist  than  they  are  to  himself.

IV.  “Genuine  science,”  says  Mr.  L.  in  conclusion,  “is  simple,
precise,  devoid  of  ornament,  free  from  all  undue  contrivances  for  ex¬
citing  applause.  Charlatanism  is  tricky,  obtrusive,  full  of  display,
&c.,  &c.”

It  cannot  be  denied  that  many  a  mesmeric  exhibitor,  both
in  private  and  in  public,  occasionally  merits  the  term  of  Char¬
latan,  by  promising  more  than  he  can  fulfd,  and  by  building
general  conclusions  upon  isolated  facts  :  but  what  of  that  ?
Mr.  Lewis  would  not  surely  have  a  law  condemned  from  the
blunders  of  its  administrator :  and  why  should  a  science  be
thus  denounced  through  the  faults  or  follies  of  its  followers  ?
If  Mr.  Lewis  were  ever  present  with  those,  whose  practice  of
the  art  might  entitle  them  to  be  regarded  as  leaders  in  the
study,  he  would  learn  that  mesmerism  could  be  as  simple  and
as  free  from  adventitious  matter,  as  the  sternest  of  the  sci¬
ences  ;  he  would  see  the  magnetist  with  calmness  and  patience
conducting  his  work,  following  nature  where  she  leads  him,
sitting  at  her  feet  as  a  learner  rather  than  a  teacher,  recording
facts  and  not  expounding  theories,  and,  with  all  humility,
pleading  ignorance  and  doubt  where  such  confessions  are  the
mark  of  a  sound  and  lofty  wisdom.  Real  practical  philosophy
is  as  much  to  be  found  in  the  sick  room  of  a  mesmerised  pa¬
tient,  as  at  the  lectures  of  Faraday,  or  in  the  hall  of  the  Royal
Institution.

Our  readers  by  this  time  may  be  enabled  to  judge  how  far
Mr.  Lewis  is  entitled  to  guide  public  opinion  to  the  extent  to
which  the  ambitious  character  of  his  book  clearly  shews  that
he  deems  himself  competent.  They  will  have  seen  that  he  is
not  constans  sibi , — that  he  is  contradictory  and  often  super-


Books  received,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  §c.  211

ficial,  and  too  much  under  the  influence  of  ill-formed,  raw
prepossessions  :  at  the  same  time  it  would  be  absurd  to  deny
that  this  Essay  contains  a  large  amount  of  valuable  matter,
and  shews  the  writer,  on  some  subjects,  to  be  a  deep  and  ju¬
dicious  thinker.  Still  I  suspect,  that  if  a  manipulator  took
the  guage  of  Mr.  Lewis’s  forehead,  and  examined  the  higher
regions  of  his  brain  on  those  principles  which  he  himself  re¬
gards  as  spurious  and  fantastic,  the  mock  science  of  phrenology
would  be  found  to  tell  too  true  a  tale,  for  that  his  organization
would  denote  a  clever,  acute,  thinking  man,  gifted  with  a
strong  memory  and  the  talent  of  arranging  his  ideas  in  a  clear
and  agreeable  order,  but  at  the  same  time  deficient  in  that
strength  and  power  of  mind  which  qualifies  a  writer  to  take
one  uniform,  masterful  view  of  a  large  and  comprehensive
subject,  and  that  with  all  his  abilities  and  all  his  reading  the
author  of  this  volume  could  never  be  accepted  as  a  safe  and
final  "  authority  in  matters  of  opinion.”

I  remain,  Mr.  Editor,

Your  humble  servant,

George  Sandby.


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

Curative  results  of  Medical  Somnambulism,  consisting  of  several  authen¬
ticated  cases,  including  the  Somnambule’s  own  case  and  cure.  By  Madame
Baumann.

This  is  but  an  eighteenpenny  pamphlet,  and  contains  accounts  of  several  very
satisfactory  cures.  We  have  reason  to  believe  that  dependence  may  be  placed  upon
the  narratives.  The  lady  herself  was  cured  with  mesmerism,  and  became  so
clairvoyant  as  successfully  to  direct  her  own  cure  of  chronic  rheumatism  to  which
her  physicians  had  condemned  her  for  life,  and  of  incipient  blindness.  She  ac¬
quired  the  same  kind  of  clairvoyance  respecting  the  diseases  of  others.  The
other  cures  related  were  of  threatening  consumption  (three  cases), — vomiting  of
four  years’  standing, — chronic  inflammation  of  the  uterus  (three  cases), — indiges¬
tion, — a  general  bad  state  of  body — more  or  less  blindness  (three  cases), —
chronic  rheumatism — probably  ovarian  dropsy, — scrofulous  swellings  and  ulcers —
spinal  affection, — affection  of  the  heart, — convulsions, — chronic  inflammation  of
the  eyes,  after  the  failure  of  Mr.  Alexander  and  the  surgeon  of  the  Ophthalmic
Hospital, — deafness, — tic  douloureux, — palsy  of  the  legs, — sleeplessness  and
vomiting, — a  remarkable  case  of  cure  of  fistula  in  a  military  officer, — and  one  no
less  remarkable  of  a  tumor  of  the  uterus,  reminding  us  of  Miss  Martineau’s
case,  and  well  deserving  the  perusal  of  Dr.  Forbes  and  Miss  Martineau’s  medical
attendant  and  relative,  Mr.  Greenhow,  who  both  spoke  so  shockingly  of  the  latter
lady’s  case.

Letters  on  the  Truths  contained  in  Popular  Superstitions.  By  Herbert  Mayo,
M.D.  Frankfort.

The  original  letters  appeared  in  Blacktvood’s  Magazine  in  1847.  The  author
is  not  Dr.  Mayo  whose  name  appeared  in  our  two  last  numbers,  but  the  surgeon
of  physiological  note  who  was  professor  of  surgery  at  King’s  College  and  surgeon
to  the  Middesex  Hospital.  A  crippling  rheumatism  compelled  him  to  relinquish
practice,  and  he  now  directs  a  water-cure  establishment  on  the  Rhine  and  an¬
nounces  himself  as  Dr.  Herbert  Mayo.

He  fearlessly  declared  his  conviction  of  the  truth  of  mesmerism  eleven  years
ago,  and  published  a  succession  of  reports  in  Longman’s  Medical  Gazette  of  the
VOL.  VII.  R


212  Books  received,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  fyc.


experiments  which  he  saw  Dr.  Elliotson  make  in  University  College  Hospital
that  will  repay  the  trouble  of  perusal.  The  popular  superstitions  of  which
lie  attempts  to  explain  the  fundamental  truths  relate  to  the  divining  rod,  the
popular  statements  respecting  which  we  consider  well  established, — vampyrism —
unreal  ghosts — real  ghosts,  (both  which  we  are  satisfied  are  the  same,  though
Dr.  H.  Mayo  writes  what  appears  to  us  “perilous  stuff’ ’  upon  the  latter, —
trance,  in  the  chapter  on  which  and  in  a  few  other  places  much  that  appears  to
us  gross  nonsense  is  written, — somnambulism, — catalepsy, — religious  delusion, —
mesmerism.  There  are  not  only  groundless  and  illogical  opinions  here  and  there,
but  errors  ;  still  the  work  is  very  interesting  and  we  admire  the  following  passage: —

“  A  new  truth  has  to  encounter  three  normal  stages  of  opposition.  In  the
first,  it  is  denounced  as  an  imposture.  In  the  second,  that  is,  when  it  is  begin¬
ning  to  force  itself  into  notice,  it  is  cursorily  examined  and  plausibly  explained
away.  In  the  third,  or  ‘  cui  bono’  stage,  it  is  decried  as  useless,  and  hostile  to
religion.  And  when  it  is  finally  admitted,  it  passes  only  under  a  protest  that  it
has  been  perfectly  known  for  ages — a  proceeding  intended  to  make  the  new  truth
ashamed  of  itself,  and  wish  it  had  never  been  born.

“I  congratulate  the  sea-serpent  on  having  arrived  at  the  second  stage  of  belief.
Since  Professor  Owen  (no  disrespect  to  his  genuine  ability  and  eminent  know¬
ledge)  has  explained  it  into  a  sea — elephant,  its  chance  of  being  itself  is  much
improved  ;  and  as  it  will  skip  the  third  stage,  for  who  will  venture  to  question  the
good  of  a  sea-serpent,  it  is  liable  now  any  morning  f  to  wake  and  find  itself
famous  and  to  be  received  even  at  Lincoln’s-inn-fields,  where  its  remains  may
commemoratively  be  ticketted  the  Ex-Great-Seal. ”  p.  21.

And  again : — “  Many  do  not  dream  how  barbarous  and  backward  the  vaunted
nineteenth  century  will  appear  to  posterity  !”  p.  40.

Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.  Report  of  the  First  Public  Meeting :  The  Right
Hon.  The  Earl  of  Ducie  in  the  Chair.

Outlines  of  a  New  System  of  Physiognomy,  illustrated  by  numerous  engrav¬
ings,  indicating  the  signs  of  the  different  mental  faculties.  By  J.  W.  Redfield,
M.D.  Fourth  Thousand.  New  York.

The  Ethnological  Journal  for  April.

Hospital  Reports  and  other  official  documents  relative  to  the  trials  of  War¬
burg’s  Fever  Tincture  (Tinctura  Warburgi)  in  cases  of  Intermittent  and  other
Fevers,  instituted  by  order  of  the  Austrian  Government.  Translated  from  the
German.  London.

Railways,  Past,  Present,  and  Prospective.  By  R.  M.  Martin,  Esq.,  author
of  the  Taxation  of  the  British  Empire,  &c.,  &c.  London,  Second  Edition,  with
additions.


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

We  much  regret  that  want  of  space  compels  us  to  postpone  several  very  in¬
teresting  articles— Capital  Punishment,  or  Murder  according  to  law,  by  L.E.G.E.
— on  the  Magic  Crystal  by  Mr.  Hockley, — on  the  Will  by  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson, —
on  Cross-Mesmerism  by  Mr.  Cattell, — on  Thought-reading  and  Clairvoyance  by
W.  F.  S., — Cases  from  Miss  Aglionby  and  two  other  ladies,  Mr.  Armour,  Mr.
Barth,  Capt.  Bagnold,  Mr.  Davey,  Mr.  Elliot,  Mr.  J.  Hands,  Mr.  Harley,
Lieut.  Hare,  Mr.  Jacob,  Dr.  Storer,  Mr.  Saunders,  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  and
Mr.  Tubbs.


ERRATA  IN  NO.  XXIV.,  VOL.  VI.
p.  385,  1.  9,  for  “  E.  M.”  read  “  E.  H.”

p.  385,  1.  36,  for  “  but  I  left  her  drowsy,  and,  though  she  afterwards  tried  to  shake  off
the  drowsiness,  she  passed  another  sleepy  night.”  read  “  but  1  left  her  drowsy,  the  influence
of  which  (after  I  left)  she  resisted,  and  thus  passed  another  sleepless  night.’*
p.  3S8,  1.  8,  for  “  better,”  read  “  hotter.”

p.  389,  1.  14,  for  “  William  Farmer,”  read  “  William  Forman.”
p.  389,  1.  34,  for  “  Mary  M.,”  read  “  Mary  H.”
p.  39(>j  1,  9.  for  "c.ambo,”  read  “at  Cambo.”


THE  ZOIST.


No.  XXVII.


OCTOBER,  1849.


I.  Dr.  Esdaile’s  Testimony  to  the  Reality  of  Clairvoyance.  In

a  letter  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

My  dear  Dr.  Elliotson. — I  now  fulfil  ray  promise  to  send  you
an  account  of  a  case  of  clairvoyance  with  transference  of  the
senses  to  the  epigastrium,  upon  which  I  stumbled  in  the  most
unexpected  manner  lately.  You,  in  common  with  others,
may  be  surprized  at  my  having  hitherto  had  so  little  to  say
regarding  the  higher  mental  mesmeric  phenomena,  considering
the  extensive  field  of  observation  I  have  enjoyed.  The  truth
is,  that  I  have  not  prosecuted  the  subject  in  this  direction,
partly  because  its  practical  application  to  surgery  and  medicine
sufficiently  occupied  me,  but  chiefly  because,  on  getting  ac¬
quainted  with  the  history  of  mesmerism,  I  found  that  the
innumerable  experiments  and  observations  of  the  last  60  years
had  nearly  exhausted  the  subject  of  its  phenomena,  and  that
it  would  be  a  waste  of  time  to  go  over  the  ground  again  that
had  been  so  often  carefully  beaten.

When  in  absolute  ignorance  (never  having  seen  a  person
mesmerised  or  read  a  mesmeric  book)  I  began  to  investigate
the  matter  for  myself,  it  was  very  agreeable  to  imagine  that  I
was  daily  making  original  discoveries  and  observations ;  and
this  happy  state  of  delusion  lasted  for  several  months — as  I
had  to  send  to  England  and  France  for  books  on  mesmerism,
none  being  obtainable  here.  But  alas !  with  the  works  of
Puysegur,  Deleuze,  Bertrand,  Dupotet,  Teste,  Colquhoun,
Xewnham,  Sandby,  Townshend,  The  Zoist,  &c.,  came  the
mortifying  conviction  that  I  had  only  been  repeating  for  the
most  part  what  had  been  equally  well  done  long  ago  in  diffe¬
rent  parts  of  the  world.

When  I  found  that  the  mesmeric  literature  of  France,
Germany,  and  Holland  would  each  require  a  moderate  sized
VOL.  VII.  s


214


Dr.  Esdaile’s  Testimony  to


library  to  hold  it,  I  was  filled  with  astonishment  at  our  insular
ignorance ,  and  felt  indignant  at  our  pretended  teachers  for  hav¬
ing  kept  us  so  long  in  the  dark  regarding  the  most  wonderful
and  interesting  discovery  ever  made  in  human  physiology.  I
had  experimented  so  extensively  with  the  new  power,  that,  on
the  receipt  of  my  mesmeric  authorities,  I  found  that  they  had
scarcely  anything  new  to  tell  me  regarding  the  physical  phe¬
nomena  of  mesmerism,  which  were  perfectly  identical  whether
they  had  been  observed  on  the  banks  of  the  Thames,  the
Seine,  the  Rhine,  the  Neva,  or  the  Hooghly.  It  was  some¬
thing,  however,  to  have  made  mesmeric  surgery  a  daily
matter  of  course,  and  to  have  reduced  it  to  a  system  sufficient
for  the  general  wants  of  the  people  of  this  country.

I  found,  also,  that  the  persons  whose  accuracy  in  the  des¬
cription  of  the  physical  effects  of  mesmerism  I  had  been  un¬
consciously  testing  were  equally  consistent  and  harmonious
in  their  independent  evidence  regarding  the  higher  mental
phenomena,  and  it  appeared  monstrous  to  me  to  suppose  that
they  had  all  suddenly  broken  out  into  fools ,  knaves,  or  madmen
at  the  same  stage  of  the  examination.  On  the  contrary,  having
found  them  right  hitherto  in  all  that  I  knew,  I  saw  no  reason
to  withhold  my  confidence  from  them  in  what  remained  to  be
learned.  It  was  still  simply  a  matter  of  fact  supported  by  the
evidence  of  their  senses,  and  they  had  not  yet  been  deceived.
But  you  must  not  suppose  that,  while  waiting  for  evidence  to
enable  me  to  form  a  satisfactory  opinion  upon  the  transcen¬
dental  mesmeric  phenomena,  I  was  unconsciously  nourishing
a  spirit  of  credulity,  and  a  love  of  the  marvellous,  and  thereby
preparing  an  easy  reception  for  the  most  monstrous  and  in¬
credible  fictions.  On  the  contrary,  in  a  pamphlet  published
here  before  having  had  access  to  mesmeric  books,  I  expressed
my  distrust  and  suspicion  regarding  the  higher  mental  phe¬
nomena  of  mesmerism ;  and  my  opinions  were  only  changed
by  the  force  of  overivhelming  and  irresistible  evidence  subse¬
quently.  It  was  thus  that  I  wrote  in  my  ignorance — “  It
seems  to  me  that  the  f  mens  sana  in  corpore  sano a  well  con¬
stituted  mind  that  has  been  cultivated  by  education,  experi¬
ence,  and  reflection,  is  the  true  medium  for  rational  clair¬
voyance.  For  how  our  senses  and  instinctive  or  reasoning
powers  can  reach  and  understand  in  the  mesmeric  condition
bodies  whose  existence  we  are  not  aware  of  in  our  natural
state,  and  the  ignorant  acquire  not  only  the  wisdom  of  the
wise,  but  the  prescience  of  God,  is  altogether  incomprehen¬
sible,  and  seems  to  me  to  be  stepping  at  one  gigantic  stride
from  matter  and  common  sense  into  the  regions  of  infinite
space  and  supernatural  power,  and  to  be  a  passing  of  that


the  Reality  of  Clairvoyance.


215


‘  bourne  whence  no  traveller  returns/  ”  So  much  for  reason¬
ing  without  a  knowledge  of  facts !  I  was  very  soon  after
compelled  to  admit  these  mesmeric  wonders  as  realities,  how¬
ever  incomprehensible,  and  very  soon  also  learned  that  they
were  only  imitations  of  wrhat  nature  had  often  spontaneously
performed  in  certain  derangements  of  the  nervous  system,
and,  in  fact,  that  mesmerism  has  done  nothing  that  nature  had
not  done  before.  But  how  are  men  to  acquire  new  ideas,  if
they  will  neither  read,  act  for  themselves,  nor  believe  others  ?

Seeing  that  the  mental  phenomena  were  established  by
a  cloud  of  witnesses  in  whom  I  have  perfect  confidence,  I
returned  to  the  daily  and  endless  pleasure  of  saving  pain  and
curing  disease  by  the  mesmeric  influence,  being  convinced
that,  sooner  or  later,  nature  would  spontaneously  evolve  some
of  the  wonders  wrhich  I  only  believed  on  testimony,  and  which,
being  unsought,  would  therefore  be  the  more  satisfactory.
This  expectation  was  not  disappointed,  though  I  had  to  wait
long  for  its  realization.

In  the  meantime  I  received  letters  from  different  parts  of
the  world,  congratulating  me  on  my  mesmeric  successes,  and
detailing  the  unknown  w'riters^  personal  experience  in  the
higher  branches  of  mesmerism.  If  these  people  did  not  tell
the  truth,  you  have  the  incomprehensible  phenomenon  of
men  lying  across  oceans  and  continents  to  please  me  !  Mon¬
sieur  Lienard,  a  merchant  at  Mauritius,  wrote  to  me  thus : —
“  I  have  long  interested  myself  in  mesmerism,  and  it  is  with
the  greatest  satisfaction  that  I  have  read  in  many  numbers
of  the  Englishman  the  reports  of  your  marvellous  operations
performed  in  the  mesmeric  sleep ;  you  are,  in  my  opinion,
Monsieur,  destined  to  remove  the  bandage  of  incredulity
from  the  eyes  of  mankind,  and  you  have  my  sincere  wishes
that  your  efforts  may  be  crowned  with  success.  The  day  is
not  distant,  I  hope,  when  the  advantages  of  your  system  will
be  recognized ;  then  there  will  be  no  more  suffering  for  the
unfortunates  who  have  to  submit  to  operations,  and  fewer
accidents  to  fear  after  being  operated  upon.  ...  I  need  not
relate  to  you  all  the  wonders  I  have  observed  in  somnam¬
bulism  ;  I  have  had  the  good  fortune  to  encounter  several
very  lucid  patients,  and,  if  this  is  interesting  to  you,  I  shall
be  happy  to  relate  to  you  my  labours,  hoping  in  return  to
be  benefitted  by  your  experience,  being  sure  that  this  will  be
a  certain  means  of  promoting  the  progress  of  mesmerism  in
the  Mauritius.”

The  following  is  an  extract  from  a  letter  received  from
Mons.  Gracher,  at  the  Isle  of  Bourbon.  “  Baron  Dupotet,
of  Paris,  has  sent  me  a  book  on  mesmerism,  which  he  desires

s  2


216


Dr.  Esdaile’s  Testimony  to


me  to  forward  to  you  at  Calcutta,  and  I  seize  the  occasion  to
send  it  by  my  friend,  Capt.  Cazentre.  Although  I  only  know
you  by  reputation,  permit  me,  as  a  mesmeriser,  to  speak  to
you  about  mesmerism  and  somnambulism,  of  the  progress
they  are  making  at  Bourbon,  and  the  services  they  are  des¬
tined  to  render  to  suffering  humanity,  even  in  spite  of  the
doctors ,  who  do  all  they  can  to  extinguish  this  divine  science.
But  these  gentry  may  do  as  they  please ,  the  time  is  come  for
this  great  truth ,  so  long  kept  in  obscurity  by  calculating  self-
interest,  to  appear  in  the  face  of  day ;  to  contest  it,  is  to
deny  the  light  of  heaven.  Being  at  this  moment  much  occu¬
pied  with  mesmerism  and  somnambulism,  I  have  been  so
happy  as  to  encounter  a  somnambulist  of  prodigious  lucidity
and  clairvoyance,  and  by  the  aid  of  this  extraordinary  person,
we  have  had  the  happiness  to  make  many  wonderful  cures.”

Mr.  Rees,  a  teacher  in  the  Martiniere  at  Lucknow,  lately
wrote  to  me  as  follows : —

“  A  few  months  ago,  I  made  a  tour  to  Benares,  and  there
learned  the  manner  of  mesmerising.  I  perfectly  succeeded
in  making  two  young  boys  successively  perfectly  insensible ;
but,  what  surprized  me  more  was,  that  they  were  in  a  manner
clairvoyants.  My  success  exceeded  my  expectations,  and  I
was  surprized  at  the  effect  that  steadfast  looking  into  the  eyes
and  making  a  few  passes  over  the  head  produced.  One  of
my  patients,  a  sickly  boy  of  10,  who  formerly  suffered  from
pain  in  the  spine,  could  mention  the  time  of  day  and  answer
questions  which  no  other  person  could  have  answered  ;  as  for
example,  what  I  had  been  doing  during  the  day,  what  I  held
up  behind  his  back,  and  several  other  similar  questions.

“  He  was  quite  insensible  to  pain  in  his  own  body,  but
seemed  to  feel  pain  in  the  corresponding  part  of  his  body
when  I  was  pricked ;  he  followed  me  in  his  sleep,  and  seemed
to  be  attracted  as  by  some  magnetic  influence,  for  he  went
on  his  very  tip-toe  to  catch  my  hand.  I  had  never  seen  the
boy  before,  and  therefore  could  not  believe  that  he  was  de¬
ceiving  me ;  and  yet  I  had  my  doubts  about  it,  especially  as
they  told  me  that  Dr.  Esdaile  did  not  believe  in  clairvoyance
himself;  this  I  wish  to  have  contradicted  by  yourself.”

You  may  be  sure  that  I  encouraged  Mr.  Rees  to  prosecute
his  experiments,  and  not  to  permit  himself  to  be  laughed  out
of  his  senses  and  understanding.  When  asked  by  people, —
“  Do  you  believe  in  clairvoyance  ?”  I  generally  give  them  a
Scotch  answer,  as  it  is  usually  meant  as  an  “  experimentum
cruris”  of  my  sanity  by  persons  totally  ignorant  of  the  subject.
But  to  genuine  enquirers  after  knowledge,  I  have  never
scrupled  to  declare  my  belief  in  clairvoyance,  long  before  I


the  Reality  of  Clairvoyance.


217


Lad  seen  it  in  tlie  most  perfect  and  unexceptionable  form,
which  happened  thus.*

On  the  29th  Feb.,  1848,  I  called  to  see  my  patient  Mr.
McKenzie,  and  while  speaking  to  him,  a  person  hurriedly
entered  the  room,  and  requested  me  to  go  and  see  Mrs.
McKenzie,  who  had  just  then  fallen  into  a  fit.  As  I  entered
the  house,  I  had  seen  her  apparently  quite  well.  On  going
into  the  next  room,  I  saw  Mrs.  McKenzie  lying  stretched  out
upon  the  bed,  her  eyes  staring  wide  open,  the  pupils  dilated
and  insensible  to  the  light,  her  breathing  stertorous,  and  her
jaws  locked ;  in  fact,  in  a  state  of  intense  coma.  Her  friends
told  me  that  she  was  subject  to  such  fits,  and  sometimes  re¬
mained  for  hours  in  them.

Without  saying  a  word  to  any  one,  (her  father,  mother,
husband,  brothers,  and  relations  were  present,)  I  placed  my
hand  upon  her  head  and  breathed  on  her  eyes.  In  about  a
minute  her  breathing  became  perfectly  tranquil,  and  but  for
her  open  eyes,  she  might  have  been  supposed  in  a  natural
sleep.  The  change  in  the  breathing  was  so  sudden,  that  it
arrested  my  attention,  and  led  me  to  suspect  that  I  had  sub¬
stituted  mesmeric  for  natural  coma.  I  expressed  this  suspicion
to  the  relatives,  and,  after  observing  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,
I  said  that  I  would  now  test  the  accuracy  of  my  opinion  by
attempting  to  awake  her  by  mesmeric  means.  I  accordingly
suddenly  demesmerised  her,  and  she  immediately  awoke  in
the  full  possession  of  her  senses.

To  leave  no  room  for  doubt,  I  approached  her  while  con¬
versing  with  her  friends  around,  and  again  mesmerised  her
unawares.  Her  eyes  almost  immediately  became  fixed,  and
she  fell  back  into  profound  coma.  I  now  showed  her  friends
that  she  was  deaf,  blind,  insensible  to  pain,  and  that  she
had  become  cataleptic  in  addition.  She  was  put  into  the
most  disagreeable  attitudes,  to  which  she  was  as  indifferent
as  a  waxen  image,  and  she  was  insensible  to  pricking  all  over
her  body.  As  the  senseless  unwinking  stare  of  her  eyes
alarmed  her  friends,  I  closed  the  eyelids,  laid  her  back  on
the  bed,  let  her  sleep  for  half  an  hour,  and  then  again  awoke
her  instantaneously  by  demesmerising  her.  She  said  that  she
remembered  nothing  since  seeing  me  arrive,  that  she  now  saw
me  for  the  first  time  in  her  room,  and  had  no  recollection  of
having  awoke  and  conversed  with  her  friends — a  phenomenon
of  which  I  have  given  many  striking  examples  before.f

My  command  over  this  lady's  system  was  established  from
this  moment,  and  I  could  entrance  her  at  any  time  in  five
minutes.  As  her  nervous  system  was  debilitated,  and  she

*  See  also  Dr.  Elliotson’s  gradual  admissions.  No.  VIII.,  p.  477. — Zoiat .

f  See  also  Dr.  Elliotson,  No.  XII.,  p.  476. — Zoist.


218


Dr.  Esdaile's  Testimony  to


suffered  from  palpitations  of  the  heart,  I  thought  throwing
her  into  the  trance  daily  would  probably  do  her  good.  For
five  days  in  succession  I  entranced  her  in  a  few  minutes  sitting
upon  a  couch  :  her  eyes  always  remained  wide  open  with  the
pupils  dilated,  and  she  was  intensely  cataleptic.  Having  re¬
duced  her  to  this  state,  I  was  in  the  habit  of  bending  her
down  into  the  recumbent  posture,  and  of  leaving  her  to  sleep
off  her  dose  of  mesmerism ;  this  she  usually  did  in  two  hours,
and  always  awoke  stronger  and  better.  I  never  thought  of
seeking  for  abnormal  mental  manifestations  in  such  a  case,
for  there  was  no  way  of  reaching  her  interior  apparently.

But  on  the  sixth  day,  while  in  the  act  of  laying  her  down
on  the  couch  with  my  hands  under  her  armpits  and  my  mouth
close  to  her  stomach,  it  suddenly  occurred  to  me  to  speak  to
her  in  this  position.  This  I  was  induced  to  do  from  having
been  reading  lately  Dr.  Petetin' s,*  of  Lyons,  account  of  several
natural  cataleptics ,  in  whom  clairvoyance  and  transference  of
the  senses  to  different  parts  of  the  body  had  been  strikingly
developed.  For  the  sake  of  comparison,  I  will  quote  Petetin's
account  of  his  first  cataleptic  patient,  and  it  should  be  borne
in  mind  that  he  detested  mesmerism.  In  raising  one  of  the
arms  of  the  patient,  Petetin  observed  that  it  retained  the
position  he  left  it  in,  and  the  same  happened  to  the  other
members;  in  a  word,  she  was  cataleptic.  She  soon  began
to  sing,  at  first  with  a  feeble  voice,  but  afterwards  louder,
an  air  of  difficult  execution,  and  with  great  taste.  Her  parents
made  attempts  to  be  heard  by  her,  but  she  remained  insen¬
sible  to  all  sounds,  and  even  to  pricking.  Her  song  lasted
an  hour  and  a  half,  and  the  fit  gradually  passed  off.  But  in
the  evening  she  relapsed  into  catalepsy,  and  began  to  sing  as
in  the  morning,  although  to  prevent  her  they  had  placed  her
in  the  most  painful  positions,  the  arms  raised  and  extended,
the  body  bent  forward  with  the  head  resting  on  the  knees.

This  being  all  useless,  and  the  patient  appearing  to  suffer
much,  Petetin  thought  of  turning  her  on  her  face,  but  in
stooping  to  do  this  he  stumbled,  and  fell  forwards  on  the  bed,
exclaiming,  u'Tis  very  unfortunate  that  I  cannot  stop  this
woman's  singing  !"  “  Oh,  doctor,  do  not  vex  yourself,  I

will  sing  no  more,"  she  replied.  Nevertheless,  after  a  few
minutes,  she  took  up  the  air  at  the  point  she  had  left  off  at,
without  being  interrupted  by  the  loudest  cries  in  her  ears.

*  Dr.  Petetin’s  work  is  entitled,  Memoire  sur  la  DS  corner  te  des  Phenomenes
que  prhcntent  la  Catalepsie  et  la  Somnambulisme ,  1787 ;  and  Eleclricite  Ani¬
mate,  prouvte  par  la  Decouverle  des  Phenomenes  Physiques  et  Moraux  de  la
Catalepsie  Hysterique  et  de  ses  vartetes,  1800.  Copies  are  scarce,  but  an  ac¬
count  of  his  clairvoyant  cases  will  be  found  in  Dr.  Elliotson’s  Human  Physiology ,
p.  655-6. — Zoist.


the  Reality  of  Clairvoyance.


219


It  appeared  certain  that  the  patient  had  heard ;  but,  as  she
no  longer  did  so,  Petetin  thought  of  placing  himself  in  his
former  position :  he  removed  the  bed-clothes,  placed  his
mouth  over  her  stomach,  crying  with  a  loud  voice :  “  Madam  !
will  you  sing  for  ever  ?”  “  Ah  !  how  you  hurt  me/’  she  re¬

plied  :  “  I  beseech  you  to  speak  lower.”  At  the  same  time
she  placed  her  hands  upon  her  stomach.  He  lowered  his
voice,  and  asked  her  how  she  had  heard.  “Like  other
people.” — “And  yet  I  am  speaking  to  you  through  your
stomach.”  “  Is  it  possible  !”  She  begged  him  to  question
her  by  the  ear,  but  she  made  no  reply,  even  when  he  spoke
through  a  funnel  to  increase  his  voice.  He  returned  to  the
stomach,  and  asked  with  a  low  voice,  if  she  had  heard  him.
“  No,”  said  she,  “  I  am  very  unfortunate.”.  .  .  The  patient
being  in  bed,  Petetin  raised  the  coverlet  cautiously,  and  placed
a  card  on  the  epigastrium.  Her  countenance  soon  changed
its  expression,  and  she  expressed  at  the  same  moment  atten¬
tion,  amazement  and  pain.  “  What  a  complaint  is  this  of
mine  !  I  see  the  queen  of  spades.”  Petetin,  withdrawing
the  card  soon,  left  her  to  the  curiosity  of  the  spectators.  A
second  card  was  introduced  with  the  same  precaution.  “  It
is,”  said  she,  “the  ten  of  hearts.”  He  asked  the  patient
where  she  saw  these  cards.  “  In  my  stomach.”  “  Have  you
distinguished  the  colours  ?”  “  Certainly :  they  were  shining,

and  appeared  to  me  larger  than  usual.  But  I  beg  you  to  give
me  some  respite ;  this  manner  of  seeing  fatigues  me  greatly.”
The  husband  of  the  lady  could  not  refrain ;  he  pulled  out  his
watch  and  placed  it  on  her  stomach :  after  a  few  seconds  of
attention,  she  said,  “It  is  my  husband’s  watch,  it  is  ten
minutes  past  seven.”  It  was  exactly  so,  &c.,  &c.  All  the
most  wonderful  mesmeric  mental  phenomena  were  witnessed
in  perfection  in  this  natural  cataleptic,  and  in  several  others.

But  to  return  to  my  mesmeric  cataleptic .  Finding  myself
in  Petetin’ s  position,  I  called  her  gently  by  name ;  she  an¬
swered, — “Umph!”  Again  I  said,  “Mrs.  McKenzie;”  and
got  “  What  ?”  in  reply.  I  drew  myself  back  and  addressed
her  ears,  but  got  no  reply.  Returning  to  my  first  position,
she  immediately  heard  me,  and  answered  readily  a  variety  of
questions  about  herself  and  family  with  great  accuracy.  Occa¬
sionally  the  conversation  was  interrupted  by  my  addressing
myself  to  her  ears,  but  always  in  vain.  She  spoke  in  a  very
slow,  measured,  monotonous  tone,  pausing  between  every
word,  in  this  fashion : —

“  What  is  your  name  ?

Sophia — Gertrude — McKenzie.

Is  there  anything  the  matter  with  you  ?


220


Dr.  Esdaile’s  Testimony  to


I — have — got — palpitations.
Now  ?

No.


Will  it  return  to-day  ?
No.


Are  you  sure?

Yes.

Have  you  got  any  other  complaint  ?

Yes.

What  is  it  ?

A  pain  in  my  stomach.

Will  mesmerism  cure  it  ?

You  know  best.

Are  you  asleep  ?

Yes.

How  long  will  you  sleep  ?

One  hour.”

Here  the  house  clock  struck  one,  and  I  seized  the  occasion
to  ask  her  what  o'clock  it  was,  expecting  that  she  would  time
herself  by  it,  if  she  heard  in  the  usual  way, — but  mark  her
reply.

“  What  o'clock  is  it  ?

Near  one.

How  near?

It  wants  four  minutes.

By  what  watch  do  you  know  ?

By  yours.”

I  pulled  out  my  watch,  and  it  wanted  exactly  four  minutes
to  one  o’clock.

“  Do  you  hear  with  your  ears  ?


No.

How?

With  my  stomach.''

She  had  never  seen  my  watch,  and  I  placed  it  on  her
stomach.

“  What  kind  of  a  watch  is  mine  ?

A  gold  watch.

Do  you  see  with  your  eyes  ?


No.


Are  they  open  ?

Yes ;  shut  them.''

It  was  far  more  satisfactory  to  see  the  open,  unwinking,
dilated  eyes,  than  to  smother  her  in  bandages.

I  did  as  she  desired,  however,  and  bandaged  her  eyes
carefully  besides.  Returning  to  the  epigastrium,  I  asked  :

“  Do  you  see  me  ?


the  Reality  of  Clairvoyance,


221


Yes.

How?


With  my  stomach.

Is  there  anything  on  your  stomach  now  ?
Yes.

What?

A  locket.

Is  it  open  ?

No.


What  is  in  it  ?

Your  wife’s  hair, — it  is  like  my  locket.

When  will  you  awake  ?

I  told  you — in  an  hour;  it  then  wanted  four  minutes  to
one  o’clock,  and  I  shall  sleep  an  hour  from  that  time.

How  many  persons  are  in  the  room  ?”

She  named  them  all  correctly,  although  some  had  entered
the  room  after  she  had  been  entranced,  and  pointed  out  where
they  stood.  I  waved  my  hand  to  them  to  change  their  places ;
she  followed  them  and  indicated  their  new  positions  in  the
room.

I  now  left  the  room,  and,  beckoning  her  mother  to  join
me,  I  asked  her  if  she  could  get  me  the  locket  that  had  been
mentioned.  Having  found  it,  we  returned,  and  I  placed  the
locket  on  her  stomach.

“  Do  you  see  anything  on  your  stomach  ?

Yes.

What  ?

My  locket.”

As  I  was  leaning  forward,  my  right  hand  was  behind  my
back,  and  I  felt  somebody  put  a  watch  into  it.  I  closed  my
hand  where  it  was  and  asked  :

“  Have  I  anything  in  my  hand  ?

Yes.

What?

A  watch.

Whose  ?

My  husband’s  watch.

What  o’clock  is  it  ?

Ten  minutes  past  one.”

This  was  the  first  mistake  she  had  made, — it  wanted  a
quarter  to  one  by  this  watch.  Could  she  still  have  been  taking
time  by  my  watch  ?  Unfortunately,  I  did  not  ascertain  this
at  the  time.  I  now  put  a  patent  leather  inkstand  on  her
stomach.

“  What  do  you  see  on  your  stomach  ?

Nothing.


222


Dr.  Esdaile’s  Testimony  to


Try  again.”

After  a  considerable  pause,  she  said  :

“I  see  something.

What  ?

A  locket.

No.

It  is  a  snuff  box.

No.

Then  I  can’t  tell.

What  colour  is  it  ?

Dark  green.”

It  was  very  like  a  snuff  box  and  blue  or  dark  green.

“  Are  you  tired  ?

Yes.

What  has  tired  you?

Speaking.

Does  it  fatigue  you  to  see  with  your  stomach  ?

Yes.

Would  you  like  to  lie  down  ?

Yes.

Then  do  so.

I  can’t.

Shall  I  help  you?

Yes.”

I  accordingly  laid  her  down  with  some  difficulty,  the
whole  body  being  very  stiff.  After  a  few  minutes  I  again
addressed  her  through  the  epigastrium,  and  all  over  her  body,
but  could  get  no  answer :  the  power  was  exhausted,  and
could  not  be  revived.

Five  o’clock  p.m.  Mrs.  McKenzie  has  no  recollection  of
having  dreamed  even  in  her  sleep  to-day,  and  was  surprized
to  find  herself  weak  and  exhausted  on  waking,  instead  of
being  refreshed  as  formerly.  I  took  out  my  watch  on  pre¬
tence  of  feeling  her  pulse  and  asked  if  she  had  ever  seen  it
before.  She  said  never.

Her  husband  told  me  that  she  awoke  at  five  minutes  to
two  o’clock,  being  within  a  minute  of  the  time  she  had  indi¬
cated.  It  was  evident  that  her  new  mode  of  perception  re¬
quired  a  strong  effort  of  the  system  and  that  this  had  greatly
exhausted  her,  and  she  expressed  a  strong  dislike  to  be  mes¬
merised  again.  I  think  that  a  little  reflection  will  enable  us
to  account  for  her  refreshment  on  former  occasions  and  her
extreme  exhaustion  this  last  time.  Voluntary  or  cerebral  life
may  be  considered  as  consuming,  and  involuntary  or  organic
life  as  restoring,  the  loss  of  nervous  fluid.  In  natural  sleep,
the  exhausted  brain  is  recruited  by  the  ever  active  ganglionic


the  Reality  of  Clairvoyance.


223


system,  and  the  sleeper  on  waking  finds  liis  brain  re-invigor¬
ated  by  a  fresh  supply  of  nervous  fluid  placed  at  its  disposal
for  the  purposes  of  animal  and  intellectual  existence.  But
suppose  the  nervous  energy  to  be  carried  off  as  fast  as  it  is
generated  during  sleep,  would  not  the  sleeper  awake  weakened
and  exhausted  and  incapable  of  active  bodily  or  mental  exer¬
tion  ?*  This  is  exactly  what  happened  to  my  patient ;  instead
of  the  brain  being  supplied  with  fresh  nervous  fluid  for  con¬
sumption  on  waking,  it  had  been  consumed  by  the  calls  made
upon  the  ganglionic  nervous  system  by  this  new  mode  of  per¬
ception,  which  was  too  unnatural  and  exhausting  to  be  borne
for  any  length  of  time.  If  this  is  a  reasonable  view  of  the
case,  such  experiments  can  never  have  a  curative  effect  upon
debilitated  nervous  constitutions,  and  I  therefore  refrained
from  experimenting  farther  upon  this  lady.  Not  having  been
such  a  mere  animal  as  to  demand  the  evidence  of  my  senses
when  my  curiosity  and  understanding  had  been  fully  satisfied
by  the  testimony  of  others,  I  hardly  felt  disappointed  at  not
being  at  liberty  to  prosecute  transcendental  mesmerism  fur¬
ther  in  this  case.

After  having  witnessed  the  mesmeric  coma  for  the  first
time,  I  wrote  thus  : — “  Although  I  should  never  succeed
again,  I  will  in  future  think,  speak,  and  write  of  mesmerism
as  being  as  much  a  reality  as  the  principle  of  gravitation,  or
the  properties  of  opium,” — and  so  I  now  say  of  clairvoyance
and  transference  of  the  senses.  Mere  experimenting,  with¬
out  reflection,  is  a  waste  of  time  that  would  be  better  employed
in  curing  diseases  or  preventing  pain,  and  it  is  high  time  for
philosophers  to  begin  to  think  what  can  be  the  cause  of  these
wonderful  effects.  Hoping  that  you  will  soon  be  able  to  en¬
lighten  us,

I  am  very  truly  yours,

Calcutta,  1st  July,  1849.  James  Esdaile.

*  Yet  we  must  remember  Dr.  Elliotson’s  remarks  in  his  narrative  of  Miss
Abbott’s  case,  No.  IX.,  p.  61. — “  She  was  always  much  stronger  after  being
mesmerised,  as  is  common  (No.  Y.  60 — 62),  and  she  was  always  the  stronger  the
more  I  made  her  talk  in  her  sleep-waking  :  so  that,  after  having  learnt  that  she
talked,  she  could  always  tell  on  waking,  by  the  degree  of  strength  she  felt,  whether
I  had  made  her  talk  much  or  not.  e  A  great  perturbation  in  nature,’  as  Shak-
speare  felt,  ‘  to  receive  at  once  the  benefit  of  sleep  and  the  effects  of  watching  :’
but  most  of  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism,  though  ti*ue  and  all  possible  to  occur
without  mesmerism,  seem  equally  great  perturbations  in  nature.”

“  Many  patients  have  told  me  in  their  sleep  that,  although  quiet  might  seem
better  for  them  than  talking,  it  really  was  not,  though  I  believe  that  in  some  it
is.  The  rigid  patients  mentioned  in  No.  V.,  were  not  the  weaker  for  being  kept
in  invariable  rigidity  and  strong  muscular  exertion  for  hours — but  refreshed  (pp.
61 — 76)  ;  nor  the  young  lady  mentioned  in  No.  VI., — though  I  often  kept  their
muscles  above  an  hour  in  the  most  forcible  action,  they  actually  were  greatly  re¬
freshed  and  strengthened  by  what  had  passed.”  See  also  Miss  Collins’s  case,
No.  XI.,  p.  357. — Zoist.


224


Cases  of  Cross-mesmerism ,


“  Calcutta,  16,  Elliot  Road,
“  June  11th,  1849/

“  To  Dr.  Esdaile,  Presidency  Surgeon.

“  My  dear  Sir, — I  beg  to  return  you  your  letter  to  Dr.
Elliotson  which  you  left  at  my  place  yesterday  for  my  perusal,
I  have  much  pleasure  in  saying  that  all  the  particulars  which
you  have  mentioned  there  relative  to  the  case  of  clairvoyance
exhibited  by  my  wife  are  perfectly  correct.

“  You  are  at  liberty  to  make  any  use  you  please  of  this
letter.

ec  I  remain  yours  very  faithfully,

“  J.  McKenzie.

“  Second  Teacher,  SeaPs  Free  College,  Calcutta.”


II.  Cases  of  Cross-mesmerism,  with  some  Remarks  upon  the
Magnetic  or  Mesmeric  Fluid.  By  Mr.  W.  Cattell.

The  phenomena  resulting  from  two  or  more  mesmeric  influ¬
ences  acting  at  one  time  upon  the  same  patient,  usually  de-  .
nominated  cross-mesmerism,  have  been  so  little  noticed, — and
their  appearance  is  so  apt  to  create  unnecessary  apprehension
where  no  real  danger  exists, — that  the  following  cases,  which
have  occurred  in  my  practice  during  last  year,  may  be  found
instructive.  At  all  events,  I  trust  they  will  be  the  means  of
directing  attention  to  a  class  of  phenomena  which,  perhaps,
have  been  too  much  neglected,  though  I  have  reason  to  be¬
lieve  the  note  books  of  many  mesmerists  could  furnish  cases
much  more  interesting  and  difficult  to  manage.  My  attention
was  first  directed  to  this  subject,  by  observing  the  dislike
which  all  my  somnambules  exhibited  to  the  presence  of  my
friend  Mr.  Nottage.  At  one  time  his  entrance  struck  the
patient  dumb  during  the  remainder  of  the  seance ;  at  another,
destroyed  the  lucidity.  Anything  touched  by  him  conveyed  the
same  distress  to  them,  and  they  never  voluntarily  allowed  it  to
come  in  contact  with  them.  A  series  of  half-crowns  placed
upon  a  book, — one  of  which  he  had  marked,  were  offered  by  me
to  the  patients,  who  accepted  all  except  that  one  which  Mr.
N.  had  touched.  I  found  the  same  symptoms  attend  the  pre¬
sence  of  other  individuals,  though  all  believers  in  mesmerism  ;
and  that  invariably,  so  that  a  person  whom  one  patient  dis¬
liked,  was  sure,  ever  afterwards,  to  excite  the  same  feelings
in  all  the  rest ;  and  vice  versa  if  he  were  liked.

“  On  the  30th  of  last  June,  during  some  phrenomesmeric
experiments  upon  Master  Tims,  set  15,  who  was  being  mes-


by  Mr.  Cattell.


225


merised  for  swelling  of  the  glandulse  concatenate  of  the  neck,
(whose  case  I  hope  some  day  to  furnish  to  The  Zoist,)  some
street  music  interrupted  us  by  throwing  the  somnambulist
into  an  ecstacjr.  The  music — now  solemn,  now  gay, — excited
varying  rigid  attitudes,  (the  rigidity  being  much  greater  at  one
moment  than  another,)  and  as  he  exhibited  no  uneasiness,  he
was  handled  at  various  times  by  several  persons  present,  to
some  of  whom  he  had  previously  shewn  dislike,  and  among
them  by  Mr.  Nottage.  After  the  music  finally  ceased,  I  found
that  the  rigidity  it  had  induced  could  not,  as  usually,  be  re¬
moved.  As  I  approached  he  retreated;  when  I  addressed
him  he  shewed  impatient  displeasure,  and,  removing  from  me
as  far  as  possible,  became  perfectly  cataleptic.

On  a  previous  occasion,  upon  touching  the  organ  of  Firm¬
ness  in  this  youth,  I  was  astonished  to  find  that  I  had  in¬
duced  a  rigidity  which,  by  the  ordinary  processes,  could  not
be  removed.  But,  on  breathing  over  that  portion  of  Firmness
which  I  had  excited,  the  limbs  immediately  relaxed.  The
patient  then  told  me  that  if  I  placed  my  finger  in  that  locality
(touching  the  sides  of  Firmness ),  I  should  always  produce
such  a  result ;  and  I  found  this  to  be  perfectly  correct.  I  have
had  but  one  other  opportunity  of  testing  this  phenomenon
upon  another  head  with  the  same  result :  it  may  be  that  there
exists  an  organ  of  Rigidity  in  the  brain ;  if  so,  that  is  probably
the  spot  where  it  will  be  found.  I  recollected  this,  and  at
once  tried  to  remove  the  excitement  from  the  supposed  organ  of
Rigidity ,  but  without  producing  any  result.  I  then  placed  him
in  a  chair,  the  rundles  of  which  he  convulsively  grasped  with
his  hands,  and  in  a  low  tone  of  voice  commanded  every  one
to  be  silent  and  to  sit  still.  He  was  evidently  very  excited
and  confused,  and  said  that  all  had  influenced  him,  and  he
did  not  think  he  should  ever  wake  again.  I  made  passes  over
him  for  more  than  half  an  hour,  and  after  remaining  some
time  in  the  deep  sleep  he  was  much  less  confused,  and  pre¬
sently  was  sufficiently  recovered  to  converse  in  his  usual  man¬
ner  with  me,  and  prescribe  for  his  release  from  the  voluntary
imprisonment  he  had  effected  by  grasping  the  chair,  for  no
efforts  of  mine  had  been  able  even  to  move  a  single  finger,  so
firmly  was  the  contact  sustained.  He  proceeded  to  give  me
the  following  rationale  of  his  state.

“  Mr.  N.,”  he  said,  “  touched  my  arm  when  the  music
ceased  for  a  moment ;  had  it  been  playing,  I  should  not  have
felt  any  pain.  He  must  take  your  hand,  and,  with  the  other,
you  must  slowly  make  one  pass  up  each  of  my  arms  from  the
finger  tips  to  the  shoulders  and  they  will  relax,  for  I  cannot
remove  them  myself  and  you  have  no  power  alone.  I  shall


226


Cases  of  Cross-mesmerism,


not,  now,  be  clairvoj'ant  to-morrow,  and  I  cannot  see  when
I  shall  be;  this  cross-mesmerism  will  delay  it  for  a  long  time.”
His  clairvoyance  he  had  predicted  to  commence  on  the  day
succeeding  this  on  which  he  was  cross-mesmerised.  He  was
to  be  perfectly  lucid  after  a  series  of  four  sleeps,  of  which  this
was  the  last,  and  before  being  cross-mesmerised  this  evening,
as  I  was  very  anxious  about  it,  he  had  told  me  that  if  he
were  awoke  and  repassed  into  the  sleep  this  evening  he  should
not  be  clairvoyant,  for  each  of  the  four  sleeps  must  be  on  a
different  day.  However,  from  his  first  becoming  somnam-
bulant,  he  had  always  accurately  predicted  and  prescribed
things  relating  solely  to  himself;  and,  a  few  evenings  before,
when  asked  to  examine  a  person's  lungs,  he  said  he  could
next  week,  but  for  the  present  he  could  only  tell  him  that  I
could  put  him  to  sleep  in  exactly  eight  minutes.  The  con¬
sulting  party  had  been  put  to  sleep  by  me  several  times,  and
the  time  occupied  in  producing  sleep  was  exactly  eight  minutes.
As  I  had  put  the  question  to  our  somnambulist  myself,  at  the
same  time  causing  him  with  the  finger  to  touch  the  brow  of
the  other  person,  he  had  no  means  of  discovering  who  he
was,  and,  indeed,  when  asked,  he  could  not  give  the  name,  nor
did  he  know  whether  he  had  ever  been  mesmerised.  The  few
in  whom  I  have  induced  somnambulism  have  invariably  been
lucid.  I  followed  our  patient's  directions  with  complete  suc¬
cess  ;  his  arms  relaxed  as  my  hand  passed  along,  and  I  con¬
sidered  it  prudent  to  awaken  him.  In  this,  however,  I  was
again  unsuccessful,  and  he  said  that  he  could  not  awake
until  Mr.  Nottage  had  made  an  upward  pass  over  each  eye
without  touching  him,  as,  otherwise,  when  he  awoke  he  should
not  be  able  to  raise  the  lids.  Looking  steadily  at  him,  I  de¬
sired  him  to  awake,  whereupon  his  eyes  slowly  opened,  and
he  complained  of  languor  and  fatigue — a  feeling  he  had  never
before  experienced  after  the  mesmeric  sleep.  Circumstances
prevented  my  mesmerising  him  again  until  19th  July,  when
he  was  no  more  lucid  than  before,  in  consequence,  as  he  said,
of  the  cross-mesmerism,  and  was  unable  to  predict  when  he
should  become  clairvoyant.

Not  long  after  this,  he  was  subjected  to  cross-mesmerism
a  second  time,  under  somewhat  different  circumstances.  This
case  is  perhaps  more  interesting  than  the  former,  as  it  illus¬
trates  what  may  be  called  cross-mesmerism  by  catalysis,  or
mere  presence.  It  was  on  the  7th  of  August  that  I  induced
sleep-waking  in  Master  Tims  by  a  single  pass,  so  susceptible
had  he  become  from  his  having  been  almost  daily  mesmerised,
in  accordance  with  his  own  instructions  delivered  in  sleep¬
waking,  to  overcome  the  retarding  influence  of  his  last  cross-


by  Mr.  Cattell.


227


mesmerism.  On  that  day  and  at  almost  every  seance  after¬
wards,  Mr.  Davis,  being  greatly  interested  in  mesmerism,  was
present.  On  this  occasion,  he  was  on  the  patient's  left,  and
one  or  two  other  gentlemen  were  also  in  the  room.  No  un¬
easiness  wras  exhibited  by  the  somnambule  in  passing  into  the
sleep,  but  to  my  preliminary  questions  as  to  his  health,  he  was
scarcely  able  to  reply  from,  apparently,  some  obstruction  in
his  throat,  and  he  appeared  to  hear  Mr.  Davis  equally  as  well
as  myself  and  us  alone.  I  then  questioned  him  as  to  the
cause  of  this — in  his  case — unusual  phenomenon,  when  he
stretched  out  his  arm,  which  remained  straight  and  rigid,
towards  that  part  of  the  room  where  Mr.  D.  was  standing.  I
had  some  difficulty  in  relaxing  his  arm,  but  was  still  unsus¬
picious  of  cross-mesmerim,  as  no  one  had  touched  our  som¬
nambule.  I  therefore  proceeded  to  excite  the  organ  of  Lan¬
guage  to  afford  him  some  relief ;  but  this  not  answering,  I
touched  several  others  with  equal  non-success.  Beyond  a  very
slight  alteration  in  his  features  none  even  of  his  more  promi¬
nent  organs  could  be  excited  into  action.  A  similar  effect  of
cross-mesmerism  is  recorded  in  the  Phrenomagnet.  Mr.  Pern-
brook  having  placed  his  daughter  in  the  sleepwaking,  she
was  accidentally  touched  by  a  gentleman  in  the  room,  when
both  arms  became  rigid,  so  that  he  could  not  reduce  them
until  he  awoke  her.  Presently,  she  was  again  passed  into
sleep-waking,  “  when  she  fell,”  he  says,  “  into  the  deepest
sleep  I  ever  witnessed ;  the  arms  could  not  be  catalepsed,  the
organs  ceased  to  act,  and  I  have  not  been  able  to  produce
catalepsy  since  neither  asleep  nor  awake,  although  I  could  do
so  previously  with  a  single  pass.  I  have  magnetised  her  but
once  since,  and  though  some  of  the  organs  can  be  excited  as
usual ,  though  much  feebler,  others  come  out  in  parts  foreign  to
their  proper  situations.  The  head  falls  frequently  to  the  front
or  back ;  the  arms  fall  from  the  lap  and  hang  loose  as  those
of  a  corpse ;  answers  are  given  to  questions  in  a  dreamy  sort  of
whisper ;  there  is  no  energy, — no  starting  up  and  swelling
with  pride  when  Self-esteem  is  touched ;  in  fact,  some  extra¬
ordinary  change  has  taken  place  in  the  nervous  system.”

Our  somnambule  having  been  apparently  in  the  deep  sleep,
awoke  in  the  same  state  as  before,  and  when  I  again  asked
him  to  give  me  some  directions  to  relieve  him,  he  gave  no
answer,  but  pointed  with  his  left  arm — which  also  remained
stretched  and  rigid — directly  towards  Mr.  D.,  so  that  there
could  now  be  no  doubt  that  his  presence  was  exercising  some
unpleasant  but  important  influence  over  the  patient,  who  pre¬
sently  fell  over  towards  the  right  and  became  contracted  and
rigid.  One  or  two  slight  attacks  of  a  similar  nature  had  oc-


228


Cases  of  Cross-mesmerism ,


cured  at  different  times  since  the  3rd  of  August,  but  they  had
passed  off  so  rapidly  that  I  had  neglected  seeking  any  expla¬
nation  of  them.  However,  on  referring  to  my  note-book,  I
found  that  Mr.  D.  had  always  been  present  when  they  took
place.  This  contraction  I  removed ;  but  almost  immediately
afterwards  a  similar  one  occurred  towards  the  left,  from  which
he  could  not  he  recovered ,  although  every  means  were  tried,
and  our  united  force  could  not  unbend  his  body .  No  alternative
remained  but  to  awaken  him ;  but,  after  using  the  usual  pro¬
cesses  for  nearly  ten  minutes,  no  effect  was  produced.  I
therefore  desired  Mr.  D.  to  stand  behind  me  and  to  place  his
hands  upon  my  shoulders,  while  I  again  endeavoured  to  awaken
him.  This  method  succeeded;  in  about  half  a  minute  the
rigidity  gave  way  all  over  his  body,  the  arms  relaxed  and  the
fingers  seemed  to  twitch  into  consciousness,  while  the  deathly
pale  countenance  became  once  more  animated  and  happy.

He  complained  of  general  numbness,  and  by  a  movement
of  my  hand  he  was  again  passed  into  sleep-waking ;  but  this
time  we  were  alone.  He  spoke  with  great  difficulty,  but  con¬
trived  to  make  me  understand  that  I  must  blow  into  his  mouth.
This  I  did,  and  his  voice,  though  greatly  relieved,  was  still
hoarse  and  iveak.

He  now  gave  me  the  following  explanation  of  what  had
occurred :  “  Mr.  D.  ought  not  to  have  been  with  me  so  fre¬
quently  when  I  was  asleep,  for  he  unintentionally  established
a  sympathy  between  us,  which  to  me  is  injurious,  because  his
influence  is  different  from  yours.  Each  time  he  was  present
it  gradually  increased,  till  every  motion  he  made  affected  me ;
and,  when  he  came  near,  I  was  stiffened  for  the  moment ;
and,  when  I  was  contracted  to-day,  each  time  Mr.  D.  leant
his  body  towards  me.  When  I  went  to  sleep  to-day,  you  did
not  speak  to  me  for  some  minutes ;  and,  because  Mr.  D.  was
silent  and  his  tongue  quiet,  mine  became  stiffened.  I  could
scarcely  speak,  and  in  all  my  sleep- wakings,  while  his  influ¬
ence  remains  upon  me,  it  will  continue  to  be  very  stiff.  If
Mr.  D.  were  to  put  me  to  sleep  now,  it  would  relieve  my
voice  at  once,  but  that  would  injure  me.  You  must  not  let
him  be  present  while  I  am  asleep,  for  some  time  to  come.
The  effects  of  this  cross-mesmerism  will  continue  upon  me  for
18  dags,  and  it  will  be  over  on  the  2 1st.

“  You  had  better  wake  me  up  now,  and  ask  Mr.  D.  to  fan
my  limbs  with  a  silk  handkerchief ;  that  will  take  away  the
stiffness,  which  you  will  not  be  able  to  remove.”

Accordingly  I  awoke  him ,  and  having  failed  in  relieving  the
numbness,  Mr.  D.  effected  it  as  he  had  directed.

On  each  of  the  following  daj^s  he  was  contracted  and


by  Mr.  CattelL


990

tv  ,V  %J

stiffened  as  before,  first  by  Mr.  D.  looking  into  the  room,
and  again  by  his  accidental  presence  in  the  adjoining  one.
This  last  was  on  the  9th.  The  next  day  I  had  an  interview
with  Ellen  Dawson,  (whose  clairvoyance  has  so  frequently
been  noticed  in  The  Zoist,)  during  her  sleep-waking.  After
relating  various  circumstances  which  had  happened  to  me
during  the  past  few  weeks,  she  especially  dwelt  with  precision
on  my  mesmeric  cases.  Looking  at  Master  Tims,  she  ex¬
claimed  :  “I  see  him;  he  has  been  cross-mesmerised;  why
don't  you  place  your  gold  ring  upon  the  patients'  finger  while
they  sleep  ?  that  would  prevent  all  accidents,  and  no  one  could
cross-mesmerise  them.  You  should  place  it  on  the  fourth  finger ,
because  there  is  a  nerve  whose  influence  runs  from  that  direct
to  the  head."

I  presume  she  meant  the  ulnar  nerve,  which  some  say
was  the  cause  of  the  fourth  being  chosen  by  the  ancients  as
the  marriage  finger.

“But  why  a  gold  ring,  Ellen?"

“  Because,"  she  replied,  “  gold  is  a  good  conductor  of  the
mesmeric  fluid,  and  holds  it  longer  than  most  other  things ;
but  anything  from  your  person  would  do,  though  not  so  well."

“  In  case  I  should  forget  the  ring,  and  paralysis  ensues,
at  any  time,  what  then  ?"

“  If,"  she  said,  “  you  touch  the  patient’s  hand  with  a  piece
of  steel,  it  will  relax  it”

On  the  18th  I  again  magnetized  Master  Tims;  when,  having
placed  my  ring  upon  the  fourth  finger  of  his  right  hand,  as  Ellen
had  directed,  I  asked  him  what  effect  that  would  produce  ?

“  Oh,  how  delightful !"  he  exclaimed  ;  “  no  one  can  cross-
mesmerise  me  now."

“  Well  then,  may  Mr.  Davis  come  in?"

“Yes,"  he  replied,  “he  cannot  hurt  me  now."

Mr.  Davis  now  came  in,  and  the  somnambulist,  without
any  symptoms  of  uneasiness,  advanced  and  shook  him  warmly
by  the  hand,  and  declared  he  felt  no  effect  from  his  touch.
However,  he  invariably  presented  the  right  hand,  and,  when
I  removed  the  ring  to  the  left,  he  presented  this;  but  no
sooner  had  it  left  the  finger  than  paralysis  took  place,  which
was  only  removed  by  my  touching  his  hand  with  my  latch-key.
He  said  he  did  not  like  touching  Mr.  Davis  with  his  left  hand
(the  ring  was  upon  his  right),  because  it  caused  a  painful  sen¬
sation  in  the  fingers.

A  few  hours  after  the  above,  he  was  standing  at  a  short
distance  behind  another  patient,  whom  I  was  mesmerising  for
general  debility,  and  fell  asleep,  with  his  pocket-knife  un¬
clasped  in  his  hand.  As  neither  he  nor  I  could  open  it,  and

VOL.  VII.  T


230


Cases  of  Cross-mesmerism,


remove  the  knife,  he  directed  me  to  awake  him,  as  then,  by
gently  opening  my  corresponding  hand,  his  would  also  open
by  sympathy.  I  desired  him  to  take  a  message  for  me  at  a
certain  time  in  the  afternoon;  awoke  him,  unconscious  of
what  he  had  promised  to  do,  and  released  the  knife  as  he  had
directed.

My  sleep-waking  command  was  literally  obeyed,  at  the
moment  I  had  desired.  He  took  the  message  to  some  dis¬
tance,  and  passed  several  persons  on  his  way,  to  whom  he
appeared  perfectly  awake,  though  his  eye  had  a  vacant  gaze ;
but,  on  his  return,  he  denied  most  firmly  having  done  any
such  thing,  or  having  even  left  the  room.  He  never  remem¬
bered  it  except  in  sleep-waking.  Such  were  the  facts  pre¬
sented  to  me  in  this  case  at  that  particular  time.

Derangement  or  inaction  of  the  cerebral  organs  occurred
frequently  during  the  interval  of  these  eighteen  days.  On
one  occasion,  as  he  did  not  speak,  I  touched  the  organ  of  Lan¬
guage  without  producing  any  result.  On  touching  over  Be¬
nevolence  he  became  very  violent.  Presently  he  drew  out
his  clasp  knife,  and  was  apparently  about  to  stab  me,  when  I
sprang  behind,  and,  by  a  sudden  effort,  stiffened  and  awoke
him.  In  a  subsequent  sleep- waking  he  was  exceedingly  sorry
and  vexed  at  what  he  had  done,  saying  his  cerebral  organs
wrere  deranged  by  cross-mesmerism,  and,  though  perfectly
conscious  of  what  he  was  doing,  he  felt  irresistibly  impelled
to  act  as  he  had  done ;  “  My  brain  will  be  right  again  on  the
21s/,  that  is  the  eighteenth  day  since  Mr.  Davis  first  stiffened
me;”  (viz.,  on  the  3rd.)  ;

Another  somnambulist  whom  I  questioned  on  this  case,
after  giving  a  similar  explanation  to  what  I  have  recorded
above,  predicted  that  the  effect  would  terminate  in  12  days
from  the  time  he  was  last  cross-mesmerised.  “I  cannot  tell
you,”  he  said,  “  why  I  say  so,  but  I  feel  that  Master  Tims
will  be  well  on  Monday  next  (the  21st.”)  On  the  3rd  he  had
been  first  cross-mesmerised,  and  for  the  last  time  on  the  9th.
On  the  21st  August,  our  somnambulist  spoke  as  fluently  as
ever  in  sleep-waking,  but  was  unable  to  state  when  he  should
become  more  lucid.  His  cerebral  organs  were  also  capable  of
excitement  by  touch,  just  as  I  had  always  found  them  to  be
before  he  was  cross-mesmerised.


Prom  the  phenomena  of  cross-mesmerism,  we  may  infer
the  existence  of  a  difference  in  the  mesmeric  fluid  of  various
persons.  And  this  doctrine  is  perfectly  consistent  with  expe¬
rience,  and  might  have  been  expected  from  analogy.  For  as


by  Mr.  CattelL


231

no  two  individuals  possess  exactly  the  same  temperaments  and
cerebral  organizations,  so  the  emanations  from  their  brains
must  be — however  slightly — different.  And  this  is  important,
as  the  reception  of  a  foreign  influence  by  the  patient,  weak,
diseased,  and  nervously  susceptible,  might  be  exceedingly
injurious.  I  have  quoted  above,  in  my  second  case,  the  warn¬
ing  of  the  somnambule,  that  he  must  not  be  mesmerised  by
a  person  whose  influence  differed  from  that  to  which  he  had
for  some  time  been  subjected.  The  same  opinion  is  frequently
uttered  by  many  clairvoyants.  Hence  a  patient  should  not
suddenly  submit  to  the  influence  of  a  second  mesmerist,  ex¬
cept  a  change  seems  to  be  imperatively  called  for,  as  when  the
usual  good  effect  ceases  or  cannot  be  produced ;  and  then  the
transfer  should  be  made  with  caution.

This  difference  in  the  mesmeric  fluid  of  various  individuals
is  further  evident  from  the  general  character  of  the  results
usually  obtained  by  each.  One  person  can  invariably  produce
a  certain  class  of  phenomena,  which  seldom  or  never  occur  in
the  practice  of  another.  There  are  mesmerists  who  produce
clairvoyance  in  every  case  of  somnambulism  ;  others  only  meet
with  it  at  times  for  the  patient’s  health,  or  in  certain  cases,
according  possibly  to  some  peculiarity  in  his  cerebral  organi¬
zation  and  temperament ;  while  many  mesmerisers  never  in¬
duce  any  degree  of  lucidity.  One  person  is  endowed  with
a  will  that  knows  no  obstacles,  and  another  appears  to  be
without  this  power ;  a  third  individual  by  his  will  compels
patients,  sleeping  and  waking,  to  see  through  (to  us)  opaque
bodies.

Dr.  Ashburner  relates  that  when  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson
by  his  will  compelled  obedience  in  the  waking-state,  he  by
this  means,  in  the  same  patients,  produced  deep  sleep.  The
one  influence  was  felt  to  be  clear,  light,  and  very  agreeable ;
the  other  dull,  harsh,  heavy,  and  overpowering.*

Upon  this  subject  I  have  heard  the  following  remarks  by
many  clairvoyants.  From  the  active  brain,  there  emanates  a
fluid  which  rests  over  the  head  and  brow  like  a  halo  or  cloud
of  light ;  varying  in  intensity  in  different  persons,  according
to  their  respective  mesmeric  powers.  Its  colour  is  blue,  like
the  electric  spark,  of  every  shade,  from  the  lightest  presented
by  the  prism,  to  a  deep  violet ;  it  extends,  more  or  less,  all
over  the  body,  but  is  most  visible  at  the  extremities,  being
emitted  from  the  tips  of  the  fingers  in  mesmerising,  like  bril¬
liant  stars  or  spangles.  When  this  blue  fluid  is  clear,  the
patient  becomes  clairvoyant,  and  is  lucid  in  proportion  to  its


T


o

4-W


\


*  Zoist,  No.  XT II.


Cases  of  Cross-mesmerism,


brilliancy  and  intensity.  The  deep  violet  is  very  intense,
powerful,  and  compulsory  in  its  operation,  and  particularly
effective  in  organic  disease,  paralysis,  contractions,  and  the
like.  It  is  a  curious  fact,  that  it  is  the  blue  ray  of  the  spec¬
trum  that  is  magnetic,  and  this  is  most  intense  in  its  violet
hue.  The  pale  blue  fluid  is  quiet,  soothing,  and  exceedingly
beneficial,  where  great  power  is  neither  necessary  nor  advis¬
able,  in  nervous  and  internal  disorders.

The  fluid  of  the  majority  of  mankind  is  more  or  less  thick,
heavy  and  dull ;  and  the  presence  of  intense  thinkers  is  likely
to  disturb  or  cloud  the  lucidity  of  a  susceptible  patient.  Oc¬
casionally,  the  mesmeric  halo  is  thickly  studded  with  stars  :
here  there  exists  a  powerful  will  combined,  according  to  the
clearness  of  the  fluid,  with  the  capability  of  producing  great
lucidity.  Sometimes  the  mesmeriser’s  brow  appears  clothed
with  this  halo  to  the  patient  before  the  sleep  takes  place ;  and
in  the  case  of  Miss  Martineau  it  surrounded  everything  in
the  room.  One  of  my  patients  usually  saw  it  after  being  mes¬
merised  for  a  few  minutes,  and  described  it  as  being  like  the
flame  that  appears  round  the  head  of  a  newly  ignited  lucifer
— but  clearer  and  softer,  about  three  inches  in  breadth  and
resting  over  my  head  and  shoulders.  It  was  much  more  bril¬
liant  in  the  dark,  but  never  occurred  except  the  patient  held
my  hands.  Clairvoyants  state  that  this  fluid  is  matter,  and
the  mesmeriser  should,  as  he  values  his  own  health  and  that
of  other  patients,  carefully  shake  and  wash  his  hands  after
each  operation.

Nor  is  this  luminousness  confined  to  the  human  species.
To  a  clairvoyant  the  feline  tribe  appears  vividly  luminous,  es¬
pecially- the  domestic  cat  and  the  tiger;  the  dog  presents  it  in
dull,  lambent  patches,  and  the  magnetic  emanations  from
the  horse  are  of  a  more  intense  character  than  those  from
the  cow.

The  luminousness  mav  be  observed  in  a  warm  evening
emanating  in  minute  points  of  light  from  the  extremities  of
various  plants — particularly  the  Indian  pink,  nasturtium,  ma-
rygold,  and  from  the  lichens  like  pale  moonbeams.  But  the
animal  creation  exhibits  it  in  the  greatest  brilliancy  and  pro¬
fusion,  being  in  all  cases  most  distinct  about  the  head  and
extremities,  which  may  correspond  with  the  poles  of  a  magnet
round  which  the  same  phenomenon  was  observed  by  Baron
Iteichenbach's  patients.  The  lambent  illumination  of  the
lampyris  or  glow-worm  is  well  known;  it  is  of  a  greenish  colour,
emanating/rom  a  yellow  surface  so  that  the  light  itself  may  he
blue.  “  The  light -emitting  segments  preserve  their  peculiar  pro¬
perty  for  some  time  after  being  separated  from  the  rest  of  the


by  Mr.  Cattell.


233


body,  and  manifest  it  even  in  vacuo,  or  when  immersed  in
gases  which  are  not  supporters  of  combustion .*

The  luminosity  of  the  infusoria  and  other  aquatic  animals
is  described  as  being  produced  by  a  fluid  diffused  over  the
whole  or  an  especial  portion  of  their  body,  which  in  the  aca-
lephse  has  the  property  of  stinging  the  person  who  touches
them,  which  has  given  their  name.  An  odour  has  also  been
perceived  from  these  luminous  animals  similar  to  that  which
surrounds  a  highly  charged  electrical  machine ;  and  after  gaz¬
ing  for  a  few  moments  upon  the  sea  when  full  of  them,  the
eyes  become  pained,  headache  and  giddiness  succeed,  and  the
effect  has  been  compared  to  that  produced  by  smoking  too
much  tobacco. f  To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  all  these  ani¬
mals  can,  at  will,  increase  or  suspend  their  light ;  in  the
familiar  case  of  the  lampyris  that  fact  is  established.  This
luminosity  cannot,  therefore,  be  ascribed  to  combustion,  es¬
pecially  as  it  suffers  no  diminution  when  the  animal  is  plpced
in  vacuo  or  in  gases  which  do  not  support  combustion.  Hence
it  appears  to  be  the  emanation  of  a  fluid,  analogous  to  that
which  is  produced  by  the  human  brain,  and  whose  effects
are  so  commonly  alluded  to  in  the  common  cat,  the  tiger,  and
the  rattle-snake.  All  these  animals  are  mesmerisers,  and  em¬
ploy  their  powers  in  hunting  for  food  by  what  is  generally
termed  fascination.  The  earth  itself  is  a  great  magnet,  caus¬
ing  all  other  things  to  become  so  by  induction ;  and  it  is  pro¬
bable  that  future  investigators  will  discover  that  this  magnetic
fluid  is  universally  diffused  throughout  the  animal  and  vege¬
table  kingdoms,  but  existing  in  every  degree  of  intensity  and
quantity  in  different  beings.  This  is  a  subject  still  very  ob¬
scure,  from  the  want  of  proper  observations  and  facts ;  but  it
is  one  which  will  some  day  demonstrate  the  universal  existence
of  magnetism.

W.  Cattell.

Weston  Sub.  Lizard,  Staffordshire.

NOTE  BY  DR.  ELLIOTSON,  ON  THE  DISTURBANCES  OF
MESMERIC  SLEEP-WAKING.

Numerous  examples  of  these  facts  are  recorded  in  The
Zoist,  and  I  quote  them  as  the  earlier  numbers  of  this  journal
are  becoming  very  scarce.  In  Yol.  I.,  p.  177,  in  my  remarks
upon  a  very  striking  cure  of  the  insanity  of  a  youth  with
mesmerism  by  Mr.  Chandler,  I  said  : —

“  In  many  cases,  a  relation  is  established  between  the  mesmeriser

*  Braude's  Dictionary  of  Arts  and  Sciences.
t  Encycl.  Ana.  and  Phys.  Art.,  Animal  Luminousness.


Note  by  Dr.  Elliolson ,


234

and  the  patient,  so  that  no  other  person  can  awake  him,  or  another
person  interfering  produces  great  disturbance  to  the  system.  This
happened  here  on  one  occasion.  ‘I  was  called  away/  says  Mr.
Chandler,  ‘after  having  mesmerised  him  for  some  time,  and,  not
thinking  it  quite  right  to  awake  him,  I  requested  his  mother  to  do  so
in  about  ten  minutes  after  I  left.  In  a  short  time,  I  was  sent  for
again  in  great  haste,  and  found  him  on  my  arrival  in  a  most  horrible
state;  he  had  tetanus  of  the  whole  body — not  a  limb  could  be  moved.
He  remained  in  this  state  about  half  an  hour.  I  was  alarmed  and
puzzled,  but  thought  the  best  plan  would  be  to  mesmerise  him  again,
and  then  awake  him  myself.  Accordingly  I  commenced  manipulat¬
ing,  and  to  my  surprise  in  about  two  minutes  the  body  became  re¬
laxed,  and  he  sunk  into  a  quiet  and  mesmeric  sleep,  out  of  which,
after  a  few  minutes,  I  aroused  him  in  the  ordinary  way ;  and  he
woke  as  usual  quite  well :  but  he  remarked  that  we  had  been  playing
tricks  with  him,  and  begged  they  might  not  be  repeated  lest  he
should  be  killed.’  Such  disturbance  of  the  system  had  the  inter¬
ference  of  another  still  left.

“This  relation  between  the  mesmeriser  and  the  patient  is  one  of
the  most  remarkable  occurrences  of  mesmerism.  It  frequently  does
not  exist.  It  did  not  occur  in  the  Okeys.  Any  one  might  touch
them ;  any  one  woke  them,  whoever  had  sent  them  to  sleep.  But
in  some  instances,  the  contact  of  any  other  person  than  the  mes¬
meriser,  nay,  the  proximity  of  any  person,  produces  the  greatest
distress,  and  sometimes  the  most  violent  disturbance.

“They  generally  shudder  and  complain  of  cold.  Hundreds  of
persons  have  seen  my  patient  Rosina.  Her  case  so  beautiful  in  many
points,  so  exquisitely  beautiful  while  she  sings  in  her  sleep  or  con¬
verses  facetiously,  is  overpoweringly  confirmatory  of  the  truth  of
Gall’s  location  of  certain  organs  of  the  brain,  by  the  excitement  on
only  one  side  or  the  other  of  the  brain,  by  merely  pointing  the  finger
to  them,  behind  her  back,  her  eyes  being  closed  or  bandaged  and  the
operator  and  all  others  looking  away,  so  that  it  is  not  known  to  him
or  others  where  he  is  pointing  till  the  cerebral  effects  come,  or  a
person  pointing  where  he  pleases,  without  knowing  why  or  to  what
he  is  pointing,  and  every  one  looking  the  other  way  till  the  effects
come.  She  also  becomes  miserable  if  her  mesmeriser  leaves  her,  and
generally  if  others  stand  very  near  her,  and  especially  if  they  touch
her;  though  her  eyes  be  shut,  she  immediately  says  that  something
cold,  a  wet  towel,  for  example,  is  put  in  her  hand,  if  another  than
the  mesmeriser  touches  her.  If  her  shut  eyes  are  blindfolded,  and
the  mesmeriser  and  a  score  of  others  touch  her  hand  with  the  point
of  their  finger,  she  distinguishes  his  finger  and  grasps  it,  but  repels
the  fingers  of  another.  Not  being  aware  of  this  relation,  I  at  first
sometimes  left  her  asleep,  and  the  effect  was  always  violent  fits.  I
mesmerised  a  young  gentleman,  about  her  age — about  seventeen
years  old,  who,  though  his  eyes  were  shut  and  his  sleep  was  sound,
instantly  distinguished  the  point  of  another  person’s  finger,  on  the
back  of  his  neck,  from  my  own,  though  every  precaution  was  taken
so  as  to  render  it  absolutely  impossible  for  him  to  learn, — impossible


on  the  Disturbances  of  Mesmeric  Sleep-waking.  235

for  him  by  ordinary  means  of  sense  to  know,  who  was  touching  him.
He  allowed  others  to  be  near  him,  but  entreated  me  not  to  leave  him,
and  remained  close  at  my  side,  following  and  pulling  me  back  if  I
attempted  to  go  away.  He  was  not  agitated  by  the  contact  of  others,
but  annoyed  and  distressed ;  and  said,  how  cold  that  is.  I  have
another  young  patient  who  will  not  allow  any  other,  not  those  whom
she  most  affectionately  loves,  to  be  within  two  yards  of  her  in  the
mesmeric  state.  The  most  noiseless  approach  of  others  towards  her
makes  her  shudder  from  head  to  foot,  and  she  cries  out,  *  cold,  cold,
cruel,  cruel.’  Even  if  two  persons  are  at  the  distance  at  which  she
will  bear  one  without  noticing  it,  she  begins  to  shiver.  Though  she
will  bear  one  or  more  at  a  certain  distance  at  first,  it  often  happens
that  their  disagreeable  influence  is  gradually  felt ;  so  that  after  a  time,
she  says,  *  I  feel  cold  and  then  complains  more  and  more,  till  it  is
absolutely  necessary  for  the  parties  to  retire  further.

“  I  have  another  case,  in  which  the  patient  is  very  rigid,  and  the
eves  and  mouth  firmly  closed.  Wherever  I  am  she  bends  very  slowly
(this  is  all  she  can  do,  for  she  cannot  move  a  foot)  in  that  direction ;
and  she  slowly  recedes  as  invariably  from  the  person,  nay,  from  the
hand,  of  any  one  else.  What  her  sensations  are  I  have  no  means  of
knowing,  from  the  locked  state  of  her  jaw,  her  complete  deafness
and  rigidity  in  the  mesmeric  state,  and  her  total  oblivion  afterwards
of  all  that  has  passed.

“  I  have  known  it  impossible  for  any  one  but  the  mesmeriser  to
awake  the  patient ;  and  I  have  known  it  impossible  for  any  one  but
the  habitual  mesmeriser  to  mesmerise  him.

“  Mr.  Chandler  adopted  the  proper  course.  He  went  himself  to
his  patient,  mesmerised  him  afresh,  and  then  awoke  him.  It  will
be  remembered  that  the  father  once  awoke  him  without  difficulty  or
inconvenience ;  but  then  Mr.  Chandler  was  present,  and  that  no  doubt
preserved  his  tranquillity.  One  of  my  patients,  before  the  period  of
spontaneous  waking  has  nearly  arrived,  cannot  allow  me  to  leave  her
without  distress,  and  goes  into  fits  if  I  do  so  for  any  time,  and  on
my  return  to  her  is  not  calmed  for  a  long  while ;  but  is  calmed  the
sooner  by  my  touching  her  kindly,  or  making  passes  so  as  to  shew
she  is  again  the  object  of  my  attention.  Mr.  Chandler,  by  mesmer¬
ising  him,  calmed  him  I  have  no  doubt  much  sooner  than  if  he  had
merely  remained  with  him  ;  though  taking  his  hand  might  possibly
have  had  the  same  result,  because  he  never,  on  other  occasions  when
his  absence  had  not  caused  the  disturbance,  found  mesmerism  of
any  avail  in  the  fit.”

In  Yol.  II.,  p.  51,  I  said  of  Miss  Critchly : —

“  She  could  distinguish  the  mesmeriser  from  others  :  she  moved
towards  him,  and  withdrew  from  the  proximity  of  others.”

“  The  sensation  given  her  by  the  proximity,  without  contact,  of
the  mesmeriser  and  of  others,  was  independent  of  all  the  common
forms  of  sensibility.  It  took  place  when  her  eyes  were  carefully
covered,  and  the  proximity  was  behind  her,  as  well  as  when  the
parties  were  before  her  and  her  eyes  left  to  themselves.  Patients,
in  whom  the  phenomena  takes  place  and  who  can  talk,  describe  the


236


Note  by  Dr.  Elliot  son,


sensation  from  the  mesmeriser  as  exceedingly  pleasant,  and  that
from  others  as  exceedingly  unpleasant.  Generally  the  former  is  de¬
scribed  as  warm,  and  the  latter  as  cold.  One  of  my  patients,  how¬
ever,  describes  the  sensation  from  others  than  the  mesmeriser  as  a
sort  of  roughness  :  “  very  disagreeable, — she  can  hardly  tell  what :
not  cold,  but  a  sort  of  roughness.”  The  distress  occasioned  by  the
contact  of  others,  in  cases  where  this  attraction  and  repulsion  happen,
is  often  extreme :  and,  for  want  of  ascertaining  whether  the  attrac¬
tion  and  repulsion  exists,  great  temporary  disturbance,  convulsions
and  even  delirium,  have  often  been  produced  by  strangers  touching
the  patient.”

“  It  sometimes  happens  that  the  patient,  though  capable  of  being
mesmerised  by  another,  may  not  feel  comfortable  on  going  into  the
mesmeric  state  at  finding  his  original  mesmeriser  not  present  with
him  :  and  the  same  disagreeable  results  have  ensued  from  this  cause.
In  general,  perhaps,  in  this  kind  of  cases,  the  new  mesmeriser  con¬
tents  the  patient  at  last  by  perseverance  in  the  mesmeric  process,  or
even  without  it.

“  The  youth  of  whom  I  have  just  spoken  distinguishes  not  only
the  touch  of  the  point  of  the  finger  of  the  mesmeriser  from  that  of
any  other  person,  but,  if,  while  he  is  grasping  the  hand  of  his  mes¬
meriser,  another  person  touches  not  him  but  the  mesmeriser,  he
instantly  drops  his  mesmeriser’ s  hand,  becoming  perfectly  indifferent
to  his  mesmeriser,  though  his  closed  eyes  be  effectually  covered  or
the  stranger’s  touch  be  made  behind  him.  I  only  yesterday  (March
17th)  made  decisive  experiments  of  this  kind  upon  him.  I  stood
behind  his  high  chair,  while  he  was  asleep  with  his  eyes  perfectly
closed,  and  laid  my  forefingers  carefully  and  closely  all  along  the
edge  of  his  eyelids,  so  that  ordinary  vision  was  absolutely  impos¬
sible.  Before  he  was  mesmerised  he  had  gone  up  and  taken  the
hand  of  a  patient  asleep,  who  has  an  attraction  to  me  and  an  aversion
to  strangers,  but  who  occasionally  had  no  aversion  to  some  particular
individual,  male  or  female ;  and,  instead  of  repelling  his  hand,  she
took  it.  Whether  this  was  the  reason  or  not,  I  cannot  say  :  ‘but
when  she,  being  now  restored  to  her  natural  state,  took  his  hand,
he  was  not  annoyed, — shewed  no  repulsion  to  her.  She  stood  with
three  other  ladies  and  his  brother  close  to  him  ;  and  each  in  all
varieties  of  succession  in  perfect  silence  touched  with  the  end  of  a
finger  only  the  back  of  his  hand  as  it  lay  in  his  lap.  Invariably,  in
not  less  than  thirty  trials,  when  any  of  the  others  touched  him  thus
he  withdrew  his  hand,  and,  when  she  touched  him,  he  made  no
signs  of  uneasiness,  but  kept  his  hand  perfectly  still  as  if  I  had
touched  him.  I  then  put  my  right  hand  into  his  right  hand,  and
he  grasped  it  firmly :  I  drew  up  my  hand  with  his  to  the  back  of
his  high  easy  chair,  and  continued  standing  behind  him.  His  brother
stood  at  my  side  also  behind  the  chair.  The  youth  was  sunk  low  in
the  chair,  so  that  had  his  eyes  been  open  he  could  not  by  any  possi¬
bility  have  seen  our  hands.  Whenever  I  touched  the  brother’s  right
hand  with  my  left,  the  youth  relaxed  his  grasp  of  my  right  hand  :
and  when  I  ceased  to  touch  the  brother’s  hand,  grasped  my  right


on  the  Disturbances  of  Mesmeric  Sleep-leaking.  237


hand  again.  This  was  repeated  so  often  and  with  such  variations
as  to  duration  and  succession  of  touching  and  not  touching,  that
fallacy  was  impossible.”

At  p.  213,  in  reference  to  Rosina  I  farther  stated: —

"  If  others  stood  close  to  her,  she  began  to  shudder ;  and  the
proximity  of  several  was  distressingly  cold  to  her.  All  this  was  con¬
stant  at  the  beginning  of  her  state;  but,  after  she  had  been  in  it
some  time,  her  face  generally  became  flushed,  and  she  would  allow
persons  to  be  near  her,  and  frowned  but  little,  at  last  not  at  all,  on
my  leaving  her.  She  would  bear  them  much  better  behind  her  high-
backed  chair  and  at  her  side  than  in  front.  What  was  very  striking,
a  stranger  could  draw  her  almost  as  well  as  I  could.  Tractive  passes
by  a  stranger  would  draw  her  arms  or  her  feet  up  or  sideways,  and
draw  her  head  and  whole  body  over  the  side  of  the  chair,  she  frowning
all  the  time  most  angrily  at  the  proximity  of  the  stranger  or  his
power  to  make  her  obey,  but  compelled  to  follow  his  movements.
When  1  drew  her  there  was  no  frown.  When  a  stranger  had  drawn
her  foot  outwards,  she  frowning  all  the  time  it  followed  his  tractive
movements,  she  would  retract  it  very  angrily  the  moment  he  desisted
from  drawing  it.  Any  one  could  draw  her  eyelids  open,  and  draw
her  eyes  from  side  to  side  and  up  and  down.  Nay,  a  stranger  could
draw  her  more  powerfully  than  myself,  if  his  efforts  were  on  her
right  side,  and  mine  upon  the  left ;  even  if  he  stood  at  some  distance
from  her  and  I  close  to  her.  If  he  and  I  began  drawing  at  the  same
time,  he  would  draw  her  over  the  right  side  of  the  chair,  while  I
was  attempting  to  the  utmost  to  draw  her  to  the  left.  He  would
effect  his  purpose  more  slowly  for  my  efforts  in  the  opposite  direction  ;
but  he  invariably  beat  me.  Every  phenomenon,  stiffening,  contrac¬
tion,  &c.,  was  more  ready  and  more  powerful  upon  her  right  side
than  upon  her  left ;  even  the  excitement  of  her  cerebral  organs  is
more  ready  in  the  right  half  of  the  brain.”

In  Yol.  III.,  p.  49,  I  said  in  reference  to  Miss  Abbot : —

“  Most  persons  can  be  mesmerised  and  awakened  by  others  no
less  than  by  their  ordinary  mesmeriser.  Nearly  all  my  patients  have
been  affected  by  others  as  well  as  by  myself :  but  in  the  far  greater
number  of  instances  the  process  has  required  to  be  continued  longer
by  others  before  sleep  began.  I  conceive  that  much  depends  upon
the  patient’s  feelings.  If  a  great  dislike  to  the  process  by  all  other
persons,  or  by  a  particular  person,  exists,  all  others,  or  the  particu¬
lar  person,  may  find  success  difficult  or  impossible,  with  the  patient's
knowledge  of  the  attempt.  The  patient  may  endeavour  to  overcome
this  dislike,  and  actually  wish  to  be  mesmerised  by  another  while
still  unconsciously  possessed  with  a  reluctance,  and  success  still  be
prevented.  Even  when  this  reluctance  does  not  prevent  success,  it
may  occasion  the  mesmerism  to  be  less  beneficial  than  usual  or  to
produce  discomfort  and  perhaps  great  irritation.

“I  have  known  this  reluctance  completely  removed,  and  then
others  suceeed  who  had  previously  failed  ;  and  in  the  present  instance
success  at  length  ceased  to  others,  probably  from  a  reluctance  being


238


Note  by  Dr.  Etliotson,


generated  which  had  not  before  existed.  When  her  betrothed  had
mesmerised  her  at  home,  I  presume  that  the  pleasure  caused  the
process  by  all  others  than  myself,  to  whom  she  looked  for  her  cure,
to  be  more  or  less  a  cold  contrast.  When  susceptibility  exists,  I
have  generally  been  able  to  refer  the  exclusive  or  superior  power  of
one  person  to  produce  the  effect  to  a  disinclination,  conscious  or  un¬
conscious,  of  the  patient  to  be  mesmerised  by  another.  The  suscep¬
tibility  of  the  party  and  the  power  of  his  feelings  may  be  in  various
relative  proportions  ;  so  that  a  great  susceptibility  may  prevent  a
great  reluctance  from  hindering  the  effect,  and  a  small  susceptibility
cause  a  slight  reluctance  to  prevent  it.  Sometimes  insensibility  or
severe  attacks  of  convulsions  have  ensued  upon  a  new  mesmeriser
operating:  or  upon  another  person  touching  the  patient,  or  attempting
to  make  passes,  or  otherwise  interfere,  in  the  mesmeric  state.  I  sus¬
pect  that  all  this  is  in  general  ascribable  to  the  feelings  :  the  person
being  annoyed  in  the  mesmeric  state  at  finding  himself  with  another
than  his  habitual  mesmeriser.  He  may  have  willingly  consented  to
be  mesmerised  by  the  stranger,  but  felt  annoyed  in  the  mesmeric
state  :  for  in  it  many  feelings  are  often  more  acute  than  in  the  natural
state,  and  the  power  of  restraining  them  much  lessened.  I  have
heard  of  such  results  in  M.  Dupotet’s  patient  Sophy,  an  excellent
girl  at  Tottenham,  cured  by  mesmerism  of  severe  fits,  when  she
once  mesmerised  herself,  which  her  great  susceptibility  rendered
possible.  I  imagine  the  mischief  arose  from  her  finding  herself  alone
on  passing  into  the  sleep-waking  state.

“  There  may  be  an  occult  unsuitableness  of  one  person  to  mes¬
merise  another.  It  has  sometimes  happened  that  a  particular  person
has  always  failed,  and  another  has  succeeded,  perhaps  the  first  time,
and  the  first  has  succeeded  ever  afterwards.”

So  strong  was  the  mesmeric  attachment  in  one  of  my
patients  that  she

“Was  displeased,  when  even  apparently  in  a  very  deep  sleep,  if
I  spoke  to  others ;  appeared  to  hear  nothing  said  by  others,  though
what  was  said  might  be  calculated  to  render  her  unable  to  restrain
herself  from  showing  that  she  heard  it ;  appeared  not  to  hear  any
noise,  however  loud,  sudden,  or  disagreeable,  made  by  others,  unless
she  mistook  it  for  a  noise  made  by  me ;  would  allow  nobody  but
myself  to  be  at  a  short  distance  from  her,  nor  more  than  two,  some¬
times  not  more  than  one,  besides  myself,  to  be  in  the  room ;  nor
allow  any  other  animal,  even  a  bird,  to  be  near  her  ;  nor  allow  me
to  mention  any  other  person,  nor  even  a  living  brute.  She  was  angry
if  I  mentioned  her  father  or  sister,  both  whom  she  dearly  loved  when
awake ;  if  I  mentioned  a  dog,  bird,  fish,  a  flv,  or  even  the  mites  of
cheese,  as  alive  :  but  if  I  spoke  of  birds  or  fish  as  dishes,  and  there¬
fore  no  longer  alive,  she  experienced  no  annoyance.  Jealousy  could
not  be  carried  to  a  higher  pitch.  The  usual  happiness  of  the  mes¬
meric  state  frequently  creates  a  disinclination  to  be  awakened ;  but,
when  this  affection  to  the  mesmeriser  occurs,  the  disinclination  is
much  heightened,  and  the  patient  often  entreats  you  not  to  wake  him.”


on  the  Disturbances  of  Mesmeric  Sleep-waking .  239


“  If  there  is  any  dislike  to  an  individual  in  the  waking  state  when
the  mesmeric  attachment  to  the  mesmeriser  occurs,  he  is  far  more
repulsive  than  others  in  the  mesmeric  state,  and  gives  a  far  greater
sensation  of  coldness.  But  the  dearest  friends  of  the  waking  state
become  repulsive.  An  amusing  circumstance  lately  occurred.  The
patient  whose  remarkable  case  I  related  in  No.  V.,  p.  42,  has  since
married,  and  after  a  few  weeks  was  greatly  indisposed  and  not  relieved
by  the  ordinary  means.  Her  medical  attendant  begged  me  to  see
her,  and  consult  on  the  propriety  of  mesmerism.  I  held  my  fingers
towards  her  eyes,  and  for  an  instant  only,  and  instantly,  as  by  magic,
though  she  had  not  been  mesmerised  for  the  greater  part  of  a  year,
her  eyelids  were  fixed,  sleep  and  rigidity  began  and,  without  my
doing  any  more,  pervaded  her,  and  in  a  few  minutes  her  whole  frame
was  rigid  and  buried  in  deep  sleep.  I  advised  that  her  widowed
sister  should  thus  mesmerise  her  daily.  This  was  done,  though  the
pointing  required  to  be  continued  a  short  time  by  the  sister  to  pro¬
duce  effect.  This  patient  always  was  attached  to  her  mesmeriser
and  withdrew  from  others  ;  but  was  contented  to  be  left  alone.  Her
sister  left  her ;  and  soon  her  husband  went  to  bed.  She  moved  from
him,  and,  on  his  toe  happening  to  touch  her  foot,  she  instantly  moved
from  him  still  more,  so  that  he  could  not  help  feeling  hurt ;  her
sister  ran  up  stairs,  and,  between  her  repulsion  from  her  husband
and  her  attraction  towards  her  sister,  she  moved  nearly  over  the  side
of  the  bed  upon  the  floor  before  her  sister  could  awake  her.  On  her
being  awakened,  the  attraction  to  the  sister  and  repulsion  from  her
husband  were  at  an  end,  and  he  was  happy  again.”

The  effects  of  cross-mesmerism  may  sometimes  be  pre¬
vented.  At  p.  357,  I  stated,  in  regard  to  Miss  Collins,  that : —

“  Fearing,  therefore,  that  I  should  not  cure  her  soon  if  she  slept
no  longer  than  I  could  remain  with  her,  I  endeavoured  to  overcome
this  inordinate  attachment  to  her  mesmeriser,  by  representing  to  her,
within  the  first  two  or  three  days,  the  disadvantage  of  her  not  allow¬
ing  me  to  leave  her  in  the  mesmeric  state,  and  by  assuring  her  that
she  could  overcome  it.  She  having  excellent  sense  and  feeling,  as
well  as  strong  resolution,  presently  overcame  it,  and  allowed  me  to
leave  both  the  room  and  the  house  for  any  length  of  time,  though
she  was  always  delighted  at  my  return.  I  should  recommend  all
mesmerisers  to  look  to  this  point  at  once  in  every  case :  for,  if  the
attachment  is  not  governed  early,  it  may  become  irresistible,  and
then  the  patient  may  have  far  less  chance  of  an  early  cure  or  a  cure
at  all ;  or  the  mesmeriser,  if  he  consents  to  persevere  with  the  case,
may  be  compelled  to  most  serious  sacrifices  of  time.  In  some  patients
it  may  be  irresistible  from  the  first ;  but  I  am  persuaded  that  where
there  is  good  sense,  principle,  and  resolution,  it  may  often  he  gov¬
erned,  especially  if  taken  in  hand  early.  I  have  observed  in  the
two  wonderful  cases  of  general  rigidity,  with  perfect  closure  of  the
eyes  and  deafness,  in  which  the  patients  incline  anxiously  to  the
mesmeriser  and  recede  from  others,  distinguishing  them  by  some
occult  sense,  that  if  I  go  out  of  the  room  and  shut  the  door,  or


240


Note  by  Dr.  Elliotson,


remain  in  the  room  and  throw  something  over  them  so  as  to  intercept

any  influence,  they  become  contented  and  remain  unmoved  in  their

chair.  I  mentioned  the  strongest  example  of  mesmeric  attachment

with  which  I  am  acquainted  ;  and,  in  that  young  lady,  the  sincerity

of  the  regard  remains  the  same,  but  the  intensity  has  so  lessened

that  she  will  allow  me  to  move  a  yard  or  two  from  her  for  a  short

time,  to  speak  of  others  and  even  to  others,  and  some  of  her  dearest

relatives  to  touch  her  :  yet,  and  notwithstanding  her  most  earnest

desire  to  be  able  to  allow  of  mv  absence  in  her  mesmeric  state,  that

«/

she  may  obtain  a  cure,  of  which  there  seems  no  chance  while  she
cannot  support  my  absence  in  her  sleep-waking, — and  I  cannot  devote
more  than  half  an  hour  daily  to  her, — she  cannot  permit  me  to  leave
her  asleep.  In  another  instance  there  was  no  mesmeric  attachment
to  the  mesmeriser  for  many  months ;  and  then  it  became  irresistible,
till  a  serious  indisposition,  in  which  she  feared  she  should  die,  took
place,  when  she  was  able  to  govern  it  greatly  and  allow  the  contact
of  her  relatives.

“  In  the  mesmeric  state,  induced  by  her  father,  Miss  C.  informed
him  that,  when  hypnotized,  she  ‘felt  no  regard  for  an  individual
merely  because  he  was  the  hypnotizer :  and  cared  not  who  went  near
her and  on  his  particularly  inquiring  whether  she  cared  about  any
other  person  approaching  her  when  mesmerised,  replied  very  empha¬
tically,  ‘  Indeed  I  do  care.’

“  As  usual  when  there  is  attraction  to  the  mesmeriser  and  re¬
pulsion  of  others,  the  sensation  given  by  my  hand  or  breath  was
agreeable,  and  by  the  hand  or  breath  of  others  disagreeable.

“  My  hand  was  ‘  very  smooth  and  nice,’>  though  really  my  palm
is  by  hereditary  organization  rough ;  and,  however  cold  it  might  in
reality  be,  it  was  ‘  warm  or  ‘  not  cold?  Her  aunt,  to  whom  she
is  deservedly  much  attached,  she  could  not  bear  to  touch  her,  and
found  ‘rough  and  cold.’  One  patient  with  a  cancer  was,  though
in  mesmeric  sleep,  ever  ‘  rough/  Dr.  Engledue,  whom  she  likes
very  much,  and  whom  she  could  hear  when  she  heard  no  one  else
but  myself,  and  who  could  at  length  mesmerise  her  as  readily  as  I
myself,  was  ‘rough/  A  youth,  in  both  his  ordinary  and  sleep¬
waking  state ,  and  his  mother,  wrere  ‘  cold  and  rough.’  In  short
she  said  they  felt  all  ‘  very  nasty.’  The  touch  of  one  female  patient
in  sleep-waking  was  ‘  very  nice.’  This  patient  has  the  peculiarity
of  dropping  senseless  and  powerless  if  in  her  mesmeric  state  she
mesmerises  another,  or  remains  a  short  time  in  contact  with  a  mes¬
merised  person  or  mesmerised  gold,  and  of  remaining  long  in  this
condition,  coming  to  with  great  distress,  and  remaining  very  weak
and  melancholy,  and  without  appetite,  for  many  hours  or  a  couple
of  days.  By  her  holding  Miss.  C/s  hand  this  happened,  and  then
the  feeling  which  she  gave  was  no  longer  ‘  very  nice,’  but  ‘  very  un¬
pleasant.’

“  Generally  sleep-waking  patients  like  the  touch  of  all  others
in  the  same  state,  and  some  passionately  ;  others  dislike  it,  but  less
than  if  the  party  was  in  his  ordinary  state.

“ My  breath  upon  her  hand  was  agreeable,  but  that  of  her  aunt
and  Dr.  Engledue  was  rough  and  cold.


on  the  Disturbances  of  Mesmeric  Sleep-waking .  241

“  If  an  individual  is  disliked,  the  unpleasant  sensation  is  much
greater.

“  She  had  no  occult  power  of  distinguishing  the  touch  or  breath
of  myself  from  those  of  others  ;  nor  of  persons  in  the  mesmeric  state
from  those  of  persons  who  were  in  their  ordinary  state,  as  certain
patients  have.

“  The  sensation  was  probably  the  result  of  mesmeric  dislike  of
all  others  in  contact  but  myself.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  reason  of
the  touch  of  the  patient  with  the  cancer  being  disagreeable,  was  her
knowledge  of  the  disease ;  and  of  that  of  the  youth,  her  sense  of
propriety  and  her  command  over  herself,  which  were  both  very
strong,  and  prevented  her  from  ever  once  exhibiting  those  childish
marks  of  affection  which  are  sometimes  seen  in  mesmeric  patients.”

In  Yol.  IV.,  Mr.  TI.  S.  Thompson  relates  some  very  in¬
teresting  facts.  He  cured  a  young  lady  of  severe  neuralgia
of  the  leg  after  the  failure  aud  worse  than  failure  of  a  great
London  Surgeon-Baronet.

“  Her  father  asked  me  if  I  thought  mesmerism  could  at  all  relieve
her.  I  proposed  a  trial.  She  was  suffering  at  the  time  acutely  from
spasm.  There  were  seven  or  eight  persons  in  the  room,  and  amongst
them  a  gentleman  (a  cousin)  who  was  sceptical  as  to  mesmerism.  I
made  passes  over  the  foot  and  down  the  leg  for  about  ten  minutes,
when  she  declared  that  she  neither  felt  pain  nor  ache.  The  foot
seemed  attracted  by  my  hand,  and  the  gentleman  whom  I  have  men¬
tioned  wished  to  try  whether  he  could  produce  a  similar  effect.  He
tried  and  succeeded  :  but  in  a  few  minutes  the  most  violent  convul¬
sive  action  took  place  in  the  limbs,  nor  could  I  by  any  effort  allay
it  for  a  considerable  time,  nor  before  all  the  parties  who  were  stand¬
ing  round  her  had  removed  to  some  distance.”

“  Subsequently,”

Mr.  T.  continues,

“  I  found  that  when  I  had  continued  the  passes  long  enough  to
overcome  the  convulsive  action  and  induce  sleep,  the  patient  became
so  highly  sensitive  that  the  approach  of  almost  every  one  produced
unpleasant  sensations  in  her;  and  even  some  hours  afterwards,  if
she  sat  near  any  persons,  or  was  touched  by  them,  or  by  any  animal ,
very  unpleasant  involuntary  twitchings  were  the  result.  Again,  I
have  occasionally  found  if  she  had  been  walking  arm  in  arm  with  any
person  previously  to  my  mesmerising  her,  that,  as  soon  as  I  com¬
menced,  the  same  convulsive  action  would  occur;  and  also  that  she
has  been  differently  affected  by  my  mesmerising  different  persons
previously  to  mesmerising  her.  At  one  time  when  the  pain  was  ob¬
stinate,  and  I  was  in  the  constant  and  daily  practice  of  mesmerising
her,  I  had  also  two  gentlemen  patients,  both  suffering  from  asthma ;
they  each  took  me  from  a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  twenty  minutes  to
mesmerise,  and  I  invariably  found  that  if  I  mesmerised  her  imme¬
diately  after  one  gentleman,  she  was  quiet  and  composed,  and  seemed
very  comfortable ;  but  if  after  the  other,  she  always  expressed  her-


Note  by  Dr.  Et/iotson,


0  19

<W  T.V

self  as  feeling  cold  and  uncomfortable,  and  the  involuntary  action
was  produced.  I  have  tried  this  experiment  repeatedly  with  the
same  result,  and  there  has  been  a  similar  though  generally  a  less
effect  produced,  when  even  some  hours  had  elapsed  from  my  mes¬
merising  either  of  these  gentlemen.  I  was  not  at  all  aware  of  any
different  or  peculiar  sensation  from  either  of  them  myself.”

At  p.  388  is  detailed  a  case  of  violent  phrensy  in  a  lad
mesmerised  into  sleep-waking  at  Bridgwater  by  another,  and
then  tickled  by  his  brothers  and  sisters  and  variously  irritated
by  them  and  his  mesmeriser  to  awake  him,  wThile  the  organ
of  Self-esteem  was  in  a  state  of  high  excitement  from  the  ap¬
plication  of  the  fingers.

At  p.  401,  is  another  which  happened  at  Plymouth  from
the  flurry  of  the  operator  and  interference  of  the  company  be¬
cause  the  patient  did  not  awake  immediately  that  this  was
desired.  The  poor  girl  remained  eighteen  months  in  a  deplor¬
able  state  from  the  suitable  mesmeric  treatment  being  for¬
bidden  by  a  sadly  ignorant  physician  opposed  to  mesmerism.

At  p.  404  a  third  case  is  given  in  which  a  physician  of
St.  Thomas’s  Hospital  would  approach,  aye  and  accompanied
by  two  colleagues,  a  young  lady  in  sleep-waking,  who  before¬
hand  had  shrunk  from  the  interview  with  even  him  alone,
and  said  it  would  do  her  harm.

In  Yol.  V.,  p.  23,  is  the  much  talked  of  case  of  James
Cook,  of  Deptford,  who  was  unexpectedly  thrown,  while  stand¬
ing,  into  sleep-waking  by  a  novice,  and  became  furious  and
delirious  on  the  approach  of  a  third  person,  who  took  hold  of
him  while  the  operator,  frightened  at  the  sleep  he  had  pro¬
duced,  went  for  a  chair.  He  might  have  been  soothed  in  a
few  minutes  if  all  but  his  mesmeriser  had  left  him,  and  the
latter  had  taken  his  hand  and  sat  quietly  at  his  side.  But
every  thing  calculated  to  make  him  furious  *"as  done ;  for
every  person  went  to  him  and  made  some  foolish  effort  to
awake  him,  and  thus  the  disturbance  was  aggravated,  and  he
could  not  be  awakened  at  all :  and  a  report  of  the  matter
appeared  in  The  Times,  with  a  letter  completely  misrepresent¬
ing  the  affair,  and,  after  the  lad  had  spontaneously  awakened,
and  information  of  this  was  transmitted  by  the  operator,  to¬
gether  with  a  correct  account  of  the  whole,  The  Times  refused
to  insert  the  communication,  and  allowed  the  public  to  sup¬
pose  that  the  boy  never  woke  again.*  This  single  circum¬
stance  of  misconduct  in  The  Times  it  is  to  which  a  very

*  Mr.  Smith,  the  operator,  says  (p.  28),  “  Not  only  the  editor  of  The  Times,
but  the  editor  of  the  Examiner,  treated  my  communications  in  the  most  con¬
temptuous  manner — never  noticed  them  :  they  published  untruth,  and  denied  me
an  opportunity  of  replying.  So  much  for  the  liberty  of  the  press.” — Zoist.


on  the  Disturbances  of  Mesmeric  Sleep -waking.  243

extended  belief  in  this  country  is  owing,  that  persons  some¬
times  never  awake  again  from  the  mesmeric  state ;  and  which
has  prevented  thousands  from  being  mesmerised  who  might
have  been  cured  or  benefitted  beyond  measure.  We  are  all
daily  tormented  by  persons,  to  whom  mesmerism  is  recom¬
mended,  objecting  ignorantly  that  they  should  never  wake
again,  and  alleging  that  they  read  such  a  case  in  the  papers.

Disturbances  of  this  kind  are  produced  not  merely  by
cross-mesmerism,  that  is  bv  the  influence  of  others  than
the  mesmeriser,  but  by  any  circumstance  calculated  to  annoy
the  patient  or  even  to  disturb  his  system,  mesmerically  or
not,  independently  of  his  feelings.  Cross-mesmerism  is  the
production  of  this  disturbance  by  the  influence  of  others,  and
is  but  a  variety  of  a  general  affection,  or  rather  one  mode
of  the  production  of  a  general  affection  :  and,  even  when  the
state  is  thus  produced  by  others,  it  may  not  have  resulted
from  any  untoward  mesmeric  influence,  but  from  mere  an¬
noyance  by  them.  Fright  from  a  sudden  noise ;  vexation ;
grief,  &c.,  felt  even  previously  to  the  mesmeric  state  and
continuing  during  it ;  pain  and  other  indisposition ;  too  many
mesmeric  experiments  upon  distinct  cerebral  organs,  at  least
certain  organs,  or  too  much  mesmerism  of  any  kind;  too
many  experiments  with  mesmerised  water,  even  applied  ex¬
ternally ;  or  with  metals  (see  Yol.  III.,  p.  473);  even  the
least  contact  of  certain  metals  or  crystals,  &c.,  in  certain  pa¬
tients,  at  least  at  certain  times,  may  cause  delirium  and  vio¬
lence,  or  fatuity,  and  at  the  same  time  difficulty  in  restoring
the  patient  into  his  natural  waking  condition  (see  above,  pp.
233-43).  He  may  open  his  eyes,  permanently  or  occasion¬
ally,  without  any  attempt  at  waking  him  ;  and  may  sponta¬
neously  become  apparently  quite  awake  but  wild.  It  may  be
impossible  for  a  time  to  wake  him  at  all;  or  to  wake  him
into  any  other  than  this  condition.  Even  if  we  succeed,  he
may  relapse  again ;  and  this  repeatedly.

When  the  disturbance  arises  from  other  persons,  the  mode
of  operation  may  be  perfectly  identical  with  the  operation  of
noise,  pain,  &c.  The  patient  may  feel  comfortable  with  the
mesmeriser  and  uncomfortable  with  others,  or  he  may  have
so  strong  a  mesmeric  attachment  to  the  mesmeriser  as  to  hate
all  others,*  and  be  agonized  by  their  proximity  (see  above,
pp.  234-5)  ;  and  then  the  effects  may  occur  even  from  jealousy
(see  above,  p.  238),  as  shewn  by  their  production  from  the
mesmeriser  talking  much  to  others :  sometimes,  the  prox-

*  I  imagine  that  the  case  is  precisely  the  same  where  patients  cannot  be  awak¬
ened  or  sent  to  sleep  by  certain  persons  or  by  any  one  but  the  habitual  mesmeriser.


244


Note  by  Dr.  Elliotson,


imitv  of  no  one,  but  the  temporary  absence  of  the  mesmeriser
is  sufficient  to  do  harm  (see  above,  p.  234) ;  sometimes  the  ill
effect  of  some  others  is  not  from  exclusive  attachment  to  the
mesmeriser,  but  from  their  being  only  disliked  in  the  waking
state.  The  ill  effect  is  generally  attended  by  coldness  (see
above,  pp.  234,  240).  Sometimes,  though  I  believe  less  fre¬
quently,  there  may  be  an  occult  unfavourable  influence  ex¬
erted  by  another  (see  above,  p.  238) ;  because  certain  patients
feel  very  uncomfortable  when  certain  persons  apparently  not
disliked  are  attempting  to  mesmerise  them.  I  think,  how¬
ever,  that  there  is  more  usually  dislike  in  even  these  latter
cases  than  occult  difference  of  mesmeric  influence  (see  above,
p.  50).

It  may  be  difficult  to  determine  this  point  in  different
cases.  The  share  that  mere  feeling  has  in  the  matter  is  shewn
by  a  patient  ceasing  to  suffer  from  another  when  he  makes
efforts  to  subdue  the  unpleasant  effect,  or  the  other  parties
strive  to  be  kind  and  remove  all  dislike*  (see  above,  pp.
237-9).  I  have  a  patient,  an  excellent  young  Jewess,  who
laboured  under  sleeplessness,  pains  of  the  head  and  side,  and
of  one  arm  which  was  also  sometimes  powerless ;  frequent
long  attacks  of  nervous  diarrhoea — a  complaint  peculiarly  cha¬
racterized,  but,  as  far  I  know,  not  recognized  by  the  pro¬
fession  ;  debility,  &c.  For  two  years  I  did  her  but  little  good,
and  proposed  mesmerism,  from  the  idea  of  which  she  shrunk
with  terror.  I  made  a  pass  one  day,  and  she  instantly  went
off  for  a  short  time,  but  apparently  in  great  distress,  and  she
w'as  ill  for  days  afterwards.  I  repeated  the  attempt  when  I
saw  her  again,  and  with  the  same  result.  Yet  she  had  no
dislike  to  me  :  and  I  believe  the  effect  was  from  fear.  Her
sister,  who  was  out  of  health,  mesmerised  her  at  my  request,
and  succeeded  and  did  her  great  good.  A  lady  made  a  pass
to  her  and  with  the  same  effect  as  myself,  so  that  she  was  ill
for  days.  At  length  her  sister  did  her  no  good  :  and  I  tried
again  and  with  no  ill  effect ;  but  I  did  her  great  good.  My
mesmerism  is  now  the  only  one  which  agrees  with  her,  and  is
both  very  powerful  and  renders  her  the  greatest  benefit ;
though  the  distance  at  which  she  lives  prevents  her  coming
to  me  except  at  intervals,  or  she  would  have  been  cured  long
ago.  The  presence  of  others  in  the  room  while  she  is  in
sleep-waking,  makes  her  feel  cold  and  very  faint,  and  fall
into  a  stupor  from  which  I  cannot  rouse  her  while  they

*  The  incident  mentioned  above,  p.  236,  bears  upon  this.  A  youth  who
withdrew  from  the  touch  of  all  but  me,  his  mesmeriser,  allowed  a  person  to  take
his  hand,  with  whom  just  before  I  had  sent  him  into  sleep -waking  he  had  shaken
hands.


on  the  Disturbances  of  Mesmeric  Sleep-waking.  245

remain,  as  the  effects  increase  till  they  retire.  In  her  natural
state,  nothing  of  this  kind  occurs;  nor  if  the  others  in  the  -
room  are  in  the  mesmeric  state,  whoever  they  may  be.  And
it  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  many  patients  have  even  an  at-'
traction  to  others,  whoever  they  may  be,  when  they  are  in
the  mesmeric  state :  will  sometimes  go  up  to  them  and  sit  at
their  sides,  be  they  men  or  women,  and  tell  by  some  unknown
sensation  that  they  are  in  the  mesmeric  state,  and  manifest,  by
the  degree  in  which  they  preserve  contact  with  their  hands,
the  precise  intensity  of  their  mesmeric  state.  I  covered  her
head  with  thick  cloths  and  brought  her  hand  in  contact  with
the  hands  of  a  series  of  persons,  some  not  mesmerised,  some  in
full  sleep-waking,  some  slightly  affected,  and  let  her  take  the
hand  of  a  person  while  I  was  mesmerising  him  and  was  pro¬
ducing  no  effect,  a  slight,  or  a  strong,  effect :  and  she  has  told
the  condition  and  its  degree  to  a  nicety,  and  always.  I  have
never  once  known  her  wrong.  Her  sensation  is  as  if  an  ad¬
hesive  substance  was  upon  the  patient’s  hand  :  and  she  inva¬
riably  says  there  is  much,  or  little  or  no,  “  sticky  stuff.”

In  Yol.  II.,  p.  217,  I  remarked  that —

“  If  her  hand  is  brought  upon  the  hand  of  any  one  who  is  in  the
mesmeric  state,  it  invariably  has  a  tendency  to  adhere  to  this,  and
in  exact  proportion  to  the  intensity  of  the  other’s  mesmeric  state ;  if
the  state  is  deep,  I  cannot  tear  her  hand  away  without  the  greatest
difficulty,  and  she  fancies  that  some  strong  adhesive  matter  binds  her
to  the  other,  and  the  sensation  to  her  is  agreeable  in  exact  proportion
to  the  intensity  of  the  adhesion.  Even  before  persons  are  perfectly
sent  off  she  feels  this  sensation  and  this  adhesive  propensity,  and  for
some  time  after  they  are  awake.”  “  In  all  the  experiments  of  this
kind  vision  was  absolutely  impossible.”

By  some  occult  sensibility  they  likewise  may  recognize
their  mesmeriser.  See  above,  p.  234,  and  pp.  234,  236.  This
occult  sensibility  is  astounding ;  for  the  patient  referred  to  at
p.  236,

“  In  his  silent  sleep,  with  his  eyes  perfectly  closed,  and  any
thickness  of  cloth  thrown  over  his  head  and  chest  and  drawn  close
round  him,  is  instantly  distressed  beyond  measure  by  a  piece  of
gold  placed  upon  the  back  of  his  hand  after  lying  in  the  hand  of
another  person,  but  not  at  all  if  it  has  been  taken  from  my  hand.
Any  one  with  gloves  on  makes  the  experiment,  placing  the  sovereign
first  on  my  hand  or  the  hand  of  another  at  pleasure,  in  every  suc¬
cession  and  with  as  many  repetitions  as  are  thought  proper.  Nay,
if  the  gold  is  taken  off  my  right  hand  and  placed  upon  his  left,  or
off  my  left  and  placed  upon  his  right,  he  is  distressed,  and  shakes
it  off,  and,  if  it  is  placed  in  his  palm,  violent  spasm  of  the  hand
occurs  ;  though  he  expresses  no  uneasiness  when  it  is  taken  from  my
YOL.  VII.  IT


246  Note  by  Dr.  Elliotson,

right  and  placed  on  his  right,  or  from  my  left  and  placed  upon  his
left.”

The  proper  way  to  remove  disturbances  from  the  absence
of  tlie  mesmeriser  or  the  proximity  of  others  is  for  all  but
the  mesmeriser  to  withdraw,  and  the  mesmeriser  to  approach
the  patient,  take  his  hand,  and  continue  to  hold  it  and  soothe
him  by  every  mark  of  kindness.  If  attempts  to  mesmerise
do  not  irritate,  they  may  be  made :  but  frequently  whether
the  state  be  marked  by  delirium,  violent  or  not  or  merry,  or
by  fatuity  or  stupor,  the  patient  is  for  a  time  apparently  quite
insusceptible  of  true  mesmeric  influence.  From  time  to  time
attempts  to  mesmerise  him  may  be  made  by  his  mesmeriser.
If  sleep  is  induced,  and  maintained  by  the  mesmeriser’s  con¬
tact  or  continued  gazing,  passing,  &c.,  the  patient  may  wake
up  in  his  natural  state  :  but  frequently  relapses  occur  for  a
time.  The  deeper  the  sleep  the  better  :  and  any  means  known
to  deepen  it  in  the  particular  patient  should  be  employed.  I
have  seen  some  of  these  mishaps,  and  they  have  all  been  soon
removed,  though  I  can  conceive  that  if  a  person  is  strongly
predisposed  to  insanity,  or  idiotcy,  or  fits,  terror  thus  induced
may  give  rise  to  any  of  them  more  or  less  permanently,  just
as  terror  from  other  causes  is  known  to  produce  them.  There
is  occasionally  so  much  depression,  paleness,  faintness,  and
feebleness  of  pulse  in  these  cases,  that,  during  the  occurrence
and  afterwards,  wine  is  required  and  borne  in  quantities  which
could  not  be  borne  at  other  times.  It  in  general  aggravates
the  symptoms  if  another  person  attempt  to  assist,  unless  he
has  mesmerised  the  patient  on  other  occasions,  or  is  liked  by
the  patient  in  the  natural  state :  and  it  often  aggravates  even
then.  Decidedly  nothing  can  be  worse  in  a  case  of  mesmeric
dislike  than  for  others  to  go  up  to  the  patient  and  try  to  soothe
him  :  and  yet  all  generally  surround  the  patient  and  try  all
sorts  of  means;  and  probably  a  medical  man,  ignorant  of  mes¬
merism,  proposes  bleeding,  cupping,  purging,  &c.,  when  the
mesmeriser  has  only  to  keep  all  at  a  distance,  take  the  pa¬
tient’s  hand,  and  above  all  to  breathe  (not  blow)  very  softly
upon  the  patient,  especially  on  his  face  and  bosom,  to  speak
kindly,  and  he  will  at  last  see  all  come  right.  Public  exhi¬
bitions  must  in  many  cases  derange  mesmeric  phenomena,
especially  if  strangers  approach  and  behave  ill.

We  may  generally  prevent  the  ill  effects  of  the  absence  of
the  mesmeriser  or  the  proximity  of  others  by  kindly  accus¬
toming  the  patient  to  both  at  the  very  beginning  ;*  and  we
ought  to  avoid  all  things  which  can  excite  whims  and  fancies


*  See  No.  XVIII.,  p.  11G.


on  the  Disturbances  of  Mesmeric  Sleep-waking.  247

in  patients,  and  therefore  say  nothing  in  their  presence  that
can  lead  to  cross-mesmerism.  So  strong  is  the  power  of  imagi¬
nation  in  sleep-waking  that  cross-mesmerism  and  endless
annoyances  may  result  in  the  majority  of  patients  from  care¬
lessness.  See  above,  p.  239

Phenomena  of  the  same  class  as  those  of  cross-mesmerism
and  dependant  upon  all  the  same  circumstances  in  different
cases  are  those  of  one  or  more  persons  only  being  able  to  mes¬
merise  an  individual,  or  one  or  more  only  being  able  to  awake
him.  And  these  difficulties  arise  so  generally  from  fancy,
that  generally  they  may  be  at  length  prevented  or  overcome.
The  young  lady,  whose  mesmeric  jealousy  was  so  extraordinary
(see  above,  p.  238),  could  be  mesmerised  by  no  one  but  myself,
and  declared  in  her  sleep-waking  that  no  other  person  would
ever  be  able,  and  that  attempts  would  be  most  injurious  to
her.  Every  attempt  did  fail  and  irritate  her.  But,  when  it
was  positively  out  of  my  power  to  mesmerise  her  any  longer,
her  sister  mesmerised  her  successfully  and  advantageously ;
and,  when  her  sister  married,  her  maid  succeeded.

To  the  same  class  belongs  the  difficulty  or  impossibility  of
sending  a  patient  off  when  others  or  certain  others  are  present
or  at  least  very  near.  This  difficulty  also  may  be  gradually
overcome  in  almost  every  instance.  The  same  equally  holds
of  the  difficulty  or  impossibility  for  others  or  certain  others
to  wake  a  patient.  When  the  person  who  produced  the  sleep¬
waking  is  absent  and  another  cannot  wake  the  patient,  a  good
plan  is  for  the  other  to  mesmerise  the  patient,  if  this  is  borne ;
and  thus  bring  him  under  his  own  influence,  and  then  attempt
to  wake  him.  I  have  recorded  some  curious  facts  of  this  kind.

“  On  the  6th  of  May,  I  could  not  wake  Miss  Collins,  so  drowsy
was  she,  and  she  answered  questions  faintly.  This  probably  arose
from  there  having  been  several  persons  all  the  morning  in  the  little
room  :  for  very  susceptible  persons  feel  the  influence  of  all  around  them.
I  have  had  several  patients  who  went  to  sleep  without  any  mesmeric
process  if  several  others  were  near  them  and  all  was  quiet :  some,  as
Rosina,  it  was  very  difficult  to  wake  if  others  were  near  them,  and
her  I  was  obliged  always  to  remove  to  a  part  of  the  room  away  from
every  body,  if  I  wished  her  to  wake  soon  after  my  experiments  had
been  made  upon  her, — and  the  more  that  were  made  the  better
Rosina  alwavs  was.  Miss  C.  had  arrived  as  usual  at  ten,  and  I  was
obliged  to  leave  her  and  her  aunt  between  one  and  two  o’clock.  Dr.
Engledue  attempted  to  wake  her  at  a  quarter  past  six,  but  she  went
into  a  modification  of  the  state  which  I  have  just  described.  She
wandered  about  with  her  eyes  open,  perfectly  lost,  and  could  not  be
roused.  This  all  arose  from  one  attempting  to  w?ake  her  who  had
not  sent  her  to  sleep ;  for  I  had  sent  her  to  sleep  in  the  morning.  I
returned  home  at  about  seven,  made  a  few  passes  before  her,  so  as

'  u  2


248


Note  by  Dr.  Elliotson,


to  send  her  to  sleep  and  bring  her  under  my  influence,  and  then
woke  her  into  her  natural  state  with  perfect  ease.  On  another  occa¬
sion  Dr.  Engledue  had  sent  her  to  sleep  by  one  pass  after  she  had
awakened  spontaneously  in  my  absence.  I  had  not  sent  her  to  sleep
in  the  morning  by  less  than  several ;  and  it  was  usual  for  a  second
sleep  to  be  induced  by  fewer  passes  than  the  first.  I  did  not  know
that  he  had  sent  her  to  sleep,  and  I  attempted  to  wake  her,  but
brought  on  the  half-waking  delirious  state,  and  had  to  send  her  to
sleep  again,  and  wake  her  again,  twice,  before  I  could  wake  her  into
the  natural  state.  When  patients  wake  imperfectly  and  in  this  de¬
rangement,  the  proper  plan  is  to  send  them  to  sleep  again,  and  then
wake  them.  Occasionally  it  is  difficult  for  a  time  to  send  them
asleep,  and  we  have  to  wait  before  the  attempt  can  be  renewed  suc¬
cessfully.  Sometimes  they  are  half  awakened  again  and  again,  and
it  is  necessary  to  send  them  to  sleep  frequently,  or  allow  them  to
sleep  a  long  while,  before  waking  measures  wake  them  into  their
natural  state.  After  this  long  sleep  of  eight  hours,  she  slept  better
at  night  than  usual : — a  common  fact,  but  very  convincing  of  the
truth  and  composing  powers  of  mesmerism.  The  diminution  of  ex¬
citability  by  the  mesmeric  sleep  appears  to  render  subsequent  natural
sleep  more  easy,  and  she  was  always  the  better  the  longer  her  mes¬
meric  sleep,  as  well  as  the  more  she  chattered.  The  same  occurrence
took  place  the  next  day  spontaneously  ;  and  in  all  probability  from
the  disturbance  it  had  produced  in  her  the  day  before.  She  passed
spontaneously  from  her  sleep  into  this  state,  and  I  had  to  make
passes  for  five  minutes  before  her  eyes  closed,  and  even  then  the
state  continued,  and  she  protested,  as  they  generally  do  in  this  con¬
dition,  that  she  was  not  asleep  ;  but  by  continuing  passes  I  soon
sent  her  into  her  ordinary  mesmeric  sleep,  and  in  two  hours  attempted
to  wake  her  and  succeeded.  In  her  mesmeric  sleep  she  remembered
all  that  had  transpired  in  the  delirious  state.  Frequently  there  is
no  remembrance  of  it.

“  On  another  occasion,  some  time  after  I  had  sent  her  to  sleep,
she  awoke  spontaneously,  and  Dr.  Engledue  sent  her  to  sleep  again,
and  she  passed  into  a  deep  coma,  from  which  neither  he  nor  I  could
wake  her.  At  five  in  the  afternoon  I  returned,  and  again  tried  in
vain,  as  I  found  he  had  been  doing.  About  six  o’clock  she  became
restless,  spoke,  said  she  wished  to  be  awakened,  told  Dr.  Engledue
that  she  had  a  headache,  which  would  be  removed  by  passes  made
over  her  head  with  both  hands,  then  breathing  on  her  eyelids  and
around  her  head,  and  then  blowing  in  her  face.  All  this  did  remove
her  headache,  but  produced  the  half-waking  delirious  state  ;  so  that
she  said  she  was  awake  and  must  go  home,  put  her  shawl  over  her
cap,  omitting  to  put  on  her  bonnet,  and  remembered  both  writing  a
letter  to  her  father  in  the  mesmeric  state,  and  its  contents,  though
in  her  ordinary  waking  condition  she  is  ignorant  of  the  whole.  I  now
made  downward  passes  before  her,  and  at  once  sent  her  to  sleep;
and  immediately  awoke  her  by  blowing  in  her  face, — the  whole  not
occupying  a  minute.

“  One  day  I  made  her  mesmerise  herself  with  my  hand.  This


on  the  Disturbances  of  Mesmeric  Sleep-waking.  249

brought  on  the  same  half-waking  cross  state;  from  which  I  could
extricate  her  only  by  making  downward  passes  before  her,  and  bring¬
ing  her  into  a  mesmeric  state  in  relation  with  myself.

“  If,  after  one  of  us  had  sent  her  to  sleep,  the  other  half-awoke
her  into  this  state,  and  this  other  called  to  her,  she  went  to  him;
but  the  moment  the  first  called  her,  she  left  the  other  and  went  to
the  first:  shewing  the  greater  attraction  to  the  party  whose  mes¬
meric  influence  had  been  most  exerted.  But  if  the  other  now  made
passes  and  sent  her  off,  and  the  first  half-woke  her  and  called  her,
she  went  to  him,  but  left  him  as  soon  as  the  other  called.

“The  disturbance  of  this  state  was  one  day  such,  that  she  told
me  afterwards  she  had  seen  each  of  us  green.  I  recollect  in  a  case
of  pain  of  the  head  in  a  young  lady,  objects  frequently  looked  of  a
blue  color.  In  this  state  Miss  C,  would  not  allow  any  other  than
the  one  who  had  sent  her  to  sleep  or  half-wakened  her  to  touch  her ;
and,  on  being  fully  awakened  one  day,  was  astonished  at  hearing  a
lady  say,  *  Why  she’s  let  me  touch  her.’  In  her  half-wakened  state
she  had  not  permitted  it,  but  was  ignorant  of  this  wheu  awake.
Just  so  was  she  astonished,  like  the  patient  at  Nottingham  who
stared  when  awakened  after  the  amputation  of  his  leg,  if  she  was
awakened  in  one  room  into  which  she  had  been  led  in  her  sleep  from
another.  In  the  simple  dreamy  state,  she  would  take  the  hand  of
any  one  whom  she  mistook  for  the  person  she  was  dreaming  of,  and
who  was  always  one  she  was  fond  of, — one  of  her  brothers,  or  a
female  friend.”*

The  last  sentence  shews  how  much  depends  upon  the  mere
feelings.  When  Rosina  (Yol.  II.,  pp.  219 — 224),  in  her
dreamy  sleep-waking  mistook  a  person  for  any  one  she  loved,
she  felt  him  warm  and  was  happy ;  if  she  mistook  him, — even
me,  her  mesmeriser,  as  she  did  if  I  excited  Pride  or  Destruc¬
tiveness, — for  one  she  disliked,  she  felt  him  cold  and  was
angrily  disturbed.  Fancy  worked  all.  The  deafness  to  all
but  the  voice  of  the  mesmeriser  is  merely  the  result  of  mes¬
meric  attachment  and  abstraction;  and  may  sometimes  be
removed  by  resolution. f

In  regard  to  an  organ  of  rigidity  (see  p.  225),  this  is  very
unlikely.  Some  sleepwakers  are  very  angry  if  their  head  is
touched  anywhere :  and  this  probably  is  the  explanation  of
the  excitement  when  the  finger  was  applied  over  Benevolence.
When  the  fingers  were  applied  in  the  region  of  Self-esteem  or
Firmness,  and  rigidity  ensued,  the  effect  might  be  the  greater.
Sleepwakers  often  grow  rigid  if  displeased :  and  I  have  seen
this  effect  when  Self-esteem,  and  heard  of  it  when  Firmness,
was  excited.  The  expression  of  each  was  immobility,  so  that
we  call  a  proud  person  stiff,  and  a  determined  person  firm.

The  existence  of  a  mesmeric  fluid  is  pure  hypothesis,

*  See  Vol.  III.,  p.  473,  &c.

j  See  Vol  TIL,  p.  329,  and  360 — 362,  &c.


250


Note  by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


The  phenomena  may  depend  upon  a  peculiar  matter,  or  upon
a  peculiar  state  of  some  matter  which  is  the  source  of  other
phenomena  of  nature.  I  think  it  best  always  to  speak  of
phenomena  only,  and  to  say  power,  property,  or  force,  which
gives  rise  to  them.  We  have  no  proof  of  a  nervous  fluid,  an
electric  fluid,  a  soul,  &c.  The  respective  phenomena  of  mes¬
merism,  electricity,  heat,  life  common  to  vegetables  and  ani¬
mals,  and  the  mental  phenomena  of  intellect,  feeling,  and
will  of  the  animal  kingdom,  may  result  from  properties  of  or¬
dinary  matter  peculiarly  circumstanced,  and,  in  the  case  of
living  beings,  peculiarly  composed,  organized,  and  circum¬
stanced,  in  regard  to  external  circumstances,  or  may  depend
upon  a  peculiar  matter  in  ordinary  matter ;  but  we  see  them
only  as  phenomena  of  ordinary  matter,  and  the  peculiar  matter
is  imaginary  only.  As  to  what  clairvoyants  say,  they  may  say
what  they  like  on  matters  where  there  is  no  means  of  ascer¬
taining  whether  they  are  right  or  wrong.  The  phenomena  of
light  seem  to  depend  upon  the  vibrations  of  some  matter :
but  what  this  is,  and  whether  the  same  holds  good  of  the  other
phenomena  of  heat,  electricity,  gravitation,  life,  mind,  in
various  circumstances,  we  know  not.  We  have  no  right  to
speak  of  these  but  as  the  result  of  conditions  of  common
matter.

I  know  no  reason  for  believing  that  particular  persons  are
disposed  to  bring  out  particular  phenomena  in  patients.  This
affair,  as  far  as  I  have  observed,  depends  upon  the  patient :
and  I  have  looked  rigorously  into  the  subject.  Inferences
are  too  often  drawn  in  mesmerism,  as  in  medicine,  from  im¬
perfectly  investigating  and  from  too  few  occurrences.  The
declarations  of  mesmerised  patients  thought  to  be  clairvoyant
upon  these  matters  is  not  worth  a  moment's  consideration.
I  am  satisfied  of  the  truth  of  clairvoyance — of  an  occult
power  of  foreknowing  changes  in  the  patient's  own  health  that
are  not  cognizable  to  others ;  of  knowing  things  distant  and
things  past ;  and  sometimes,  though  rarely,  events  to  come.
But  I  am  sure  that  most  clairvoyants  imagine  much,  speak
the  impressions  of  their  natural  state  or  of  those  about  them,
and  may  be  led  to  any  fancy.  Some  talk  Swedenborgianism  :
some  Roman  Catholicism :  some  Calvinism :  some  Deism :
some  Atheism  :  some  prescribe  homoeopathy,  some  allopathy.
Cerebral  sympathy — a  fact  totally  unknown  to  the  medical
world,  is  continually  mistaken  for  clairvoyance,  and  the  opi¬
nions  of  patients  may  thus  be  sympathetically  those  of  their
mesmerisers.  They  will  deceive  from  vanity  or  love  of  money
or  even  of  fun.  Many  patients  pretend  to  the  power  who
have  it  not  at  all,  and  those  really  possessed  of  it  in  some


On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal.


251


degree  or  other  pretend  to  it  when  it  is  not  in  action.  I  first
noticed  this  in  1838,  and  have  seen  it  every  month  from  that
to  the  present  time.


III.  On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal,  and  its  Connexion  with
Mesmerism.  By.  Mr.  Hockley.

“  My  brethren,  there  are  men  who,  whether  designedly  or  not,  are  in  league
with  the  fallen  spirits — wizards  and  necromancers ,  using  enchantment  and  divina¬
tion,  and  producing  divers  effects  beyond  the  power  of  man — real  and  natural
effects,  by  the  help  of  the  devil,  upon  both  the  minds  and  bodies  of  their  fellow-
creatures.  I  shall  endeavour  this  evening,  by  God’s  help,  to  follow  that  branch
of  the  subject,  and  to  shew  you  what  I  conceive  to  be  the  connexion  between  the
agency  of  those  fallen  spirits  and  the  lying  wonders  performed  in  these  later
times,  amongst  which  I  have  no  hesitation  in  reckoning  this  mesmerism,  which  is
now  performing  its  real  effects — real,  supernatural,  but  diabolical .” — Rev.  Hugh
M‘Neil,  Liverpool,  April,  1842.

“  Were  we  to  believe  nothing  but  what  we  could  perfectly  comprehend,  not
only  our  stock  of  knowledge  in  all  the  branches  of  learning  would  be  shrunk  up
to  nothing,  but  even  the  affairs  of  common  life  could  not  be  carried  on.” —
Tucker.


TO  THE  EDITORS  OF  THE  ZOIST.

The  surprizing  coincidence  of  the  phenomena  elicited  by  the
ancient  practice  of  invocation  by  the  crystal  with  the  later
discoveries  of  animal  magnetism  has  for  some  years  attracted
the  attention  of  the  curious,  and  I  have  long  been  desirous
of  seeing  the  subject  investigated  by  some  of  your  able  con¬
tributors  with  the  attention  which  it  eminently  deserves  :  and,
although  there  may  be  cause  to  fear  that  those  opponents  of
mesmerism  who,  like  the  Rev.  Mr.  M'Neil,  are  already  too
prone  to  attribute  to  satanic  agency  every  thing  connected
with  animal  magnetism  which  is  beyond  their  limited  compre¬
hension  might,  by  its  apparent  alliance  to  the  art  of  divina¬
tion  by  the  crystal,  find  an  additional  reason  for  denouncing
it ;  yet,  considering  that  the  very  surprizing  revelations  made
by  clairvoyants  under  magnetic  influence,  whether  attribut¬
able  “  to  the  agency  of  spiritual  beings”  or  to  “  the  divinity
that  stirs  within  us  and  points  out  an  hereafter,”  have  opened
a  wide  field  of  enquiry  into  some  of  the  hitherto  least  under¬
stood  arcana  of  psychology,  and  that  many  of  your  readers,
whether  rationalists  or  spiritualists,  notwithstanding  the  rhap¬
sodies  of  the  above  learned  and  reverend  gentleman,  may
feel  desirous  of  investigating  those  occult  laws  of  nature
which,  in  spite  of  the  poet,  yet  “lie  hid  in  night,”  I  have
been  induced,  upon  a  perusal  of  Gamma’s  article  in  the  last
number  but  one  of  The  Zoist,  to  offer  the  following  notes  upon
the  subject,  trusting  they  may  prove  the  germ  of  a  more  full
and  able  essay  by  one  of  your  learned  correspondents.


On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal,


or,  9

•v » J  »v


It  would  trespass  too  much  upon  your  space  to  attempt
to  elucidate  the  origin  and  various  modes  of  divination  by
the  crystal,  of  the  antiquity  and  wide-spread  belief  in  which
there  exist  innumerable  testimonies,  sacred  and  profane ;  from
the  divine  responses  by  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  mentioned
in  the  Old  Testament,*  to  Josephus,  who  in  his  history  declares
it  to  be  more  than  200  years  since  the  stones  of  the  ephod
had  given  an  answer  by  their  extraordinary  lustre ;  and  from
Porphyry,  Iamblichus,  and  Psellus,  to  the  magicians  of  Cairo
and  the  peepers  and  speculators  in  England  at  the  present
day.  With  respect  to  the  “  superstitious  rites,  the  long  fast¬
ings,  the  mystical  words,  the  concentric  circles,  the  per¬
fumes/^  which  “  T”  deems  only  worthy  of  the  knaves  who
employed  them,  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  many  mesmerists,
who  justly  deprecate  their  favourite  science  being  deemed  a
deception  and  its  professors  impostors,  yet  so  readily  bestow
the  same  abusive  epithets  indiscriminately  upon  the  advocates
of  any  doctrine  which  may  be  opposed  to  their  own  precon¬
ceived  opinions.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  divination  by
the  crystal  is,  more  than  any  other  species  of  modern  magic,
derived  immediately  from  the  Jews — a  people  whose  numer¬
ous  ceremonials  of  the  same  kind  were  enjoined,  we  are
taught  to  believe,  by  divine  command ;  and  their  followers,
the  Cabalists,  though  not  perhaps  strictly  speaking  the  utili-

*  It  would  seem  from  the  observations  of  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson  that  this
form  of  divination  was  employed  by  the  Egyptians  before  the  time  of  Moses.
Not  only  the  form,  but  the  symbols,  and  even  titles,  connected  with  it,  are  all
related  to  those  of  Egypt.  The  Urim  and  Thummim,  connected  with,  if  not
part  of  the  breast-plate  of  judgment  of  the  High  Priest  (Exodus  xxviii.,  30),  and
interpreted  as  Light  and  Truth,  or  Revelation  and  Truth,  correspond  most  re¬
markably  with  the  figure  of  Re  (the  Sun)  and  Thmei  (Truth)  in  the  breast-plate
of  the  Egyptian  priest :  and  JElian  and  Diodorus  Sicidus  are  quoted  as  autho¬
rities  for  the  custom  of  the  Egyptian  priest  when  acting  as  arch-judge,  hanging
around  his  neck  a  sapphire  stone  which  was  called  Truth.  (Manners  and  Customs
of  the  Ancient  Egyptians,  ii.,  22,  v.  28.)

Good  accounts  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  or  rather  of  what  is  undersood
concerning  them,  may  be  found  in  Winer’s  Biblisches  Realverterbuch.  In  the
Rev.  D.  Kitto’s  Cyclopaedia  of  Biblical  Literature,  are  extracted  the  observations
and  wood-cuts  of  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson,  before  whose  researches  ultra- theologians
endeavoured  to  make  the  world  believe  that  the  immense  and  ancient  Egyptian
nation  had  only  copied  the  Jews,  whose  Urim  and  Thummim  they  had  learnt
after  Solomon  had  married  a  daughter  of  Pharaoh  !  Dr.  Kitto,  though  we  dare
say  quite  orthodox,  is  not  among  these,  but  cheerfully  admits  the  force  of  Sir
G.  Wilkinson’s  observations  :  just  as  other  orthodox  divines  cheerfully  allow  us
to  admit  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  the  countless  worlds  for  millions  of  years,
and  of  the  sun  not  going  round  the  earth  but  the  earth  round  the  sun,  and  to
agree  with  the  Chevalier  Bunsen  and  others  that  the  current  views  of  history  de¬
rived  from  the  Old  Testament  are  untenable. — Zoist.

■f  “  T”  is  rather  unfortunate  in  his  ‘‘most  approved  modern  author.”  Barrett
was  a  mere  book-maker,  and  his  Magus  (the  original  MS.  of  which  was  for  years
in  my  possession)  is  a  transcript  from  Agrippa  and  a  MS.  of  Rabbi  Solomon,
and  the  conjurations  therein  given  were  never  intended  for  crystal  work.


by  Mr.  Hockley.


253


tarians  of  their  day,  yet  remembering  “  how  much  better  it
is  to  get  wisdom  than  gold,  and  understanding  rather  than
fine  silver,”*  were  diligent  investigators  of  the  occult  pro¬
perties  of  nature,  and  the  efficacy  of  their  “  concentric  cir¬
cles”  we  must  leave  undecided  until  it  can  be  explained  how
an  invisible  line  drawn  across  the  path  of  a  somnambulist
instantaneously  arrests  his  progress — a  fact  which,  although
of  daily  occurrence,  as  yet  remains  equally  inexplicable.  Of
the  use  of  strict  previous  fasting  we  have  continued  examples
from  Exodus  xxxiv.,  28,  where  Moses  “  did  neither  eat  bread
nor  drink  water,”  to  Matthew  iv.,  where  Jesus  “led  up  of
the  spirit  into  the  wilderness  fasted  forty  days  and  forty
nights.”  Now  as  Jesus  was  “harmless,  undefiled,  and  sepa¬
rate  from  sinners,” — had  no  fleshly  lust  to  mortify — no
sluggishness  of  spirit  to  overcome,  why  then  did  he  fast  ?
Fasting  was  also  enjoined  to  the  candidates  previously  to  their
admission  to  the  ancient  mysteries ;  thus  proving  how  old  is
the  belief  that  the  rude  health,  so  needful  for  the  laborious
struggles  of  every-day  life,  is  incompatible  (as  mesmerists  also
experience)  with  a  high  degree  of  spiritual  perception  and
clairvoyance,  but  that  by  such  fasting,  prayer,  and  other
purifications,  it  is  possible  to  attain  an  insight  into  physical
causes,  which  by  constant  contemplation  becomes  at  length
an  intuitive  perception.  And  passing  over  for  the  present
the  esoteric  doctrine  of  the  vestments  and  pentacles,  it  must
be  observed  that  the  extraordinary,  though  little  known  and
appreciated,  properties  of  perfumes  derived  from  the  animal,
vegetable,  and  mineral  kingdoms,  has  long  been  known  to
students  in  the  occult  sciences,  and  amongst  others  the  fol¬
lowing  remarkable  relation  is  to  be  found  in  Eckhartshauseffis
Key  to  Magic,  p.  57 ;  Munich,  1791 ;  and  is  thus  related  by
Jung-Stilling  in  his  admirable  theory  of  Pneumatology.t
“  Eckhartshausen  became  acquainted  with  a  Scotsman,
who,  though  he  meddled  not  with  the  conjuration  of  spirits,
and  such  like  charlatanry,  had  learned  however  a  remarkable
piece  of  art  from  a  Jew,  which  he  communicated  also  to  Eck¬
hartshausen,  and  made  the  experiment  with  him,  which  is
surprising  and  worthy  of  perusal,  tie  that  wishes  to  raise,
and  see  any  particular  spirit,  must  prepare  himself  for  it,
for  some  days  together,  both  spiritually  and  physically.  There
are  also  particular  and  remarkable  requisites  and  relations
necessary  betwixt  such  a  spirit  and  the  person  who  wishes  to
see  it ;  relations  which  cannot  be  otherwise  explained  than  on
the  ground  of  the  intervention  of  some  secret  influence  from


*  Proverbs  xvi.,  16.


f  Longman,  12mo.,  p.  200  ;  1834.


251


On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal,


the  invisible  world.  After  all  these  preparations,  a  vapour
is  produced  in  a  room,  from  certain  materials,  which  Eck-
hartshausen  with  propriety  does  not  divulge  on  account  of
the  dangerous  abuse  which  might  be  made  of  it,  which  visibly
forms  itself  into  a  figure  which  bears  a  resemblance  to  that
which  the  person  wishes  to  see.  In  this  there  is  no  question
of  any  magic-lantern  or  optical  artifice,  but  the  vapour  really
forms  a  human  figure,  similar  to  that  which  the  individual
desires  to  behold.  I  will  now  insert  the  conclusion  of  the
story  in  Eckharthausen's  own  words.

“  ‘  Some  time  after  the  departure  of  the  Scotsman,  T  made
the  experiment  for  one  of  my  friends.  He  saw  as  I  did,  and
had  the  same  sensations.

“  ‘The  observations  that  we  made  were  these;  as  soon  as
the  ingredients  were  thrown  into  the  chafing  dish,  a  whitish
body  forms  itself,  that  seems  to  hover  above  the  chafing  dish
as  large  as  life.

“  ‘  It  possesses  the  likeness  of  the  person  whom  it  is
wished  to  see,  only  the  visage  is  of  an  ashy  paleness.

“  1  On  approaching  the  figure,  one  is  conscious  of  a  resist¬
ance  similar  to  what  is  felt  when  going  against  a  strong  wind,
which  drives  one  back.

“  1  If  one  speaks  with  it  one  remembers  no  more  distinctly
what  is  spoken ;  and  when  the  appearance  vanishes,  one  feels
as  if  awaking  from  a  dream ;  the  head  is  stupified,  and  a  con¬
traction  is  felt  in  the  abdomen.  It  is  also  very  singular  that
the  same  appearance  presents  itself  when  one  is  in  the  dark,
or  when  looking  upon  dark  objects.

“  ‘  The  unpleasantness  of  this  sensation  was  the  reason
why  I  was  unwilling  to  repeat  the  experiment,  although  often
urged  to  do  so  by  many  persons.

“  ‘  A  young  gentleman  once  came  to  me,  and  would  par
force  see  this  phenomenon.  As  he  was  a  person  of  tender
nerves  and  lively  imagination,  I  was  the  more  reluctant  to
comply  with  his  request,  and  asked  the  advice  of  a  very  ex¬
perienced  physician,  to  whom  I  revealed  the  whole  mystery.
He  maintained  that  the  narcotic  ingredients,  which  formed
the  figure,  must  of  necessity  violently  affect  the  imagination,
and  might  be  very  injurious  according  to  circumstances;  he
also  believed  that  the  preparation  which  was  prescribed  con¬
tributed  much  to  excite  the  imagination,  and  told  me  to  make
the  trial  for  myself  with  a  very  small  quantity  and  without
any  preparation  whatever.  I  did  so  one  day  after  dinner,*

*  It  is  surprizing  that  Eckhartshausen  should  have  thus  violated  the  rules
expressly  laid  down  for  his  guidance,  and  then  complain  of  the  unpleasant  sensa¬
tions  he  experienced.


by  Mr.  Hockley.


O  K  K


when  the  physician  had  been  dining  with  me;  but  scarcely
had  I  cast  the  quantum  of  ingredients  into  the  chafing  dislq
when  a  figure  presented  itself.  I  was  however  seized  with
such  a  horror,  that  I  was  obliged  to  leave  the  room.  I  was
very  ill  during  three  hours,  and  thought  I  saw  the  figure
always  before  me.  Towards  evening,  after  inhaling  the  fumes
of  vinegar,  and  drinking  it  with  water,  I  was  better  again,
but  for  three  weeks  after  I  felt  a  debility ;  and  the  strangest
part  of  the  matter  is,  that  when  I  remember  the  circum¬
stance,  and  look  for  some  time  upon  any  dark  object,  this
ashy  pale  figure  presents  itself  very  vividly  to  my  sight.  After
this  I  no  longer  dared  to  make  any  experiments  with  it/  ”*

And  in  support  of  this  singular  development  of  the  hidden
properties  of  nature,  the  following  curious  receipt,  “  How  to
make  a  Ghost  ,”  is  extracted  from  the  Monthly  Magazine  for
June,  1848  : — “  If  chloride  of  barium  is  put  upon  a  plate  in
a  dark  cellar,  and  the  hand  placed  beneath  it,  so  soon  as  the
warmth  of  the  hand  has  penetrated  the  plate,  the  form  of
the  hand  is  delineated  in  phosphoric  delineations  on  the  upper
surface  of  the  plate.”  Thus  the  heat  communicated  by  the
hand  to  the  chloride  of  barium  gives  rise  to  certain  luminous
emanations,  which  have  the  extraordinary  property  of  seizing
at  the  same  time  the  form  of  that  which  gave  them  birth,
and  proves  that  the  minutest  atom  of  creation  possesses  ele¬
mentary  powers  which  it  would  be  far  wiser  to  attempt  to
explain  than  to  deny.f

In  this  mode  of  divination,  crystal  has  not  solely  been


*  See  also  a  very  singular  narrative  by  John  Howison,  Esq.,  of  the  East
India  Company’s  Service,  in  his  Foreign  Scenes  and  Travelling  Reminiscences.
London,  1825.

f  Of  the  desirableness  of  investigating  the  physiological  influence  of  perfumes,
gases,  and  exhalations,  there  can  be  no  doubt :  and,  in  the  history  of  witchcraft
and  of  ancient  divination,  we  find  these  influences  so  closely  connected  with  quasi-
mesmeric  phenomena,  that  the  recent  discoveries  of  anaesthetic  agents — “  weak
masters  though  they  be,” — that  took  so  many  by  surprize,  only  came  as  instal¬
ments  of  the  expectations  and  partial  fulfilment  of  the  predictions  of  observers  of
mesmeric  nature  and  students  of  its  antiquities.  At  the  same  time,  there  is
nothing  in  the  anecdote  of  Eckharthausen  as  related  with  its  unspecified  drugs  and
uncertified  results,  that  enables  us  to  say  that  it  is  more  than  a  case  of  intoxication
by  narcotics.  It  is  very  unsafe  to  say  positively  what  influences  and  incidents  will
not  produce  the  mesmeric  states  :  but  caution  is  always  required  in  judging  of
matters  so  liable  to  mistake ;  above  all,  we  have  a  right  to  demand  the  best  evi¬
dence  in  the  best  form  so  far  as  obtainable.

If  the  illustration  said  to  be  gained  from  the  experiment  with  the  plate  of  barium
goes  for  anything,  it  goes  to  prove  that  the  image  in  the  vapour  was  that  of  the
experimenter  himself :  and  “  ashy  paleness”  and  “  stupified  head,”  not  to  say
alarm,  may  account  for  the  non-recognition  of  it.  If  the  warmth  of  the  hand  gave
rise  to  emanations,  these  must,  we  suppose,  take  place  at  the  portions  warmed  by
the  hand,  and  therefore  represent  its  figure. — Zoist.


256


On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal ,


used ;  its  scarcity  and  the  difficulty  of  cutting  having  caused
it,  from  the  earliest  ages,  to  be  superseded  by  olive-oil,  black
liquids,  glass,  and  particularly  by  bottles  and  basins  of  water.
Porphyry,  under  the  heads  of  Hydro-and  Lecano-mancy,
says  that  demons  were  compelled  by  invocatory  songs  to  enter
a  vessel  filled  with  water,  and  give  answers  to  the  questions
propounded,  or  represent  therein  the  issue  of  any  required
event.  Psellus  also  states  that  the  Assyrians  were  much  ad¬
dicted  to  prophesying  in  a  basin  of  water.  And  Dr.  Kernel’
relates*  that  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst  appeared  to  him  to  have
had  her  inner  or  spiritual  eye  excited  by  soap-bubbles,  glass
mirrors,  &c.  Dr.  K.  relates  that,  “  a  child  happening  to  blow
soap-bubbles,  she  exclaimed,  1  Ah,  my  God  !  I  behold  in  the
bubbles  every  thing  I  think  of,  although  it  be  distant,  not  in
little,  but  as  large  as  life ;  but  it  frightens  me/  I  then  made
a  soap-bubble,  and  bade  her  look  for  her  child  that  was  far
away.  She  said  she  saw  him  in  bed,  and  it  gave  her  much
pleasure.  At  another  time  she  saw  my  wife,  who  was  in
another  house,  and  described  precisely  the  situation  she  was
in  at  the  moment — a  point  I  took  care  immediately  to  ascer¬
tain.  She  was  however  with  difficulty  induced  to  look  into
these  soap-bubbles.  She  seemed  to  shudder,  and  she  was
afraid  that  she  might  see  something  that  would  alarm  her.
In  one  of  these  she  once  saw  a  small  coffin  standing  before  a
neighbouring  house.  At  that  time  there  was  no  child  sick ;
but  shortly  after  the  lady  who  lived  there  was  confined ;  the
child  lived  but  a  few  months,  and  Mrs.  K.  saw  it  carried  from
the  house  in  a  coffin.  If  we  wished  her  to  recall  dreams
which  she  had  forgotten,  it  was  only  necessary  to  make  her
look  at  a  soap-bubble,  and  her  memory  of  them  immediately
returned.  She  often  saw  persons  that  were  about  to  arrive
at  the  house,  in  a  glass  of  water ;  but  when  she  was  invited
to  this  sort  of  divination,  and  did  it  unwillingly,  she  was
sometimes  mistaken.”

Aubrey,  in  his  Miscellanies,  j*  gives  the  form  of  the  crystals
as  commonly  used  in  his  time.  Dr.  Dee  used  several  stones,
one  of  which  is  now  in  Case  No.  20,  of  the  Mineral  Room,
at  the  British  Museum;  it  belonged,  with  his  MSS.,  to  the
collection  of  Sir  R.  Cotton ;  another,  composed  apparently  of
a  flat  circular  and  highly-polished  piece  of  Cannel  coal,  about
six  inches  in  diameter,  came  to  the  hands  of  Lord  Peter¬
borough,  and  from  thence  passed  into  the  possession  of  Horace

*  Seeress  of  Prevorst,  p.  74.  London,  1845.

f  Miscellanies  by  J.  Aubrey,  Esq.,  8vo.,  1696,  p.  128.


by  Mr.  Hockley.


257


Walpole,  and  was  sold  at  the  Strawberry-hill  Sale,  in  1842,
and  most  probably  was  the  one  alluded  to  by  Butler.* * * §

Upon  referring  to  that  very  remarkable  and  scarce  work,
entitled  “  A  true  and  faithful  Relation  of  what  passed  between
Dr.  John  Dee  and  some  Spirits,”-]*  edited  by  the  learned  Dr.
Merie  Casaubon,  which  although  a  goodly  folio  of  500  pages,
formed  but  a  small  portion  of  Dr.  Dee’s  Experiments,  or  as
he  termed  them,  “  Actions yet  sufficiently  attest  that  both
Dee  and  Kelly  (his  seer)  were  firm  believers  in  the  truth  of
their  researches ;  and  the  very  singular  coincidences  arising
from  a  perusal  of  this  work  with  the  revelations  made  to  Dr.
Kerner  by  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst,  and  by  the  somnambulist
described  in  Dr.  Henry  Werner’s  work,  entitled,  “  Guardian
Spirits ;  or,  Remarkable  Cases  of  Vision  by  two  Seeresses  into
the  Spiritual  World,” %  will  well  repay  an  attentive  perusal,
although,  unfortunately,  it  would  occupy  too  much  of  your
valuable  space  to  allow  of  parallel  passages  from  such  volumi¬
nous  works.  §

Dr.  Collyer,  the  able  lecturer  on  mesmerism,  appears  to
see  the  subject  only  in  a  rationalist  point  of  view,  and  in  sup¬
port  of  his  theory,  gives,  in  his  Psychography,  or  the  embo¬
diment  of  thought,  the  following  account  of  a  modern  magical
experiment  performed  at  the  instance  of  Lord  Prudhoe  and
Major  Pelix,  a  British  officer,  when  travelling  in  Egypt,  who
were  among  the  first  persons  who  astonished  the  European
world  with  their  report  of  the  magic  mirror  experiment ;
being  men  of  high  character  and  sense,  their  statement  created
a  considerable  sensation,  (although  a  matter  of  almost  daily
occurrence  in  many  parts  of  England,  especially  in  Lanca¬
shire),  and  was  first  reported  by  the  interlocutors  in  the
Noctes  Ambrosianse  of  Blackwood’ s  Magazine ,  for  August,
1831.||

“Lord  Prudhoe  and  Major  Eelix,  being  at  Cairo  last

*  Hudibras,  Canto  III.,  line  631.

“  Kelly  did  all  his  feats  upon
The  devil’s  looking-glass  a  stone.

Where,  playing  with  him  at  bo-peep,

He  solved  all  question  ne’er  so  deep.”

+  London.  Folio  :  1659.

X  Stuttgart,  1839.  New  York,  1847.  Ti’anslated  by  A.  E.  Ford.

§  Dr.  Dee  relates  in  his  Diary,  published  by  the  Camden  Society  in  1842  :
<f  16th  March,  1575.  Her  Majestie  (Elizabeth)  willed  me  to  fetch  my  glass  so
famous,  and  to  show  unto  her  some  of  the  properties  of  it,  which  I  did  ;  her
Majestie,  being  taken  down  from  her  horse  by  the  Earle  of  Leicester,  did  see
some  of  the  properties  of  that  glass,  to  her  Majestie’s  great  contentment  and
delight.”

||  See  also  an  article  in  No.  356  of  Chambers’s  Edinburgh  Journal,  which
contains  an  account  of  some  of  the  Egyptian  magicians’  failures.


258


On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal,


autumn,  on  their  return  from  Abyssinia,  where  they  picked
up  much  of  that  information  which  has  been  worked  up  so
well  by  Captain  Bond  Head,  in  his  life  of  Bruce,  found  the
town  in  a  state  of  extraordinary  excitement,  in  consequence
of  the  recent  arrival  in  those  parts  of  a  celebrated  magician,
from  the  centre  of  Africa,  somewhere  in  the  neighbourhood
of  the  mountains  of  the  moon.  It  was  universally  said,  and
generally  believed,  that  this  character  possessed  and  exercised
the  power  of  shewing  to  any  visitor  who  chose  to  comply  with
his  terms,  any  person,  dead  or  living,  whom  the  same  visitor
pleased  to  name.  The  English  travellers,  after  abundant  en¬
quiries  and  some  scruples,  repaired  to  his  residence,  paid  their
fees,  and  were  admitted  to  his  sanctum.  They  found  them¬
selves  in  the  presence  of  a  very  handsome  young  Moor,  with
a  very  long  black  beard,  a  crimson  caftan,  a  snow-white  turban,
blue  trousers,  and  yellow  slippers,  sitting  cross-legged  on  a
Turkey  carpet  three  feet  square,  with  a  cherry  stalk  in  his
mouth,  a  cup  of  coffee  at  his  left  elbow,  a  diamond-hafted
dagger  in  his  girdle,  and  in  his  right  hand  a  large  volume
clasped  with  brazen  clasps.  On  hearing  their  errand,  he  arose
and  kindled  some  spices  on  a  sort  of  small  altar  in  the  middle
of  the  room ;  he  then  walked  round  the  altar  for  half  an  hour
or  so,  muttering  words,  to  them  unintelligible ;  and  having  at
length  drawn  three  lines  of  chalk  about  the  altar,  and  placed
himself  upright  beside  the  flame,  desired  them  to  seek  a  seer ,
and  he  was  ready  to  gratify  them  in  all  their  desires.  There
were  in  the  olden  days  whole  schools  of  magicians  here  in
Europe,  who  could  do  nothing  in  this  line  without  the  inter¬
vention  of  a  pure  seer ,  to  wit,  a  maiden’s  eye .  This  African
belongs  to  the  same  fraternity.  He  made  them  understand
that  nothing  could  be  done  until  a  virgin's  eye  was  placed  at
his  disposal ;  he  bade  them  go  out  in  the  streets  of  Cairo,  and
fetch  any  child  they  fancied  under  ten  years  of  age.  They
did  so ;  and  after  walking  about  for  half  an  hour,  selected  an
Arab  boy,  not  apparently  above  eight,  whom  they  fouud  play¬
ing  at  marbles ;  they  bribed  him  with  a  few  halfpence,  and
took  him  with  them  to  the  studio  of  the  African  Roger  Bacon  ;
the  child  was  much  frightened  at  the  smoke,  and  the  smell,
and  the  chatter,  but  by  and  by  he  sucked  his  sugar  candy,
and  recovered  his  tranquillity ;  and  the  magician  made  him
seat  himself  under  a  window,  the  only  one  that  had  not  been
darkened,  and  poured  out  a  table-spoonful  of  some  black  liquid
into  the  boy’s  right  hand,  and  bade  him  hold  the  hand  steady,
and  keep  his  eye  fixed  upon  the  surface  of  the  liquid ;  (‘  here/
the  doctor  says,  as  with  the  magic  mirrors  of  old,  f  is  the
medium  used  to  embody  the  idea,  which  has  been  conveyed


by  Mr.  Hockley.


259


by  the  operator  to  persons  in  correspondence ;  the  angle  of
direction  from  the  bov’s  mind,  must  be  in  accordance  with
the  angle  from  the  person  in  correspondence  /)  and  then  re¬
suming  his  old  station  by  the  brazier,  sung  out  for  several
minutes  on  end,  f  What  do  you  see  ?  Allah  bismillah — what
do  you  see  V  All  the  while  the  smoke  curled  up  faster  and
faster ;  presently  the  lad  said,  ‘  Bismillah,  I  see  a  horse — a
horseman — I  see  two  horsemen — I  see  three — I  see  four —
five  — six — I  see  seven  horsemen,  and  the  seventh  is  a  sultan  V
(  Has  he  a  flag  ?’  cried  the  magician.  f  He  has  three/  an¬
swered  the  boy.  fJ,Tis  well/  says  the  other;  ‘  now  halt/
And  with  that  he  laid  the  stick  right  across  the  fire,  and
standing  up,  addressed  the  travellers  in  these  words  :  ‘  Name
your  name ;  be  it  of  those  that  are  upon  the  earth,  or  of  those
that  are  beneath  it;  be  it  Frank,  Moor,  Turk,  or  Indian,
prince  or  beggar,  living  and  breathing,  or  solved  into  the
dust  of  Adam,  three  thousand  years  ago ;  speak,  and  this
boy  shall  behold  and  describe.’

“  The  first  name  was  William  Shakespear.  The  magician
made  three  reverences  towards  the  window,  waved  his  wand
nine  times,  sang  out  something  beyond  their  interpretation,
and  at  length  called  out,  f  Boy,  what  do  you  behold  V  ‘  The
sultan  alone  remains/  said  the  child  ;  f  and  beside  him  I  see
a  pale-faced  Frank — but  not  dressed  like  these  Franks — with
large  eyes,  a  pointed  beard,  a  tall  hat,  roses  on  his  shoes,  and
a  short  mantle  !  The  other  asked  for  Francis  Arouet  de  Vol-
taire ,  and  the  boy  immediately  described  a  lean,  old,  yellow¬
faced  Frank,  with  a  huge  brown  wig,  a  nutmeg-grater  pro¬
file,  spindle  shanks,  buckled  shoes,  and  a  gold  snuff  box.
Lord  Prudhoe  now  named  Archdeacon  Wrangham,  and  the
Arab  boy  made  answer  and  said,  f  I  perceive  a  tall  grey-haired
Frank,  with  a  black-silk  petticoat,  walking  in  a  garden  with
a  book  in  his  hand, — he  is  reading  in  the  book ;  his  eyes  are
bright  and  gleaming,  his  teeth  are  white ;  he  is  the  happiest
looking  Frank  I  ever  beheld  V  Major  Felix  now  named  a
brother  of  his,  who  is  in  the  cavalry  of  the  East  India  Com¬
pany,  in  the  presidency  of  Madras ;  the  magician  signed,  and
the  boy  again  answered,  f  I  see  a  red-haired  Frank,  with  a
short  red  jacket  and  white  trousers ;  he  is  standing  by  the
sea-shore,  and  behind  him  there  is  a  black  man  in  a  turban
holding  a  beautiful  horse  richly  caparisoned  V  ‘  God  in
heaven  V  cried  Major  Felix.  f  Nay/  the  boy  resumed,  ‘this
is  an  old  Frank ;  he  has  turned  round  while  you  are  speaking,
and  by  Allah  he  has  but  one  arm  V  Major  Felixes  brother
lost  his  arm  in  the  campaign  of  Ava.”

“  It  is  here  evident,”  says  Dr.  Collyer,  “  that  he  did  not


260


On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal ,


see  any  real  spirit  or  apparition,  but  merely  the  embodied
idea  of  the  travellers,  who  depicted  in  their  minds  the  image
of  Shakespear  as  he  is  generally  represented,  &c.,  &c.

Dr.  Collyer  then  proceeds  to  state  that  he  has  proved  the
“  possibility  of  mental  transfer”  beyond  the  remotest  chance
of  doubt :  he  relates  several  experiments  in  which  the  reci¬
pients  exactly  described  what  the  spectators  wished  them  to
perceive,  it  being  necessary  that  the  latter  should  form  clear
and  vivid  images,  in  their  own  minds,  of  what  was  to  be  seen
by  the  patients.  One  of  these  experiments  is  described  as
follows : —

“New  York,  Feb.  1841.

“Magnetized  Miss - ;  found  her  condition  one  of

the  most  exalted.  At  the  request  of  her  father,  who  is  one  of
the  most  eminent  artists  in  the  country,  I  brought  before
her  spiritual  vision  the  shade  of  Napoleon,  whom  she  recog¬
nized  at  once,  then  Byron  and  Alexander  the  Great ;  the
experiment  was  performed  with  much  care,  so  that  she  could
not  have  previously  known  our  intention.  I  repeated  the
experiment  on  a  series  of  persons  with  a  like  success.  I  was
obliged  to  embody  the  image  of  those  personages  in  my  own
mind,  before  they  could  be  recognized  by  the  recipients ;
whose  brain  during  the  congestive  state  was  so  sentient,  that
the  impression  was  conveyed  to  the  mind,  similar  to  the  pho¬
tographic  process  of  Daguerre.”

In  the  Albany  Argus ,  Dr.  Collyer  says,  “  I  have  always
advocated  the  philosophy,  that  the  nervous  fluid  was  governed
by  the  same  code  of  laws  which  governed  heat,  light,  &c.,  as
radiation  and  reflection  actually  made  a  lady  perform  the  same
class  of  phenomena  which  is  the  wonder  of  travellers  in  the
East.  She  was  desired  to  look  into  a  cup  of  molasses  (any
other  dark  liquid  will  answer  the  same  purpose)  and  when  the
angle  of  incidence  from  my  brain  was  equal  to  the  angle  of
reflection  from  her  brain,  she  distinctly  saw  the  image  of  my
thoughts  at  the  point  of  coincidence,  and  gave  minute  descrip¬
tions  of  many  persons  whom  she  could  have  no  idea  of ;  she
saw  the  persons  and  things  in  the  fluid,  only  when  the  angles
of  thought  converged.”

With  due  deference  to  Dr.  Collyer,  is  it  not  most  pro¬
bable  that  these  ladies  wrere  influenced  bv  the  well  known
mental  control  which  magnetizers  possess  over  their  patients,
and  which  has  been  aptly  termed  “suggestive  dreaming?”
Upon  considering  the  relations  just  made  it  cannot  for  a  mo¬
ment  be  supposed  that  Lord  Prudhoe  and  Major  Felix  could
have  heard  the  persons  and  costumes  thus  described,  in  the
same  sequence  in  which  they  were  formed  in  their  own  minds,


by  Mr.  Hockley.


261


without  remarking  the  coincidence ;  still  less  could  Major
Felix  have  felt  such  astonishment  at  the  description  of  his
brother,  with  the  accessories  of  the  red-haired  Frank,  &c.,
when,  according  to  Dr.  Collyer’s  theory,  it  was  merely  the
reflex  of  his  own  imagination.

Mr.  Salt,  the  late  British  Consul,  a  gentleman  intimately
acquainted  with  the  language,  people,  and  country,  and  less
liable  to  be  deceived  than  a  passing  traveller,  found  himself
completely  puzzled  on  many  occasions  by  the  results  of  the
magic  mirror  experiment.  Having  once,  for  example,  private
reasons  for  believing  that  some  one  of  his  servants  had  stolen
various  articles  of  property ;  Mr.  Salt  sent  for  a  celebrated
Mugh'-reb'-ee  magician,  with  the  view  of  intimidating  the
suspected  person,  and  causing  him  voluntarily  to  confess
if  he  were  really  guilty :  the  magician  came,  and  at  once
declared  that  he  would  cause  the  exact  image  of  the  guilty
person  to  appear  to  any  boy  not  above  the  age  of  puberty.  .4
boy  was  taken  incidentally  from  a  band  of  several  of  them  at
work  in  Mr.  Salt's  garden,  the  forms  were  gone  through  and
the  magic  mirror  properly  formed;  after  seeing  various  images,
the  boy  finally  described  from  the  mirror  the  guilty  person,
stature,  dress,  and  countenance;  said  that  he  knew  him,  and
ran  down  into  the  garden,  where  he  apprehended  one  of  the
labourers,  who,  when  brought  before  his  master,  immediately
confessed  that  he  was  the  thief.

Mr.  Lane,  the  eminent  Orientalist,  who  lived  for  several
37ears  in  Egypt,  and  witnessed  personally  the  operations  of
the  Egyptian  magicians,  of  which  he  has  published  many
curious  relations  :  states,  that  on  one  occasion  the  magicians'
performances  were  ridiculed  by  an  Englishman  present,  who
said  that  nothing  would  satisfy  him  but  a  correct  description
of  his  own  father,  of  whom  he  was  sure  no  one  of  the  com¬
pany  had  any  knowledge.  The  sceptic  was  a  little  staggered
when  the  boy  described  the  man  in  a  frank  dress,  with  his
hand  placed  to  his  head,  wearing  spectacles,  and  with  one
foot  on  the  ground,  and  the  other  raised  behind  him,  as  if  he
were  stepping  down  from  a  seat.

The  description  was  exactly  true  in  every  respect,  the
peculiar  position  of  the  hand  was  caused  by  an  almost  con¬
tinual  head-ache,  and  that  of  the  foot  by  a  stiff  knee  caused
by  a  fall  from  a  horse  in  hunting.

I  am  assured,  continues  Mr.  Lane,  that  on  this  occasion,
the  boy  described  accurately  each  person  and  thing  that  was
called  for,  and  I  might  add  several  other  cases  in  which  the
same  magician  has  excited  astonishment  in  the  sober  minds
of  Englishmen  of  my  acquaintance.  Mr.  Lane  candidly  con-
vol.  vii.  x


262


On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal,


fesses  that  there  is  a  mystery  in  the  matter  to  which  he  can¬
not  discover  any  clue.  How  then  are  such  phenomena,  so
perfectly  coincident  with  the  higher  order  of  mesmeric  clair¬
voyance  as  developed  by  Alexis  Didier,  and  by  Mr.  Hands’s
patient,  as  recorded  in  No.  XNY.  of  The  Zoist  ?  Dr.  Collyer
would  certainly  confess  that  it  is  utterly  improbable,  that
these  gentlemen  should  have  been  in  that  peculiar  position
in  respect  to  the  boy-seer,  that  the  angle  of  incidence  in  all
these  cases  equalled  the  angle  of  reflexion,  and  a  very  slight
perusal  of  Dr.  Dee’s  work,  will  convince  the  reader,  that  Dr.
Dee  could  not  have  been  so  besotted  during  more  than  twenty
years  experiments  (with  different  seers)  not  to  have  discovered
that  the  visions  and  responses  given  by  the  crystal  were  but
the  embodiment  of  his  own  thoughts.

That  the  phenomena  thus  elicited  has  a  closer  connexion
with  the  spiritual  world  than  the  rationalists  of  the  present
day  are  disposed  to  allow :  the  following  extracts  are  given
from  that  remarkable  piece  of  autobiography,  William  Lilly’s
History  of  his  Life  and  Times,  from  the  year  1602  to  1681.

“All  the  ancient  astrologers  of  England  were  much
startled  and  confounded  at  my  manner  of  writing,  especially
old  Mr.Wm.  Hodges,  who  lived  near  Wolverhampton,  he  swore
I  did  more  by  astrology  than  he  could  do  by  the  crystal  and
use  thereof,  which  indeed  he  understood  as  well  as  any  one
in  England.  His  angels  were  Raphael,  Gabriel,  and  Uriel.
John  Scott,  my  partner,  having  occasions  into  Staffordshire,
addressed  himself  for  a  month  or  six  weeks  to  Hodges,  as¬
sisted  him  to  dress  his  patients,  let  blood,  &c.,  being  to  re¬
turn  to  London,  he  desired  Hodges  to  shew  him  the  person
and  features  of  the  woman  he  should  marry.  Hodges  carries
him  into  a  field  not  far  from  his  house,  pulls  out  his  crystal,
bids  Scott  set  his  foot  to  his,  and  after  a  while  wishes  him
to  inspect  the  crystal,  and  observe  what  he  saw  there.  c  I
see/  said  Scott,  ‘  a  ruddy  complexioned  wench  in  a  red  waist¬
coat,  drawing  a  can  of  beer.’  ‘  She  must  be  your  wife,’  said
Hodges.  ‘You  are  mistaken,  Sir,’  said  Scott,  ‘I  am,  so
soon  as  I  come  to  London,  to  marry  a  tall  gentlewoman  in
the  Old  Bailey.’  ‘  You  must  marry  the  red-waistcoat,’  said
Hodges.  Scott  leaves  the  country,  comes  up  to  London,
finds  his  gentlewoman  married.  Two  years  after,  going  unto
Dover,  on  his  return,  he  refreshed  himself  at  an  inn  in  Can¬
terbury  ;  as  he  came  into  the  hall  or  first  room  thereof,  he
mistook  the  room,  and  went  into  the  buttery,  where  he  espied
a  maid,  described  by  Hodges  as  aforesaid,  drawing  a  can  of
beer,  &c.  He  then  more  narrowly  viewed  her  person  and
habit,  found  her  in  all  parts  to  be  the  same  as  Hodges  had


by  Mr.  Hockley.


263


described ;  after  which  he  became  a  suitor  unto  her,  and  was
married  unto  her,  which  woman  I  have  often  seen ;  this  Scott
related  unto  me  several  times,  being  a  very  honest  person,
and  made  great  conscience  of  what  he  spoke.  Another  story
of  Hodges  is  as  followeth,  which  I  had  related  from  a  person
who  well  knew  the  truth  of  it.

“  A  neighbour  gentleman  of  Hodges  lost  his  horse ;
who  having  Hodges*  advice  for  recovering  of  him,  did  again
obtain  him.  Some  years  after,  in  a  frolic,  he  thought  to
abuse  him ;  acquainting  a  neighbour  therewith,  viz.,  that  he
had  formerly  lost  a  horse,  went  to  Hodges,  recovered  him
again,  but  saith  it  wras  by  chance,  ‘I  might  have  had  him
without  going  unto  him.  I  will  leave  some  boy  or  other  at
the  town*s-end  with  my  horse,  and  then  go  to  Hodges*  and
enquire  for  him.*  He  did  so,  gave  his  horse  to  a  youth,  with
orders  to  walk  him  till  he  returned ;  away  he  goes  with  his
friend,  salutes  Hodges,  thanks  him  for  his  former  courtesy,
and  now  desires  the  like,  having  lost  a  horse  lately.  Hodges,
after  some  time  passing,  said,  ‘  Sir,  your  horse  is  lost,  and
never  to  be  recovered.*  ‘  I  thought  what  skill  you  had,*  re¬
plies  the  gallant,  ‘  my  horse  is  in  a  lane  at  the  town*s-end.*
With  that  Hodges  swore,  (as  he  was  too  much  given  into  that
vice,)  ‘Your  horse  is  gone,  and  you  will  never  have  him
again.*  The  gentleman  departed  in  great  derision  of  Hodges,
and  went  where  he  left  his  horse ;  when  he  came  there  he
found  the  boy  fast  asleep  upon  the  ground,  the  boy*s  arm  in
the  bridle.  He  returns  again  to  Hodges,  desiring  his  aid,
being  sorry  for  his  former  abuse.  Old  Will  swore,  ‘  Begone,
begone,  go  look  for  your  horse.*  This  business  ended  not
so,  for  the  malicious  man  brought  Hodges  into  the  Star
Chamber  for  sorcery,  bound  him  over  to  the  assizes,  put
Hodges  to  great  expence ;  but  by  means  of  the  Lord  Dudley,
if  I  remember  aright,  or  some  other  person  thereabouts,  he
overcame  the  gentleman  and  was  acquitted.**

And  again  Lilly  says,  “I  was  very  familiar  with  one
Sarah  Skelhorne,  who  had  been  speculatrix  unto  one  Arthur
Gauntlett,  about  Gray*s  Inn,  a  very  lewd  fellow,  professing
physick ;  this  Sarah  had  a  perfect  sight,  and  indeed  the  best
eyes  for  that  purpose  I  ever  yet  did  see.  This  Sarah  lived  for
a  long  time,  even  until  her  death,  with  one  Mrs.  Stockman,
in  the  Isle  of  Purbeck,  and  died  about  sixteen  years  since.
Her  mistress  one  time  being  desirous  to  accompany  her
mother,  the  Lady  Beaconsfield,  unto  London,  who  lived
twelve  miles  from  her  habitation,  caused  Sarah  to  inspect
her  crystal,  to  see  if  she,  viz.,  her  mother  was  gone,  yea  or
not ;  the  angels  appeared  and  shewed  her  mother  opening  a

x  2


264


On  the  Ancient  Magic  Crystal,


trunk  and  taking  out  a  red  waistcoat,  whereby  she  perceived
she  was  not  gone.  Next  day  she  went  to  her  mother’s,  and
there,  as  she  entered  the  chamber,  she  was  opening  a  trunk,
and  had  a  red  waistcoat  in  her  hand.”

Lilly  wrote  the  account  of  his  life  to  and  by  the  request
of  Elias  Ashmole,  (the  founder  of  the  Ashmolean  Museum,
Oxford,)  and  in  reference  to  these  and  similar  relations,  says,
“I  may  seem  to  some  to  write  incredibilia,  be  it  so,  but  know¬
ing  unto  whom,  and  for  whose  only  sake  I  do  write  them,  I
am  much  comforted  therewith,  well  knowing  you  are  the
most  knowing  man  in  these  curiosities  of  any  man  now  living
in  England.”

So  far  as  my  own  experience  extends,  I  feel  convinced
that  nothing  approaching  a  transmission  of  thought  takes
place  between  the  caller  and  the  seer,  in  fact,  the  vision  in
the  glass  is  often  quite  unconnected  with  what  is  passing  in
the  minds  of  either.  In  this  country  the  seer  generally  in¬
spects  the  crystal  for  himself,  and  the  object  he  perceives  is
known  only  to  himself,  and  concerns  alone  his  own  private
affairs.  Upon  referring  to  a  diary  I  formerly  kept,  I  find
the  following  entry.*

“  it  die,  Oct.  9,  1834.  This  evening  I  charged  my  crystal

(a  glass  sphere),  and  J -  N - inspected  it,  she  wished

to  see  her  mother  who  lived  at  Worcester.  Upon  commenc¬
ing  the  call  a  second  time,  she  perceived  a  straight  streak  of
light,  which  appeared  to  open  like  a  pair  of  compasses,  and
she  then  saw  the  head,  and  gradually  the  whole  person  of
her  mother,  shoulders,  waist,  &c.,  but  she  could  not  see  any
feet.  She  described  her  mother  as  dressed  in  a  green  gown
with  yellow  spots,  and  a  purple  silk  handkerchief  with  blue
spots  over  her  shoulders,  her  dark  hair  parted  over  her  fore¬
head.  She  said  her  mother  appeared  to  be  well.

“  M.  inspected  the  crystal,  but  had  no  vision.”

This  J.  N.  was  a  young  woman,  about  twenty  years  of
age,  and  although  I  knew  the  purpose  for  which  she  inspected,
yet  having  no  knowledge  of  the  absent  party,  it  certainly
could  not  be  a  transmission  of  my  thought.  But,  says  the
rationalist,  it  was  the  embodiment  of  her  own.  Granted —

*  Nothing  is  more  likely  than  that  John  Lilly  may  have  encountered  and
even  have  produced  many  genuine  phenomena  of  the  class  now  known  as  clair¬
voyance  :  but  he  is  a  confirmed  charlatan,  in  whose  hands  truth  itself, — to  parody
Burke, — loses  half  its  goodness  in  losing  all  its  purity.  His  autobiography  is,
nevertheless,  capital ;  it  reads  like  a  foretaste  of  Defoe,  and,  as  it  is  difficult  to
think  that  Defoe,  as  he  wrote  fiction,  did  not  sometimes  come  to  believe  that
what  he  related  was  fact,  so  Lilly,  it  is  not  at  all  impossible,  was  once  or  twice
so  far  carried  away  by  fervour  and  habit  of  invention  as  to  feel  as  if  he  was  telling
the  truth. — Zoist.


by  Mr.  Hockley.  265

still  the  following  experiment  will  shew  even  that  might  not
have  been  the  case.

“  O  die ,  Nov.  9,  1834.  I  charged  the  crystal  for  E.  T.
She  wished  to  see  a  gentleman  of  her  acquaintance  (but  a
perfect  stranger  to  myself),  and  who  then  resided  a  short
distance  from  London.  Upon  my  first  charging  the  glass,
she  perceived  only  an  eye  looking  at  her ;  but  upon  repeating
the  charge,  the  whole  face  and  body  to  the  waist  formed
gradually.  So  distinctly  did  the  vision  appear,  that  she  per¬
ceived  even  a  scar  he  had  on  his  right  cheek,  he  was  dressed
in  black,  with  white  neckerchief  and  white  shirt  studs.

u  I  afterwards  charged  for  another  person,  but  they  had
no  vision.”

In  this  case  the  speculatrix  had  never  seen  the  party  in
question  in  any  other  than  a  black  silk  neckerchief  and  jet
studs,  but  it  afterwards  appeared  that  the  gentleman,  being
then  in  mourning  for  his  deceased  wife,  he  on  Sundays  wore
a  white  neckcloth  and  diamond  studs,  a  circumstance  she  was
at  the  time  perfectly  unconscious  of,  and  consequently  the
vision  could  not  be  the  embodiment  of  her  own  thoughts.  I
will  just  add  one  more  relation  to  prove  the  fallacy  of  Dr.
C/s  opinion.

In  1842,  an  old  and  worthy  friend,  of  whose  strict  veracity
I  have  no  possible  reason  to  doubt,  came  from  Burnham  with
a  relative  to  transact  some  business  in  London,  and  during
the  time  of  my  absence  from  home  with  his  relation,  he  took
up  from  sheer  curiosity  a  small  oval  mounted  crystal,  which
I  had  been  using  (without  effect)  shortly  before,  and  then
stood  upon  the  table ;  and  after  examining  it  and  trying  to
guess  its  use,  he  observed  it  to  become  clouded,  this  at  first
he  attributed  to  his  breath,  but  upon  further  observing  it,
the  cloud,  as  he  expressed  it,  appeared  to  open  like  a  pair  of
ostriches  legs,  which  gradually  resolved  itself  into  the  form
of  a  skeleton.  He  has  since  told  me  that  at  the  same  time
he  felt  so  great  an  oppression  of  giddiness  and  alarm,  that
he  immediately  replaced  the  crystal,  and  was  a  considerable
time  before  he  could  throw  off  the  unpleasant  sensations  it
had  produced.  It  was  not  until  nearly  two  years  after  this
that  he  ventured  to  tell  me  the  circumstance ;  but  I  could
never  by  any  means  induce  him  to  inspect  it  again.  It  is
remarkable  that  a  few  months  after  this  happened  his  rela¬
tive,  with  whom  I  was  absent,  died.

In  this  case  there  was  no  embodiment  of  thought,  no
angle  of  incidence  equalling  the  angle  of  reflexion,  and  it
would  be  difficult  to  persuade  my  friend,  a  hale  and  hearty
farmer  of  fifty,  that  at  noon-day  he  was  dreaming.


266


Mesmerism  and  Chloroform  in  India,


“  r ,”  in  p.  69  of  The  Zoist,  considers  this  mode  of  divi¬
nation  as  precisely  analogous  to  one  of  Mr.  Braid’s  methods
of  inducing  sleep ;  but  in  that  he  is  most  certainly  in  error;
there  is  not  the  slightest  analogy  between  Mr.  Braid’s  process
of  producing  sleep  by  fatiguing  the  rectus  and  levator  muscle
of  the  eye,  and  the  method  of  inspecting  the  crystal.  Mr.
Braid’s  method  is  to  fix  a  small  but  conspicuous  object  above
the  level  of  the  eye,  (the  stopper  of  a  bottle  was  the  first
object  he  employed,)  and  then  desiring  his  subjects  to  fix
their  gaze  steadfastly  upon  its  outer  extremity,  their  eyelids
generally  closed  in  sleep  in  a  few  minutes,  often  a  few  seconds,
thus  causing  congestion  by  a  rapid  exhaustion  of  the  natural
sensibility  of  the  retina  and  motive  nerves  of  the  eye  and
eyelids ;  or,  in  Mr.  Braid’s  own  w  ords,  “  My  phenomena,  I
consider,  arise  entirely  from  the  patient  keeping  his  eyes
fixed  in  one  position,  and  the  greater  the  strain  on  them  the
better,  and  the  mind  rivetted  to  one  idea.”

On  the  contrary,  when  inspecting  the  crystal,  it  is  held
in  the  party’s  hand,  in  the  position  most  easy  to  himself,  and
he  retains  the  full  possession  of  his  faculties  and  conversa¬
tional  powers.  But  if  “jP”  is  still  wedded  to  his  hypnotic
theory,  perhaps  he  wfiil  try  a  few  experiments  by  squinting,
say  at  a  decanter  stopper,  and  then  favour  us  in  the  next
Zoist  with  his  revelations.  As  for  the  visions  in  the  crystal
being  as  “T”  supposes,  the  result  of  merely  “the  earnest
gaze  and  concentration  of  the  mind  to  one  idea as  well
might  he  assert  that  Sir  John  Herschell,  Adams,  or  Gasparis,
when  scrutinizing  every  point  of  the  starry  heavens  with
telescopic  eye,  were  self-hypnotized,  and  their  resplendent
discoveries,  which  have  placed  them  foremost  in  the  ranks  of
science,  were  but  the  revelations  of  a  neuro-hypnotic  trance.

For  myself  I  am  content  to  believe  that  the  faith  of  our
forefathers  were  not  such  “wretched  superstitious  absurdi¬
ties;”  and  that  “there  are  realty  things  in  nature  of  which
our  modern  philosophy  does  not  permit  us  to  dream.”

London.  Fred.  Hockley.


IV.  Mesmerism  and  Chloroform  in  India.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

I  extract  the  following  from  the  Calcutta  Star,  of  the  6th
of  last  June  : —

“  Mesmerism.

“  To  the  Editor  of  the  Madras  Spectator.

“Dear  Sir, — Encouraged  by  the  ready  insertion  which
you  gave  to  my  last  letter,  detailing  a  successful  case  of  pain-


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


267


less  operation,*  I  now  do  myself  the  pleasure  of  recording  in
your  columns  a  few  remarks  upon  mesmerism,  as  a  medical
agent  for  the  cure  of  chronic  diseases.

“  In  the  last  report  of  the  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital, f
that  enlightened  'physician ,  Dr.  Esdaile,  mentions  the  suc¬
cessful  application  of  this  mysterious  agent,  in  the  case  of  a
young  man  who  had  been  dumb  for  a  very  considerable  period :
and,  if  my  memory  is  correct,  the  aphonia  was  brought  on
from  the  administration  to  the  youth  of  some  poisonous  drug,
and  hence  the  dumbness  was  very  probably  attributable  to
paralysis  of  the  muscles  of  the  larynx  and  tongue.  Therefore
I  am  induced  to  call  the  attention  of  the  profession  to  the
following  case,  which  will  make  evident  the  value  of  mes¬
merism  in  other  forms  of  paralysis.

“A  fine  healthy  Sepoy  (a  native  of  Hindostan)  was  ad¬
mitted  into  hospital,  with  complete  loss  of  motion  and  sen¬
sibility  in  the  right  leg,  from  the  hip  downwards :  he  stated
that  he  was  quite  well  at  roll-call  the  previous  evening,  but
had  slept  during  the  night  in  the  open  air,  and  awoke  towards
morning  feeling  very  chilly,  and,  to  his  great  horror,  found
himself  unable  to  walk.  This  man  was  under  my  care  for
about  three  months ,  during  which  period  all  the  usual  remedies
suited  to  his  case  were  used ,  without  any  relief.  After  some
trouble,  I  threw  the  man  into  a  mesmeric  sleep,  and  subse¬
quently  had  the  limb  mesmerised  every  day  (by  which  I  mean
confining  the  passes  to  the  affected  limb,  from  the  hip  down¬
wards  to  the  heel),  and,  except  upon  the  first  day,  this  man
was  never  entranced.  I  regret  that  I  have  not  kept  notes  of
this  case,  but  I  think  that  in  about  six  weeks  after  the  mes¬
meric  treatment  was  commenced,  he  was  enabled  to  return
to  his  military  duties,  quite  restored  to  health  and  activity.

“The  first  symptoms  of  returning  sensibility  were  fre¬
quent  cramps  in  the  affected  limb,  and  subsequently  the  man
said,  that  he  felt  as  if  some  person  was  beating  him  severely
along  the  back  of  the  leg.  This  complaint  was  reiterated
every  time  the  mesmeriser’s  hand  had  passed  over  the  limb.

“In  tic  douloureux,  sciatica,  chronic  rheumatism,  and
neuralgic  pains  of  all  kinds,  I  have  found  mesmerism  a  remedy
of  priceless  value.  In  traumatic  tetanus  I  have  tried  it  only
once,  but,  though  not  successfully,  it  most  certainly  dimin¬
ished  the  sufferings  of  my  patient,  by  visibly  prolonging  the
interval  between  the  spasms.

“  I  was  lately  called  in  to  see  a  European  lady,  suffering
under  the  most  violent  spasms  I  have  ever  beheld.  On  former

*  I  shall  be  happy  to  forward  this  case  if  favoured  with  an  account  of  it. — J.  E.
t  I  have  not  yet  received  Dr.  Esdaile’s  last  report. — J.  E.


268


Mesmerism  and  Chloroform  in  India,


occasions,  large  doses  of  morphia  always  arrested  them ;  but
in  this  attack,  her  usual  remedy  appeared  powerless,  and  at
the  urgent  request  of  my  patient  I  proceeded  to  mesmerise
her,  and  in  about  five,  minutes  she  ivas  free  from  agony,  and
has  had  no  return  of  her  sufferings.

“  This  lady  was  not  thrown  into  deep  mesmeric  sleeps,  but
merely  dozed  off  for  some  minutes,  though,  from  the  twink¬
ling  of  the  eyelids  and  other  symptoms,  there  would  have
been  (in  my  opinion)  no  difficulty  in  completely  mesmerising
her,  had  such  been  required  for  her  relief.

“  Believe  me,  my  dear  Sir,

“  Your's  faithfully,

“G.  Morrogh,  M.D.

“  Asst.  Surgeon  Madras  Army,  and
attached  to  H.  H.  the  Nizam's  Service.
“Worrungal,  May  19th,  1849."

Dr.  Esdaile  has  one  more  rational,  benevolent,  and  liberal
contemporary — Dr.  Morrogh.

I  have  recorded  Indian  painless  operations  in  the  mesmeric
state  by  Dr.  Johnstone  (No.  XVIII.,  p.  192),  Dr.  Martin  (No.
XXVI.,  p.  124),  Dr.  Webb  (No.  XXVI.,  p.  126),  and,— ob¬
serve  this,  ye  flourishing  English  and  metropolitan  surgeons,
who  have  not  humanity,  not  high  intelligence,  not  nobleness
of  mind,  not  moral  courage,  enough  to  do  the  same, — and  by
a  native  surgeon,  named,  not  Liston,  Brodie,  Lawrence,
Green,  or  Key,  but,  to  your  shame,  Baboo  Buddenchunder
Chowdry,  with  a  dark  skin,  and  not  a  Christian  (No.  XXII.,
p.  144).  Note* this,  ye  four  worthy  young  natives,

Dwarikanoth  Bose,

Bholanath  Bose,

Gopalchunder  Seal,
and  S.  G.  Chuckenbuty,

who  were  educated  in  University  College,  London,  and  never
instructed  in  mesmerism,  as  you  ought  to  have  been;  but,
on  the  other  hand,  cruelly  taught  to  despise  it.  Take  Dr.
Esdaile  for  your  example :  not  your  late  professors  at  Uni¬
versity  College — not  Dr.  Mouat,  Mr.  0‘Shaughnessy,  and
the  other  medical  opponents  of  Dr.  Esdaile  in  India,  who  are
stereotyped  in  The  Zoist  for  the  history  of  medicine :  nor
your  late  guardian,  Dr.  Goodeve,  who,  with  you,  saw  the
great  truth  of  mesmerism  at  my  house,  and  lost  his  patient
when  he  removed  a  scrotal  tumor  in  India  (No.  XV.,  pp.  316-
19),  and  who,  in  his  recent  introductory  lecture  at  the  opening
of  the  session  of  the  Calcutta  Medical  College,  expatiated
upon  the  beauties  of  ether  and  chloroform,  and  had  the  child-


269


by  Dr.  Elliot  son .

isliness  not  to  allude  to  mesmerism  or  Dr.  Esdaile.  Dr.
Goodeve  has  been  further  weak  enough  to  print  his  lecture  at
Calcutta.  He  believes  his  patient  died  from  the  shock  of
the  operation :  and  this  the  mesmerism  which  he  despises
prevents.*

I  extract  the  following  from  the  Calcutta  Star  of  the  3rd
of  last  July  : —

“Fatal  Surgical  Operation — Chloroform  the  Anaesthetic
Agent. — An  operation  was  performed,  on  Saturday  afternoon,
by  Mr.  Joseph,  the  Surgeon,  in  the  presence  of  Drs.  Peet,
Burn,  Bremner,  Yuill,  and  other  gentlemen  of  the  medical
profession,  for  the  removal  of  an  enormous  scrotal  tumor,
between  sixty  and  seventy  pounds  in  weight,  from  the  body
of  a  Mahomedan,  about  40  years  of  age,  following  the  calling
of  a  boatman.  The  patient  having  been  reduced  to  insen¬
sibility  by  the  use  of  chloroform,  the  operation  was  com¬
menced,  and  performed  with  skill  and  expedition — no  return
to  consciousness  taking  place  during  its  progress.  After  all
was  over,  the  man  revived,  said  he  felt  relieved,  and  was  put
to  bed.  Much  exhaustion  and  1  sinking^  were  however,  appa¬
rent,  and  in  about  half  an  hour,  we  believe ,  he  breathed  his  last.

“In  this  case  no  blame  was  due  to  the  operator,  who  per¬
formed  his  task  in  a  most  masterly  manner ;  nor  was  the  fatal
result  owing  to  any  immediate  effect  produced  by  the  chloro¬
form,  the  influence  of  which  went  off  long  before  the  man's
death  ensued.  We  cannot  help  being  reminded,  however,
that  Dr.  Esdaile,  of  the  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital,  has
put  on  record  his  distinct  and  emphatic  opinion  that  in  all
operations  of  a  severe  nature,  or  attended  by  considerable
hsemorrhage,  it  is  highly  dangerous  to  exhibit  narcotics  with
the  view  of  suspending  sensation.  We  quote  the  following
observations  from  the  last  report  of  this  gentleman : —

“  ‘Let  me  ask,  who  would  venture  to  reduce  a  man  to  insensi¬
bility  by  chloroform,  for  ten  days  in  succession,  to  have  a  stone
broken  down  in  his  bladder,  or  to  have  the  orbit  of  his  eye  dressed
and  sponged  with  nitric  acid  as  often  as  was  desirable,  or  who  would
dare  to  remove  scrotal  tumors  weighing  50,  60,  70,  80,  90,  100  lbs.
and  upwards,  under  the  influence  of  any  narcotic  drug  whatever  ?
Not  I  certainly ,  and  I  would  earnestly  dissuade  any  one  from  at¬
tempting  it,  or  suffering  it  to  be  done  to  him.  We  all  know  now
that  chloroform  has  a  tendency  to  paralyze  the  heart,  lungs,  and
brain,  audit  requires  no  doctor’s  learning  to  be  convinced  that  such
exhausting  operations  can  only  be  performed  with  a  chance  of  success
in  cases  where  the  vital  powers  are  intact.  When  these  tumors  weigh
above  401bs.,  the  loss  of  blood  is  so  profuse,  that  the  pulse  is  usually

*  See  Dr.  Esdaile’ s  remarks  in  No.  XV.,  p.  319.


270


Mesmerism  and  Chloroform  in  India ,


extinguished  on  the  spot,  and  it  takes  a  considerable  time  to  revive
it.  The  brain  is  so  exhausted  by  the  sudden  withdrawal  of  blood  that
the  patient  awakes  in  a  half  delirious  state,  and,  the  stomach  sym¬
pathizing,  vomiting  also  takes  place,  and  hours  elapse  before  the
equilibrium  of  the  sanguineous  and  nervous  systems  is  re-established.
In  the  last  tumor  of  401bs.,  I  ordered  the  solid  clots  to  be  gathered,
and  they  weighed  2^1bs.,  and,  taking  into  account  the  serum  that
covered  the  floor,  with  the  blood  in  the  mass,  I  presume  that  about
51bs.  of  blood  were  discharged  in  a  few  minutes — half  of  the  blood
in  the  whole  body,  according  to  Harvey,  and  in  cases  of  double  this
size,  and  upwards,  the  loss  of  blood  must  be  much  greater.

“  ‘  It  must  be  evident  to  every  one  of  common  sense,  that  per¬
sons  fainting  from  this  immense  haemorrhage  (as  they  usually  do)
would  probably  never  revive  if  the  vitality  of  the  heart  and  brain
was  lowered  ‘by  any  influence  whatever.  The  late  fatal  case  at  the
Medical  College  here  illustrates  this ;  although  there  was  only  mode¬
rate  bleeding,  we  are  told  the  patient  fainted  and  never  recovered,
and  Mr.  OcShaughnessv,  in  reporting  the  case,  very  truly  said,  that
all  narcotic  drugs  were  open  to  the  objection  that  they  prevented  the
re-action  necessary  for  recovery  from  injuries,  attended  with  great
exhaustion  of  the  system.  Mesmerism  is  the  only  known  anaesthetic
agent  to  which  this  does  not  apply,  for  it  not  only  protects  but  exalts
organic  life ;  the  best  proof  of  which  is,  that  not  one  of  these  mon¬
strous  tumor  cases  has  been  lost  in  consequence  of  the  operation

“  The  above,  it  will  be  said,  are  the  opinions  of  a  professor
of  mesmerism — a  man  who  may  naturally  be  supposed  to  be
anything  but  favourable  to  the  use  of  artificial  agents  for  the
production  of  insensibility.  Dr.  Esdaile,  however,  though  a
mesmerist,  is  no  bigot ;  and  the  fact  cannot  be  gainsayed,
that  while  an  immense  number  of  tumors,  some  as  much  as
lOOlbs.  in  weight,  have  been  removed  by  him,  with  the  aid
of  mesmerism,  without  a  single  fatal  result;  more  than  one
instance  (for  this  is  not  the  first )  of  the  use  of  chloroform  in
Bombay,  in  the  removal  of  tumors,  have  terminated  in  the
death  of  the  patients .  The  fact  is  one  which  should  excite
attention  and  induce  philosophical  enquiry ;  and  the  expecta¬
tion  that  it  will  do  so,  is  not,  we  hope,  destined  to  be  dis¬
appointed.

“  Since  writing  the  above  we  have  been  favoured  with  the
following  account  of  Mr.  Joseph's  operation,  which  we  have
been  assured  may  be  depended  on  as  strictly  accurate.  It
will  be  seen  that  the  escape  of  blood,  at  the  time  the  tumor
was  removed,  was  very  small  indeed ;  but  of  course  an  immense
deal  of  the  vital  fluid  must  have  been  withdrawn  in  the  huge
excrescence  itself.

“  On  the  afternoon  of  Saturday  last,  Mr.  J.  M.  Joseph,  Member
*  See  No.  XXVI.,  p.  129,  Zoist .


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


271


of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  London,  and  a  private  practitioner
in  Bombay,  performed  the  above  named  operation  on  a  Mahomedan,
by  name  Shaw  Mahomed,  aged  38  years.  The  tumor,  measured  in
circumference  round  the  body,  four  feet,  round  the  neck  twenty-two
inches,  and  in  length  two  feet,  five  inches. — On  the  patient  standing
erect,  it  almost  reached  to  his  ancles;  and  when  removed,  weighed
sixty-seven  pounds,  fourteen  ounces  Avoirdupois  !  The  man  had
been  bed-ridden  upwards  of  five  years,  and  had  repeatedly  and
urgently  solicited  Mr.  Joseph  to  perform  the  operation,  saying  he
preferred  death,  to  living  in  such  affliction. — Previous  to  adminis¬
tering  the  chloroform,  Mr.  Joseph  clearly  explained  to  him,  the
great  risk  attendant  on  the  operation,  and  to  this,  the  man  reite¬
rated  his  urgent  solicitations  to  have  the  tumor  removed.  The  ope¬
ration  was  performed  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Burn,  Professor  Peet,
Doctors  Bremner,  Reynolds,  and  Yuill.  This  latter  gentleman,  and
Professor  Peet,  assisted  in  the  operation.  Chloroform  was  adminis¬
tered,  and  four  minutes  elapsed  before  it  took  effect.  The  time  of
operating,  from  the  first  incision  to  the  separation  of  the  tumor  from
the  body,  occupied  only  thirteen  minutes  and  a  half,  and  including
the  ligaturing  of  the  vessels  (only  four  ligatures  were  applied),  twenty-
five  minutes.  The  patient,  on  being  carried  from  the  operating  table
spoke  to  several  of  his  relatives  near  him,  and  on  being  offered  some
brandy  and  water,  expressed  a  wish  to  have  wine,  which  was  imme¬
diately  given  him.  Throughout  the  operation  his  pulse  was  good,
and  his  appearance,  generally,  gave  hopes  to  every  one  that  he  would
survive.  After  he  had  been  placed  on  his  bed,  about  40  minutes,  he
swooned  off,  and  although  every  attention  was  paid  to  restore  him,
and  every  precautionary  measure  adopted  by  Mr.  Joseph  and  others,
he  never  rallied.

<c  ‘  Mr.  Joseph  expressed  his  decided  opinion  that  the  death  of
the  patient  was  occasioned  by  the  excessive  shock  the  system  must
necessarily  have  received  from  so  sudden  removal  of  so  large  a  mass
from  the  body,  and  the  loss  of  so  large  a  quantity  of  blood  as  the
tumor  must  have  contained,  although  very  little  blood  was  lost  during
the  operation.

“  ‘  A  somewhat  similar  operation  was  performed  some  years  back,
(9th  April  1831)  by  Mr.  Aston  Key,  surgeon  to  Guy’s  Hospital,
except  that,  in  the  above  case,  the  tumor  weighed  eleven  pounds,
six  ounces  more,  and  Mr.  Key’s  patient  died  on  the  operating  table,
after  being  there  one  hour  and  three  quarters.  As  it  is  analogous
to  that  under  notice,  for  an  account  of  the  same,  we  refer  the  reader
to  2nd  Vol.,  p.  806,  of  Dr.  Chelius’s  System  of  Surgery .’  ”* — Tele¬
graph  and  Courier ,  April  23.

The  editor  of  the  Star  makes  these  reflections : —

“We  give  elsewhere  the  particulars  of  a  fatal  operation

*  The  account  of  Mr.  Key’s  unfortunate  operation  will  be  found  in  the
Lancet,  No.  398,  and  of  a  similar  unfortunate  operation  by  Dr.  Goodeve  in
No.  781.  I  referred  to  Mr.  Key  in  No.  XV.,  pp.  316,  317,  327,  and  the  laugh¬
able  absurdity  of  his  opposition  is  recorded  at  p.  328.  He  declared  himself  too
sagacious  to  be  deceived  into  a  belief  of  mesmerism. — J.  E.


272


Mesmerism  and  Chloroform  in  India,


for  the  removal  of  a  scrotal  tumor  of  between  sixty  and  seventy
pounds  weight,  in  which  chloroform  was  the  ansesthetic  agent
employed,  at  Bombay.  The  patient  was  a  man  of  about  forty
years  of  age,  and  survived  the  conclusion  of  the  operation
some  forty  minutes.  Our  Bombay  contemporary  says:  ‘In
this  case  no  blame  was  due  to  the  operator,  who  performed
his  task  in  a  most  masterly  manner ;  nor  was  the  fatal  result
owing  to  any  immediate  effect  produced  by  the  chloroform  ;
the  influence  of  which  went  off  long  before  the  man’s  death
ensued/  We  rather  surmise  that  the  Telegraph  has  accident¬
ally  omitted  the  word  active  before  influence.  Dr.  Esdaile
long  ago  asked,  ‘who  would  dare  to  remove  scrotal  tumors
weighing  50,  60,  70,  80,  90,  100  lbs.  and  upwards,  under  the
influence  of  any  narcotic  drug  whatever?’  Dr.  Joseph  has
ventured  to  attempt  the  removal  of  one  of  the  medium  size
quoted,  the  weight  being  67  lbs.  14  oz.  avoirdupois,  and  the
result  has  been  (we  do  not  say  unhappily,  for  the  patient
himself  thought  death  preferable  to  living  on  under  the  afflic¬
tion  with  which  he  was  afflicted)*  precisely  that  foretold  by
Dr.  Esdaile,  who  said,  ‘We  all  know  that  chloroform  has  a
tendency  to  paralyze  the  heart,  lungs  and  brain,  and  it  re¬
quires  no  doctor’s  learning  to  be  convinced  that  such  exhaust¬
ing  operations  can  only  be  performed  with  a  chance  of  success
in  cases  where  the  vital  powers  are  intact.’  Again  the  doctor
said,  ‘  It  must  be  evident  to  every  one  of  common  sense,  that
persons  fainting  from  this  immense  haemorrhage  (as  they
usually  do)  would  probably  never  recover  if  the  vitality  of
the  heart  and  brain  was  lowered  by  any  influence  whatever.’
Here  we  have  a  case  exactly  in  point, — the  use  of  chloro¬
form,  as  an  anaesthetic  agent,  having  been  attended  with
precisely  the  results  to  the  operation  foretold,  while  no  like
effect  can  be  pointed  to  as  having  awaited  the  use  of  mesmerism
for  similar  operations  of  even  a  severer  nature.  We  leave  the
anti-mesmerism  and  pro-chloroform  party  to  crack  and  digest
this  nut  as  best  they  may.”

The  Bengal  Hurkaru  and  India  Gazette  of  the  same  date
gives  the  case  also,  with  the  same  extracts  from  Dr.  Esdaile’s
writings  :  and  thus  remarks  upon  the  matter  : —

“Dr.  Esdaile  estimated  the  prudence  of  his  professional
brethren  too  highly.  It  has  not  been  so  difficult  as  he  sup-

*  If  Dr.  Joseph  had  possessed  the  intelligence  and  humanity  of  Dr.  Esdaile,
and  been  high-minded  enough  to  employ  mesmerism  instead  of  chloroform,  the
poor  patient  might  have  had  no  reason  to  prefer  death  to  life,  but  have  been  libe¬
rated  from  his  affliction  without  pain,  and  lived  on  happily,  like  the  multitude  of
Dr.  Esdaile’s  patients  who  have  been  painlessly  liberated  from  their  immense
tumors.  But  Dr.  Joseph  cannot  rise  above  routine  and  the  fear  of  his  brethren.


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


27  3


posed,  to  find  men  willing  to  use  chloroform  in  their  practice
at  any  risk  whatever;  there  are  dozens  of  doctors  in  India
now,  who  would  run  any  risk  short  of  the  certainty  of  death,
rather  than  employ  mesmerism.  But  though  perhaps  a  little
too  charitable  to  the  members  of  his  fraternity,  Dr.  Esdaile
is  a  good  prophet.  Alluding  to  the  great  flow  of  blood  that
accompanies  the  peculiar  operations  which  have  formed  the
ground-work  of  so  many  of  the  triumphs  of  mesmerism  in
India,  he  says  :  ‘ It  must  be  evident  to  every  one  of  common
sense  that  persons  fainting  from  this  immense  haemorrhage
(as  they  usually  do)  would  probably  never  revive  if  the  vitality
of  the  heart  and  brain  was  lowered  by  any  influence  whatever/
He  then  quotes  Mr.  0‘Shaughnessy’s  just  remark,  that  f  all
narcotic  drugs  are  open  to  the  objection,  that  they  prevent
the  reaction  necessary  for  recovery  from  injuries  attended
with  great  exhaustion  of  the  system/

“We  may  be  mistaken,  but  we  think  that  this  is  the  first
instance  in  which  chloroform  has  been  used  in  the  removal  of
these  tumors,  and  no  one  will  deny  that  it  is  a  very  bad
beginning.  Of  course  chloroform  had  nothing  to  do  with
the  man’s  death,  for  f  Mr.  Joseph  expressed  his  decided  opi¬
nion  that  the  death  of  the  patient  was  caused  by  the  excessive
shock  the  system  must  necessarily  have  received  from  the
sudden  removal  of  so  large  a  mass  from  the  body,  and  the
loss  of  so  large  a  quantity  of  blood  as  the  tumor  must  have
contained,  though  very  little  was  lost  during  the  operation/
The  only  drawback  to  our  confidence  in  this  opinion  is  the
fact  afforded  by  Dr.  Esdaile,  that  *  not  one  of  his  monstrous
tumor  cases  has  been  lost  in  consequence  of  the  operation  /  and
if  we  remember  rightly,  the  only  death  that  has  happened
out  of  some  fifty  cases,  occurred  from  a  fever  that  followed
the  extirpation  of  the  tumor.  We  beg  to  tell  Mr.  Joseph
that  his  opinion  is  good  for  nothing  when  tried  by  this  test.
It  is  charitable  to  hope  that  this  gentleman  has  never  heard
of  Dr.  Esdaile’s  mesmeric  facts,  but  we  are  afraid  we  shall
not  be  allowed  to  stretch  our  charity  so  far.  To  exhibit  on
certain  occasions  a  sort  of  consecrated  stupidity ,  is  the  peculiar
privilege  of  the  opposers  of  truth  all  the  world  over.  Whatever
be  the  degree  of  a  man’s  intelligence,  only  set  him  to  work
defending  an  old  system,  and  he  will  expect  to  be  permitted  to
pass  for  a  fool  or  a  blind  man  now  and  then ;  and  his  exercise
of  the  privilege  will  keep  pace  with  his  bigotry  and  ingenuity.
No  other  theory  will  account  for  the  dullness  of  Mr.  DTsraeli
when  he  attempts  to  defend  Protection  by  argument  instead
of  the  clever  rhetoric  which  he  understands  so  well ;  and  no
other  theory  will  enable  us  to  understand  the  ingenious  thick-


274  Mesmerism  and  Chloroform  in  India,

headedness  which  so  many  members  of  the  medical  profession
affect  when  they  are  asked  for  a  plain  opinion  about  any
question  that  has  the  remotest  connection  with  mesmerism.
Mesmeric  facts  are  stubborn  things,  but  they  are  not  much
more  stubborn  than  those  people  who  do  not  like  to  admit
them,  and  who  feel  injured  if  you  deny  them  that  imaginary
right  of  closing  their  eyes  when  it  is  convenient  to  do  so.”

If  Dr.  Esdaile  and  the  Government  authorities  and  civilian
Natives  and  English  of  India  have  set  a  fine  example  to  the
medical  profession  and  to  society  here  at  home,  the  news¬
papers  of  India  shine  in  glorious  contrast  with  the  English
daily  and  weekly  press — which  on  the  whole  did  great  harm  to
the  subject,  and,  when  supplied  with  The  Zoist  and  urged  to
publish  our  facts,  absolutely  refused,  some  papers  despising
the  subject,  and  others  saying  that  the  medical  journals  were
the  proper  channels,  notwithstanding  they  were  told  that  the
medical  journals  refused  to  admit  a  single  fact  from  The  Zoist
or  even  to  mention  its  name,  and  though  the  newspapers
were  continually  printing  accounts  of  the  operations  under
chloroform  and  reviewing  the  medical  writings  of  persons  who
made  interest  with  them  and  wished  to  catch  patients.  Still
the  Sun  was  always  open  to  our  truths  :  the  Morning  Chronicle,
the  Morning  Herald,  and  Examiner  inserted  statements  from
The  Zoist  two  or  three  times  in  the  course  of  six  years,  and
the  Morning  Post  has  just  acted  most  nobly,  and  the  Examiner
has  kindly  not  declined  to  extract  its  liberal  remarks.  The
Morning  Post  eleven  years  ago  published  numerous  long  re¬
ports  of  the  phenomena  of  the  Okeys  and  others  as  observed
by  a  gentleman  in  the  establishment,  named  Stevens,  and
who  had  once  been  in  the  medical  profession.

But  the  India  newspapers  were  once  against  Dr.  Esdaile,
though  now,  one  and  all  are  energetically  in  his  favour.

In  a  letter  to  me,  on  the  16th  of  last  April,  Dr.  Esdaile
wrote, —

“  I  have  sent  you,  by  this  mail,  20  copies  of  my  first  half-year’s
report  from  the  new  hospital.  It  has  been  printed  in  all  the  news¬
papers,  and  therefore  has  had  a  thousand  times  the  circulation  it
would  have  had  in  the  Medical  Journal.  Our  enemies  (they  are
toothless  vipers  now)  thought  the  death  of  the  Journal  a  crowning
mercy,  but,  as  usual,  they  have  outwitted  themselves  and  made  me
much  more  formidable  than  before.  The  newspapers  are  the  only
means  of  revolutionizing  public  opinion  rapidly  when  powerful  class-
interests  and  prejudices  are  opposed  to  the  enlightenment  of  the
public.  All  open  opposition  has  been  put  down  here,  and  my  long
excited  Combativeness  begins  to  be  troublesome  for  want  of  occupa-


Great  benefit  in  a  severe  Case  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance.  275

tion.  Having  conquered  India,  like  Alexander,  I  sigh  for  other
worlds  to  subdue.  If  you  can  get  my  Reports  into  the  principal
English  papers,  John  Bull  would  soon  become  indignant  at  the
impudent  attempt  to  hoodwink  him,  and  keep  him  in  perpetual
ignorance  regarding  mesmerism.  You  have  no  professional  Levite
who  dare  address  the  public  through  the  daily  press  on  this  subject,
for  fear  of  compromising  his  dignity  and  of  being  called  an  advertizing
quack.  I  am  quite  insensible  to  such  terrors,  and  having  nothing
to  fear  or  hope  from  the  public,  I  will  persist  in  telling  them  the
truth  till  it  is  universally  received  and  valued.  I  removed  an  80
pounder  from  a  man  upwards  of  50,  a  few  days  ago.”

The  conduct  of  the  Weekly  Dispatch,  while  written  in  by
a  man  named  Williams,  was  shocking  !  and  the  snarling  Mr.
Rintoul,  the  editor  of  the  Spectator,  so  far  forgot  himself  as
to  say  of  Dr.  Esdaile,  August  1,  1846,' —

“No  military  surgeon  should  be  permitted  to  subject  soldiery  to
a  practice  repudiated  by  the  bulk  of  the  profession,  whether  mes¬
merism  or  anything  else,  for  the  sufficient  reason  we  have  stated.”

Also,  July  26,  he  had  said,

“  ‘  These  mesmeric  miracles  the  doctor  worked  at  Hooghly,  in
Bengal ;  he  has  now  departed  for  the  banks  of  the  Sutlej,  and  there
he  intends  to  work  more.  But  will  he  be  permitted  by  the  higher
military  and  medical  authorities  ?  If  private  hospital  patients  choose
to  submit  themselves  to  experiments,  they  are  free  agents ;  but  sol¬
dier  patients  are  under  martial  law,  must  obey  the  surgeons’  orders,
and  should  not  be  submitted  to  the  irregular  experiments  of  any  body
who  chooses  to  practise  upon  them  at  his  will  and  pleasure.’  Can
Mr.  Rintoul  have  the  common  feelings  of  a  man  ?  Or  is  he  in  his
senses?  He  also  forgets  that  Government  provides  Dr.  Esdaile
with  a  mesmeric  corps.” — J.  Elliotson,  Zoist ,  No.  XV.,  p.  255.

Mr.  Rintoul  ought  to  blush ;  and  so  ought  Mr.  Dilke,  the
editor  of  the  Athenaeum.


Y.  Great  Benefit,  with  remarkable  Phenomena,  in  a  severe  and
longstanding  Case  of  St.  Vitus’s  Dance.  By  Mr.  Barth.

Miss  Sarah  Newman,  aged  10  years,  was  brought  to  me  last
August  by  her  father,  who  is  a  highly  respectable  builder  at
Camden  Town.  I  immediately  saw  that  it  was  a  very  bad
case  of  St.  Vitus's  dance.  The  child's  head  was,  every  three
or  four  minutes,  drawn  round  until  the  chin  nearly  touched
the  shoulder ;  the  head  was  constantly  shaking ;  the  eyes
turning  up  and  the  eyelids  twitching ;  the  left  shoulder  was
frequently  drawn  up  and  forward ;  and  the  muscles  of  the
neck,  chest,  back,  and  abdomen  on  the  left  side  were  con¬
tinually  acting  involuntarily.  She  was  of  an  average  size  for
her  age,  but  had  an  unhealthy  sallow  complexion ;  her  head


.276


Great  benefit  in  a  severe  Case  of


was  well  formed  as  a  whole,  though  the  organs  at  the  posterior
part  were  largely  developed.  She  is  of  an  affectionate  dispo¬
sition,  and  by  no  means  deficient  in  capacity.  The  disease
had  existed  upwards  of  three  years,  and  was  supposed  to  have
been  caused  by  her  being  one  day  knocked  down  and  ridden
over,  when  she  was  both  hurt  and  frightened.  No  means  had
been  neglected  by  her  parents  to  obtain  a  cure  for  her.  She
had  been  treated  by  eight  medical  men, — physicians  and
general  practitioners ;  and  nothing  left  untried  which  their
skill  could  suggest.  Blisters  and  stimulating  ointments  had
been  applied  to  the  spine  until  it  was  raw  and  covered  with,
sores ;  she  had  been  galvanized  (or  rather,  I  imagine  electro-
magnetized)  ;  she  had  taken  iron  for  many  months,  and  much
other  medicine,  but  very  little  benefit  had  resulted  from  the
treatment.  Mr.  Newman  knew  nothing  of  mesmerism,  but
was  willing  that  it  should  be  tried,  on  the  recommendation  of
a  friend  who  had  proved  its  utility  in  his  own  person ;  and
like  a  sensible  man  he  came  at  once  to  consult  a  mesmeriser,
instead,  as  many  do,  of  first  taking  the  opinion  of  their  med¬
ical  attendant  who  probably  knows  nothing  about  mesmerism
and  denounces  it.

I  commenced  mesmerising  her  on  Aug.  22,  by  looking  at
her  eyes  and  making  quiet  long  passes  down  the  face  to  the
knees  or  feet,  for  an  hour;  she  seemed  quieted  but  did  not
close  her  eyes  or  sleep.

I  again  tried  the  same  process  next  day  with  no  better
effect,  though  I  continued  for  nearly  an  hour :  I  therefore
changed  my  mode  of  operating.  I  desired  her,  whilst  lying
on  a  sofa,  to  turn  on  her  side  and  face  the  wall,  and  made
passes  over  the  cerebellum  and  down  the  whole  spinal  column
for  twenty  minutes.  I  then  left  her  alone  for  ten  minutes,
and  on  returning  found  her  asleep.  I  allowed  her  to  sleep
undisturbed  to  ascertain  the  character  or  intensity  of  the  sleep  :
she  awoke  spontaneously  in  twenty  minutes.  Next  day  I
mesmerised  as  before  down  the  spine  for  twenty  minutes,  pre¬
viously  requiring  her  to  remain  on  the  sofa  until  told  to  rise
up ;  left  her  alone  ten  minutes,  then  found  her  asleep.  I
enquired  if  she  was  asleep  :  she  replied  in  the  affirmative.
After  allowing  her  to  sleep  for  half  an  hour  whilst  I  made
long,  quiet  passes  before  her,  I  awakened  her  easily  by  trans¬
verse  passes.

Aug.  25.  Slept  as  before  on  being  mesmerised  down  the
back,  and  began  talking  in  her  sleep  spontaneously.  I  ascer¬
tained  by  listening  and  occasionally  questioning  her  that  she
fancied  she  was  taking  her  tea  at  a  friend’s  house,  and  after¬
wards  was  dancing.


St.  Vitus’s  Dunce,  by  Mr.  Barth.


277


Aug.  27.  Was  in  her  mesmeric  state  two  hours  and  a  half.
Fancied  she  was  at  home  playing  with  her  dolls,  rose  off  the
sofa,  and  began  running  about  the  room,  took  books  off  the
table  fancying  they  were  her  dolls ;  talked  to  them  and  put
them  to  sleep  on  the  sofa ;  she  seemed  to  require  some  material
object  to  handle,  to  satisfy  her  sense  of  touch ;  her  imagina¬
tion  then  clothed  these  objects  with  the  accessories  of  dress
and  appearance.  To  her  the  books  became  real  dolls.  She
nevertheless  saw  clearly  when  her  imagination  did  not  deceive
her.  I  sent  down  to  my  children  for  a  real  doll.  They  sent
me  a  dirty,  shabby  one.  I  gave  it  her,  but  she  instantly
perceived  its  state,  beat  it,  and  scolded  it  for  having  a  dirty
face  and  such  a  dirty,  torn  frock.  She  then  took  her  pocket
handkerchief  and  tried  to  wipe  the  face  clean ;  but,  not  suc¬
ceeding  in  renewing  the  demolished  paint,  she  opened  the
door  and  threw  it  down  stairs,  desiring  that  it  might  not
again  come  to  her  until  it  was  fit  to  be  seen.  She  then  re¬
turned  to  her  books,  caressed  them,  and  evidently  believed
them  to  be  dolls.  She  eventually  discovered  that  her  eyelids
were  closed ;  tried  to  open  them  with  her  fingers,  and  became
much  excited  and  angry  because  she  could  not  succeed.  I
immediately  put  an  end  to  this  by  demesmerising.  She  awoke
quite  unconscious  of  all  that  had  passed  in  her  sleep.  I  awoke
her  on  the  same  sofa  on  which  I  had  mesmerised  her :  she
was  not  aware  that  she  had  left  it.

From  this  time  until  the  7th  of  September  she  was  daily,
for  two  hours,  in  sleep-waking.  I  could  not,  by  any  means,
induce  the  deep  sleep,  which  I  knew  would  be  more  beneficial
to  her  than  the  sleep-waking.  In  her  sleep-waking  she  gene¬
rally  romped  until  she  was  tired,  taking  most  extraordinary
leaps  from  sofas  to  chairs  and  back,  such,  in  point  of  distance
as  I  could  not  have  accomplished,  nor  could  she  in  her  waking
normal  state.  When  tired  she  would  lie  on  the  carpet  and
sing  songs  and  hymns, — 10  or  12  in  succession.  If  inter¬
rupted,  she  was  violent  and  quarrelsome ;  I  always,  therefore,
waited  until  she  became  quiet  and  kind,  and  then  awakened
her.  During  these  sleeps,  she  was  not  aware  of  being  in  a
mesmeric  state ;  she  declared  that  she  was  at  her  own  home,
and  mistook  the  persons  she  saw  for  the  different  members  of
her  own  family  :  she  always  called  me  her  sister  “Nancy.”
And  this  delusion  remained  for  some  time,  even  after  she
became  quite  clairvoyant.

On  the  7th  of  September,  in  sleep- waking,  she  went  to
the  pianoforte,  opened  a  music  book,  and  began  playing  from
the  notes  quite  as  well  as  she  could  do  if  awake.  I  observed
that  her  eyes  were  turned  up  in  their  orbits  and  the  lids  closed.

VOL.  VII.  Y


278


Great  benefit  in  a  severe  Case  of


Sept.  8th.  In  sleep- waking,  she  went  into  the  garden,
saw  and  named  different  flowers  :  then  read  a  book ;  returned
to  the  piano  and  played  from  a  book  wherever  I  opened  it,
or,  if  a  piece  was  difficult,  she  said  “  it  was  too  hard.”  I
tried  to  make  her  understand  who  I  was,  where  she  was,  and
that  she  was  asleep.  She  remembered,  after  reflecting,  that
she  had  been  mesmerised,  and  that  she  was  in  Mr.  Barth's
house,  but  said  I  was  “Nancy,”  that  “Mr.  Barth  had  gone
away.”  She  declared  she  could  not  be  asleep  because  people
shut  their  eyes  and  cannot  see  when  asleep,  that  she  could
see  and  her  eyes  must,  therefore,  be  open.  I  ultimately  con¬
vinced  her  that  her  eyes  were  shut  by  taking  her  to  a  looking
glass  and  making  her  look  at  her  closed  eyelids.  She  won¬
dered  much  how  she  could  see,  and  said  she  saw  writh  her
eyes.  I  tested  her  in  various  ways  and  was  satisfied,  as  I  had
often  been  in  previous  cases,  that  if  light  acted  on  the  retina
in  the  ordinary  mode  it  must  have  passed  through  the  frontal
bone.  She  could  not,  or  would  not  attempt  to  read  through
an  opaque  substance :  if  I  interposed  such  betwixt  her  face
and  book,  she  immediately  pushed  it  away  as  a  waking  per¬
son  might,  asking  if  I  could  read  through  it,  and  how  could
she  be  expected  to  do  so  if  I  could  not.  Every  time  she  was
mesmerised  she  passed  into  this  sleep-waking  state,  clair¬
voyant  to  the  extent  of  seeing  with  her  eyelids  closed,  until
September  12,  when  she  manifested  the  power  of  seeing
through  two  floors  and  two  brick  walls.  Whilst  romping
about,  she  stopped  suddenly,  turned  her  face  intently  to  the
floor,  exclaimed,  “  Oh,  there's  a  pretty  tiling,  I  must  have
that,”  and  ran  down  stairs  :  I  followed.  She  ran  directly
through  the  kitchen  into  the  front  area,  opened  the  door  of  a
cellar,  and  took  from  a  basket  a  kitten,  of  whose  existence  I
was  not  previously  aware.  She  carried  it  up  stairs  in  her
frock  and  nursed  it.  She  had  no  knowledge  of  this  kitten
when  awake,  but  in  her  sleep-waking  it  could  not  be  con¬
cealed  from  her.  My  cook,  who  has  a  penchant  for  the  feline
tribe,  endeavoured  daily  to  secrete  the  little  animal,  but  in
vain;  wherever  she  hid  it  Sarah  Newman,  when  asleep,  saw
it,  went  straight  to  the  place  and  took  it  away,  returning  it
when  tired  of  playing  with  it.

She  was  mesmerised  until  the  middle  of  October,  before
she  became  subject  to  any  other  phenomena  than  the  above,
excepting  that  she  evinced  the  power,  when  in  sleep-waking,
of  preventing  my  awakening  her  without  her  consent.  This
proved  a  source  of  great  trouble  to  me.  She  took  a  dislike  to
some  of  my  patients,  and,  when  they  entered  the  house,
would  by  all  means  in  her  power  seek  to  annoy  them  and  to


St.  Vitus’s  Dance,  by  Mr.  Barth.


279


prevent  my  putting  them  asleep.  When  excluded  from  the
room  they  were  in,  she  would  knock  at  the  door ;  when  con¬
fined  in  a  distant  apartment,  she  would  ring  the  bell  until  I
had  the  clapper  muffled ;  foiled  in  this,  she  would  scream  and
shriek.  I  used  to  put  an  end  to  the  first  indication  of  this
state  by  awakening  her  :  but  one  day,  when  peculiarly  noisy
and  troublesome,  she  declared  she  would  not  be  awakened,
and  all  my  endeavours  were  useless  until  she  consented  to
awake.  From  that  time  I  never  could  bring  her  out  of  sleep¬
waking  until  she  consented.

When  I  commenced  mesmerising  her,  noticing  that  she
instinctively  put  forth  her  hands  to  protect  a  portion  of  her
chest  whenever  my  hands  approached,  I  discovered  that  she
had  a  small  place — not  larger  than  a  shilling — on  the  right
side  of  the  sternum,  which  was  exquisitely  sensitive,  and
always  in  pain  :  the  most  gentle  touch  on  this  place  caused
her  great  agony.  On  examination,  I  saw  no  perceptible
cause  for  this.  My  friend,  Dr.  Thompson  of  Charlotte  Street,
examined  her  carefully,  but  could  detect  nothing  which  would
account  for  the  existence  of  the  fixed  pain  here  localized.
This  pain  she  had  felt  from  the  time  of  being  ridden  over.
I  took  her  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  kindly  saw  her  as  a  friend,
and  most  minutely  examined  her.  He  could  not  perceive  any
sign  of  injury  or  morbid  formation  which  would  indicate  a
cause  for  the  pain ;  but  said  he  had  seen  in  other  cases  of
chorea  points  of  acute  sensibility  developed  without  apparent
cause,  and,  on  percussing  the  bust  and  back,  discovered  two
more  sensitive  spots — though  sensitive  in  a  far  less  degree,
and  not  painful  unless  touched.  I  endeavoured  by  local  mes¬
merising  to  remove  this  pain  and  sensibility,  but  in  vain,
until  the  end  of  September,  when  one  day,  during  her  sleep¬
waking,  she  started  up  from  her  seat,  seized  my  right  hand
with  both  of  hers,  and  commenced  making  local  passes  with
my  hand  over  the  painful  spot.  I,  of  course,  abandoned  my
hand  to  her  directions.  In  about  five  minutes  she  relinquished
it  and  returned  to  her  seat,  saying,  “  Now  I  am  satisfied.”
“  Why  are  you  satisfied  ?”  I  enquired ;  but  she  refused  to
tell  me.  When  awakened,  she  knew  nothing  of  this,  but  the
pain  and  sensitiveness  were  gone  and  never  returned.

During  the  month  of  October,  I  frequently  stiffened  her
arms  whilst  she  was  in  sleep-waking;  and,  after  a  few
attempts,  succeeded  in  making  them  rigid  by  a  few  passes
whilst  she  was  awake.  One  day,  Dr.  Elliotson  stiffened  one
of  her  arms  while  I  stiffened  the  other;  he  then  tried  to  relax
the  arm  which  I  had  stiffened,  but  could  not  succeed ;  nor

y  2


280


Great  benefit  in  a  severe  Case  of


could  I  relax  the  arm  which  he  had  stiffened.  Each  had  to
remove  the  effect  of  his  own  operation.

During  this  time  there  had  been  very  little  diminution
of  the  disease;  but  her  general  health  and  appearance  im¬
proved.  One  of  her  acquaintances  expressed  this  by  saying
“  the  mesmerist  had  taken  the  tallow  out  of  her  face.”  Her
attendance  was  not  quite  so  punctual  as  I  thought  necessary,
and  I  therefore  had  her  to  reside  in  my  house  until  cured,
and  then  I  obtained  a  much  greater  influence  over  her.  I
was  able  soon,  not  only  to  stiffen  her  arms  by  short  passes,
but  to  stiffen  her  all  over,  so  that  locomotion  was  impossible  :
I  could  also  lock  her  jaws  at  pleasure,  and  cause  her  hands  or
feet  to  stick  apparently  to  the  table  or  chairs,  footstool  or
floor,  or  any  object  or  substance  excepting  leather.  I  cannot
tell  why  she  could  not  be  affixed  to  leather :  I  content  myself
with  mentioning  the  fact,  which  was  curious,  as  I  could
attach  her  to  wood,  books,  metals,  or  cotton  or  woollen  fabrics
without  difficulty.  I  could  make  her  arms  rigid  or  lock  her
jaws  by  my  mere  will  when  she  had  no  knowledge  that  I
willed  it.  When  she  wished  to  leave  the  room  I  could,  at
any  time,  prevent  her  by  willing  that  she  should  stay ;  and
this  silently.  I  could  not  arrest  her  progress  whilst  she  was
actually  in  motion,  but,  if  she  stood  for  a  moment  and  I
mentally  said,  “  stand,”  directing  my  thoughts  to  her,  she
stood,  unable  to  move  from  the  spot  until  I  presented  my
own  feet  to  hers  and  then  relaxed  the  muscles  of  my  own
ankles  and  legs.  If  she  placed  her  hand  on  the  table  I  could
affix  it  by  my  will  alone,  and  unfix  it  by  will.  I  could  never
unfix  her  feet  by  will  though  I  could  fix  them  by  will  to  the
floor  or  a  stool  easily.  If  she  held  a  ruler  or  paper  knife,  or
similar  article,  in  her  closed  hand,  I  could  compel  her  by  will
alone  to  unclose  her  hand  and  drop  the  article ;  or  I  could
compel  her  to  keep  her  hand  closed  and  thus  retain  the  article,
however  much  she  might  try  to  put  it  away  from  her.  My
volition  at  this  time  was  more  potent  to  control  her  voluntary
acts  than  her  own  volition ;  nor  was  it  necessary  for  her  to
know  by  any  movement,  or  external  sign,  that  I  was  willing
or  exercising  my  influence  upon  her.  Frequently,  when  she
has  been  at  the  tea  table  and  I  quite  behind  and  out  of  her
sight,  have  I  locked  her  jaws  or  arrested  her  hand  with  her
bread  and  butter  in  it,  when  half  way  betwixt  her  plate  and
mouth.  I  often  stiffened  her  with  the  intention  of  benefiting
her.  When  she  was  twitching  her  shoulders  and  shaking
her  head,  I  used  to  make  her  recline  upon  a  sofa  and
stiffen  her  neck,  trunk,  and  legs,  sticking  them  also  (appa-


St.  Vitus’s  Dance,  by  Mr.  Barth.


281


rently)  to  the  sofa,  and  her  elbows  to  her  sides,  and  leaving
her  just  sufficient  liberty  with  her  hands  to  hold  a  book  and
turn  the  leaves  or  to  knit.  I  did  this  without  putting  her  to
sleep,  and,  for  the  time,  it  effectually  put  an  end  to  any
symptom  of  her  disease,  as  motion  was  of  course  impossible  to
her  at  the  time ;  and  the  tendency  to  motion  was  abated  for
a  short  period  after  she  was  demesmerised  and  restored  to

liberty.  Dr.  Elliotson  recommended  that  she  should  be  stif-

•/

fened  all  over  and  kept  stiffened  the  greater  part  of  the  day,
or  the  whole  day  if  possible.  This  could  not  be  easily  accom¬
plished,  as  after  she  was  a  short  time  stiffened  her  skin  be¬
came  so  irritated  that  she  could  not  bear  the  itching.  Every
attempt  to  put  her  to  sleep  induced  sleep-waking,  and  in  this
state  she  felt  the  itching  as  acutely  as  when  she  was  awake ;
and  when  she  was  kept  long  in  this  state,  the  itching  became
a  positive  torture  which  it  was  not  prudent  to  prolong.

On  the  16th  of  November  she  became  an  interesting  clair¬
voyant.  Mrs.  Barth  and  I  were  seated  in  an  apartment  on
the  first  floor;  and  Miss  Newman  was  in  sleep-waking  and
more  kindly  disposed  and  tractable  than  usual.  I  requested
her  to  look  into  a  back  parlour,  which  was  not  under  us  but
built  out  into  the  garden,  and  tell  me  who  were  in  it  and
what  they  wrere  doing.  She  said  she  would  go  down  stairs
and  ascertain  and  come  and  tell  me.  I  requested  her  to  look
from  the  place  where  she  was  sitting  and  tell  me ;  assuring
her  it  was  quite  possible ;  that  if  she  wished  to  oblige  me  she
had  only  to  try  to  do  it  as  much  as  she  could,  hoping  to  suc¬
ceed,  and  that  the  power  would  come.  She  seemed  absorbed
in  the  endeavour  for  a  few  minutes,  and  her  face  turned  in
the  direction  of  the  room.  She  then  described  who  were  in
the  room,  how  they  were  seated,  and  what  they  were  doing.
I  asked  if  she  saw  into  the  room.  She  replied,  “  She  did
not  like  positively  to  say  she  saw  into  the  room ;  but  it  seemed
to  her  as  if  she  saw  into  the  room.”  I  instantly  visited  the
room  and  verified  her  statement.  As  she  had  been  playing
in  that  room  with  the  children  who  were  in  it  a  short  time
before,  her  imagination,  I  thought,  might  have  pictured  to
her  the  manner  in  which  I  found  them  engaged.  Therefore
in  about  an  hour  after  this  I  tried  her  again,  she  not  having
left  me  during  the  interval.  I  asked  her  to  look  into  that
room  and  tell  me  what  the  children  were  doing,  and  how
seated,  if  sitting.  She  appeared  to  look,  and  replied,  “  Miss
Groom  (a  little  play-fellow)  is  sitting  next  the  window;  Katie
is  sitting  next  to  Miss  Groom ;  Charlotte  is  sitting  with  her
back  to  the  fire,  and  George  by  Charlotte.”  “  What  are  they
doing?”  I  enquired.  "They  are  playing  at  school;  Miss


282  Great  benefit  in  a  severe  Case  of

Groom  is  the  governess;  Charlotte  is  pretending  to  jabber
French,  and  Miss  Groom  is  pretending  to  scold  her  for  it."
I  immediately  went  down  stairs  and  found  the  children  seated
as  described ;  I  said  to  Charlotte,  “  Have  you  been  pretend¬
ing  to  jabber  French  ?’’  Answer :  “  Yes,  Father."  “  Have
you  been  pretending  to  scold  her  for  it,  Miss  Groom  ?"
Answer  :  “  Yes,  Sir ;  I  hope  I  have  not  been  doing  wrong."
In  this  instance  my  little  patient  evinced  not  only  clear-seeing,
but  also  clear-hearing.  This  faculty  now  became  constant
to  her  when  in  sleep-waking,  as  far  as  seeing.*  I  used  to
desire  her  to  look  at  home,  a  mile  distant,  and  tell  me  what
her  sisters  were  doing;  or  what  was  cooking  for  dinner;  or
send  her  to  a  friend’s  house  to  see  what  he  was  doing.  Her
details  were  verified  on  enquiry.  At  my  house  whenever  I
wished  to  know  in  what  part  of  the  house  any  of  the  family
were;  what  the  servants  were  doing;  if  dinner  was  ready;
or  any  information  on  such  like  matters ;  I  had  only  to  put
her  to  sleep  and  ask  her  to  look  and  tell  me ;  and  I  was  as
correctly  informed  as  if  I  sent  her  to  obtain  the  information
in  her  waking  state.  This  exercise  of  her  clairvoyance  I  soon
discontinued,  in  consequence  of  a  more  useful  form  of  the
faculty  developing  itself ;  that  of  seeing  persons’  diseases  and
directing  how  they  ought  to  be  mesmerised  to  cure  or  relieve.
One  day  she  was  seated  in  her  sleep-waking  state,  working  a
mat  with  Berlin  wool ;  I  passed  into  the  next  room,  closing
the  door,  to  mesmerise  a  child  who  had  a  diseased  knee.f
When  taking  my  little  patient’s  hands  to  put  him  to  sleep  (he
slept  deeply  from  the  first  time,  though  only  two  years  of
age),  I  found  a  penny -piece  in  his  hand  and  took  it  from  him,
observing  to  his  nurse  that  it  was  not  well  to  have  copper  in
his  hand  whilst  being  mesmerised.  He  cried  at  the  loss  of
his  money,  and  his  nurse  to  quiet  him  put  a  shilling  in  his
hand.  After  I  had  made  a  few  passes  over  him,  the  door
opened,  and  in  rushed  Miss  Newman,  and  snatched  the  silver
out  of  the  child’s  hand,  saying,  “Mr.  Barth,  never  let  any
one  have  metal  in  the  hand  when  you  are  mesmerising  them
to  sleep ;  even  this  needle  which  I  have  in  my  hand  would  do
me  harm  if  you  were  making  passes  over  me.  You  do  not
mesmerise  that  child  in  the  best  manner ;  I  will  go  into  the
next  room,  I  like  that  room  best ;  if  you  let  the  door  be  open

*  I  had  a  few  instances  of  her  hearing  distant  persons  speak,  which  were  cor¬
roborated  by  the  parties.

f  This  little  patient  has  been  quite  cured  by  mesmerism  after  all  the  cus¬
tomary  medical  and  surgical  treatment  pursued  by  several  practitioners,  some  of
high  standing,  had  totally  failed.  His  parents  believe  he  would  have  been  a
cripple  for  life  but  for  mesmerism  :  they  arrive  at  this  conclusion  from  experience
of  the  non-success  of  one  system  and  perfect  success  of  the  other.


St.  Vitus’s  Dance ,  by  Mr.  Barth.


283


I  will  look  oil  and  tell  you  how  to  do  it.”  She  said  she  only
wished  the  door  open  that  I  might  hear  her  speak.  She  went
back  to  her  seat  in  an  easy  chair,  from  which  vision  was
only  possible  through  the  wall;  continued  her  Berlin  work,
and  at  intervals  directed  me,  by  speaking  loudly,  how  she
wished  the  passes  made.  If  I  deviated  (which  I  did  several
times  purposely)  from  her  instructions,  she  instantly  detected
it,  and  called  to  me  “  that  is  not  what  I  told  you  to  do ;
mind  and  do  as  I  tell  you.”

She  seemed  to  take  great  delight  in  this  new  occupation
whilst  her  faculty  lasted.  Daily  used  she  to  be  put  into  sleep¬
waking,  and,  looking  at  my  patients,  describe  the  appearance
of  their  insides,  and  tell  me  how  to  mesmerise.  At  first  she
said,  “  They  looked  so  nasty ;  it  made  her  feel  sick ;”  but  she
soon  became  used  to  it.

Such  ailments  as  tooth-ache,  head-ache,  side-ache,  and
sore  throat,  I  often  cured  in  eight  or  ten  minutes,  acting  by
her  directions,  after  failing  to  remove  by  mesmerising  to  the
best  of  my  own  judgment.  Structural  diseases  which  I  knew
to  exist,  though  not  perceptible  to  ordinary  vision,  she  has
correctly  described  when  not  in  the  room  with  the  person  she
was  viewing.

She  described  the  mesmeric  influence  as  being  bright  like
light :  that  there  were  two  sorts  in  every  body,  the  “  silver
and  the  blue  stuff:”  that  “  the  silver  was  all  over  the  body,
but  most  of  it  over  the  brain ;  the  blue  only  over  the  brain,
outside  or  beyond  the  silver :  that  sometimes  my  “  blue  stuff”
seemed  like  a  cloud  three  or  four  feet  above  my  head :  that,
when  I  made  passes  the  silver  came  out  of  my  hands  and  fin¬
gers  and  fell  like  stars ;  and  she  always  called  it  “  the  silver
stars that  it  was  the  silver  which  cured  people,  and  the
blue  seldom  did  good  and  was  generally  hurtful :  that  when  I
fixed  her  to  the  floor,  or  her  hand  to  the  table,  the  blue  came
out  of  me  and  did  it :  that  all  people  had  the  silver  and  the
blue,  and  when  they  lost  their  stars  they  became  ill :  that
every  body  has  some  stars,  and  when  all  their  stars  are  gone
they  die :  that  blue  and  silver  came  from  my  eyes  when  I
mesmerised,  as  well  as  from  my  fingers :  that  if  I  had  mes¬
merised  much  she  always  knew  it  by  observing  that  I  had  not
my  customary  quantity  of  silver.  She  could  see  the  blue  and
silver  in  all  persons ;  and  the  stars  fall  from  them  if  they
mesmerised,  but  the  shade  of  the  influence  in  different  per¬
sons  differed.  Some  had  a  paler  blue  than  I  had,  and  some
person's  stars  looked  red  or  dirty.  She  did  not  like  to  see  any
one  whose  stars  were  dull  or  dirty  make  passes  over  me,  lest
I  might  receive  harm  from  them.  She  also  saw  another  kind


281  Great  benefit  in  a  severe  Case  of

of  emanation  when  drawing-off  passes  w?ere  made  over  persons
who  were  not  in  health.  She  first  perceived  it  as  proceeding
from  herself  when  I  was  drawing  away  some  pain  from  her  by
making  passes  to  the  feet  and  throwing  my  hands  off  right  and
left  towards  the  carpet.  She  said,  “When  you  do  that  I  see
stuff  fall  off  your  hands  on  the  carpet  like  mud.”  She  always
called  it  “  dirty  stuff”  or  “  dirt :”  “  The  dirt  you  are  taking

out  of  Mr. - is  not  like  my  dirt ;  his  is  of  a  drab  colour,

mine  looks  more  like  mud :”  “  I  know  that  it  is  not  real
dirt ;  but  it  looks  exactly  like  it.  When  you  throw  it  on  the
carpet,  it  spreads  about  and  goes  away,  Dirt  would  do  some
people  harm  if  you  throw  it  on  them.”

There  is  not  anything  in  these  declarations  inconsistent
with  reason.  She  neither  had  nor  needed  prompting :  the
statements  were  spontaneously  made  in  the  first  instance,  and,
whenever  questioned  in  her  sleep-waking  respecting  the  sub¬
ject,  she  was  always  consistent  in  confirming  her  first  state¬
ment  by  her  present  perceptions  and  declarations.  I  am  now
in  the  habit  of  mesmerising  two  clairvoyants  who  see  similar
emanations ;  excepting  that  one  can  only  see  the  influence
which  proceeds  from  me.  I  also  am  acquainted  wdth  a  lady
who  has  a  subject  that  is  occasionally  clairvoyant  and  gives  a
similar  description  of  the  influence  to  that  furnished  by  Miss
Newman,  seeing  silver  and  blue,  and  describing  the  silver  as
being  the  healing  and  curative  influence.  Nearly  all  mes-
merisers  concur  in  the  main  facts  of  a  luminous  emanation
proceeding  from  their  fingers  being  seen  by  their  sleep-wakers ;
and  of  some  persons  who  can  in  a  darkened  chamber  see  this
emanation  even  in  their  normal  state ;  also  that  the  luminosity
contains  two  or  more  colours,  and  that  the  colour  and  inten¬
sity  differ  in  different  individuals.

On  the  29th  of  November,  whilst  Miss  Newman  was  in
her  sleep-waking,  she  had  a  very  severe  pain  near  the  heart.
I  placed  a  folded  handkerchief  over  the  part  and  breathed
strongly  upon  it,  and  in  four  or  five  minutes  the  pain  sub¬
sided.  She  soon  afterwards  had  a  similar  pain  in  the  back
under  the  left  blade-bone,  which  was  also  breathed  upon  until
the  pain  was  gone.  These  pains  seemed  to  have  exhausted
her ;  and  she  passed  into  deep  unconscious  sleep  for  ten  mi¬
nutes.  She  aroused  from  this  state  into  sleep-waking,  and
addressed  me  seriously  and  earnestly.  She  said  she  could  see
what  I  must  do  in  order  to  cure  her :  that  she  could  not  be
cured  without  having  a  great  many  of  these  pains  :  that  she
must  have  eight  of  these  pains  given  to  her  every  evening  in
one  sleep-waking :  that  I  was  to  put  her  to  sleep  and  press
upon  her  head  to  give  her  the  pain,  and  that  I  was  to  breathe


St.  Vitus’s  Dance,  by  Mr.  Barth.


285


over  the  pained  place  until  the  pain  was  gone  :  that  her  disease
was  not  caused  by  any  hurt,  but  by  the  fright  when  she  was
ridden  over :  that  the  fright  made  a  part  of  her  brain  seem  as
if  there  were  knots  in  it.  She  indicated  the  spot  with  her
fingers  externally ;  it  was  on  the  left  hemisphere,  where  the
organs  of  Adhesiveness,  Love  of  Approbation,  and  Self-esteem,
as  marked  on  the  ordinary  busts,  approach  or  touch.  External
pressure  on  this  spot  gave  pain  when  she  was  not  in  a  mes¬
meric  state  :  she  then  felt  as  if  she  had  received  a  blow  upon
it.  She  directed  me  to  allow  her  to  sleep  half  an  hour  after
having  these  pains :  and  to  put  her  to  sleep  an}7  time  to¬
morrow,  when  she  would  tell  me  more  if  she  saw  it.

Nov.  30.  On  being  put  into  sleep-waking  she  repeated
the  statement  of  the  previous  night,  and  said  she  saw  that  she
must  have  the  pains  :  that  she  could  not  have  them  without
feeling  :  that  it  would  not  be  good  for  her  if  this  were  possible  :
and  that  when  they  came  near  her  heart  they  might  kill  her
if  she  could  not  tell  me  where  to  breathe.  In  the  evening  I
put  her  into  sleep- waking  and  gave  the  eight  pains  as  directed  :
some  lasted  three  or  four  minutes,  some  ten  minutes.  They
commenced  just  under  the  neck;  each  successive  pain  was
lower  down ;  the  last  near  the  left  abdominal  region.  They
were  exceedingly  severe,  insomuch  that  I  should  not  have
been  induced  to  repeat  them  but  for  the  little  patient's  earnest
declaration  that  it  was  the  only  way  to  cure  her,  and  my  firm
opinion  that,  when  patients  prescribe  for  themselves,  and  do
this  rationally,  it  is  our  duty  to  comply  with  their  instructions,
unless  we  have  good  and  sufficient  reason  for  not  doing  so.
The  poor  child's  shrieks  during  the  paroxysms  of  pain  were
most  distressing,  and  when  the  pain  subsided  she  was  quite
exhausted.  I  have  seen  severe  capital  operations;  I  have  seen
the  agony  of  parturition ;  I  have  seen  punishment  adminis¬
tered  with  the  cat ;  but  I  never  saw  more  severe  suffering.
After  enduring  a  few  pains,  she  became  afraid  of  them,  and
it  required  much  persuasion  to  induce  her  to  recline  on  the
sofa  and  allow  me  to  press  her  head.  The  slightest  touch  was
sufficient  to  bring  on  the  pain ;  the  harder  I  pressed  the  more
severe  the  pains.  When  she  consented  to  let  me  give  her  the
pain,  she  begged  I  would  not  press  hard  and  make  it  too
severe.  Dr.  Elliotson  was  so  kind  as  to  visit  me  and  see  her
have  a  few  of  these  pains.  He  thought  the  pains  he  saw  as
bad  as  ordinary  labour  pains ;  but  she  had  some  paroxysms
very  far  more  severe  than  those  which  he  saw.  On  several
occasions  I  found  pulsation  and  respiration  cease  for  a  period,
I  think  for  some  minutes,  but  I  did  not  note  the  time  by  my
watch.  However  much  afraid,  she  still  insisted  on  the  ne-


286


Great  benefit  in  a  severe  Case  of


cessity  of  them,  “  Oh  !  pray  don’t  give  me  any  more  pains ;
I  am  so  afraid ;  they  hurt  me  so ;  but  I  ought  to  have  them ;
I  must  have  them  if  I  am  to  get  cured.”  The  paroxysms
commenced  about  the  neck  or  shoulder;  and  travelled  down¬
wards,  along  the  thigh  and  foot  and  out  at  the  toes.  In  four
days  one  set  of  pains  would  commence  and  pass  out ;  then
another  set  commence,  and  run  the  same  course.  During
this  period  she  had  extraordinary  clairvoyance  and  prevision
as  related  to  herself.  She  told  me  always  where  the  next
pain  would  be,  and  how  much  lower  down  my  breathing  had
brought  it.  She  felt  the  spot  where  one  ceased  and  the  next
commenced.  She  said  it  seemed  to  her  that  every  time  I
pressed  her  head  one  of  the  knots  gave  way,  and  that
caused  the  pain  to  come.  I  enquired  one  day  how  long  these
pains  would  last.  She  replied,  she  had  been  looking  and  that
they  would  not  last  longer  than  three  weeks,  if  I  pressed  hard
enough  to  make  them  bad  pains.  They  lasted  20  days.

On  the  17th  December  she  had  her  customary  eight  pains ;
she  then  had  half  an  hour’s  sound  sleep ;  awoke  into  sleep¬
waking,  and  told  me  her  pains  would  be  all  got  out  the  next
night ;  and  that  I  should  not  be  able  to  give  her  the  full
number,  eight.

On  Dec.  18th  I  gave  her  four  paroxysms,  the  last  passing
out  at  the  toes ;  but  I  could  not  cause  another.  Thus  her
predictions  were  verified.

I  acquainted  her  father  with  the  circumstance  of  her  having
these  violent  pains  produced  by  her  own  instruction ;  and  put
her  into  the  sleep-waking  state  that  he  might  hear  her  own
declaration  of  their  being  necessary  to  her  cure.  I  did  not
like  to  incur  the  responsibility  without  his  approval.  Some
of  her  paroxysms  towards  the  end  of  the  assigned  period  were
so  severe  and  endured  so  long  (one  was  20  minutes),  and
were  succeeded  by  such  profound  syncope,  that  I  feared  lest
there  might  not  be  reaction,  and  that  thus  all  might  end
wrong.  She  always  insisted  on  the  necessity  of  the  pains ;
often,  when  questioned,  declaring  that  she  did  not  like  pain
better  than  I  did,  and  would  rather  not  feel  it,  but  she  saw
that  she  must  have  it.  She  repeated  this  most  positively  to
her  father,  and  stated  that  she  also  saw  the  time  of  her  cure ;
and,  if  all  was  done  as  she  directed,  she  should  be  well  three
weeks  after  Christmas :  that  in  order  to  cure  her  she  must
have,  after  the  pains  were  done,  one  long  deep  sleep,  and  not
be  awakened :  that  she  should  sleep,  perhaps,  two  days  and
a  night :  and  that,  if  I  could  not  put  her  into  this  long  deep
sleep,  it  would  take  a  much  longer  time  to  cure  her.  When¬
ever  I  enquired  how  she  learnt  all  this,  she  always  insisted


St.  Vitus’s  Dance,  by  Mr.  Barth.


287


that  she  knew  it  and  saw  it,  but  would  not  tell  how  or  where.
When  I  enquired  and  wished  her  to  tell  me  how  I  could  get
her  into  this  deep  sleep,  she  usually  replied,  “  I  can’t  find
the  place.”  This  was  her  customary  reply  when  asked  re¬
specting  any  matter  to  which  her  prevision  did  not  extend :
but  I  could  not  ascertain  what  she  meant  by  it,  or  if  any
meaning  was  attached  to  it,  until  the  evening  when  the  pains
ceased.  She  always  declared  that  she  was  perfectly  aware
how  she  knew  that  which  ought  to  be  done  or  would  happen ;
that  she  felt  quite  certain  she  was  right  about  what  she  said ;
but  “  how  I  know  it  I  must  not  tell  to  anybody ;  not  to  my
own  father  and  mother ;  no  !  not  even  to  Mr.  Barth.”  This
evening,  after  a  short  deep  sleep,  she  passed  into  her  cus¬
tomary  sleep-waking,  and  was  exceedingly  kind  and  amiable,
seeming  very  happy  that  the  pains  were  done  with.  Just  as
I  told  her  I  was  going  to  open  her  eyes  and  had  made  two  or
three  demesmerising  passes,  she  said  suddenly,  not  being  yet
aroused,  “  Oh  dear  !  I  wish  you  had  not  disturbed  me ;  I  was
looking  at  something  very  important  for  you  to  know  about
curing  me;  now  I  have  forgotten  it,  and  can’t  see  it  again.”
I  urged  her  to  look  well ;  she  repeatedly  tried ;  we  waited  and
tried  again  without  success.  I  awoke  her,  put  her  to  sleep,
and  she  tried  again,  but  in  vain;  she  could  only  remember
it  was  important  I  should  know  it,  but  could  not  tell  what  it
was ;  she  “  could  not  find  the  place,”  I  asked  how  this  was
and  what  she  meant  by  the  place.  After  a  little  hesitation
she  came  and  sat  down  beside  me  and  said,  “  I  ought  not  to
tell  any  body,  not  even  you ;  I  will  tell  you,  but  you  must
never  tell  again ;  every  thing  that  ought  to  be  done,  or  that
is  going  to  happen,  I  see  in  a  great  book  ;*  where  that  book
is  I  may  not  tell  now,  nor  at  any  other  time ;  I  must  never
tell  that.  I  cannot  see  the  book  any  more  to-night.”  The
next  evening  I  put  her  into  sleep-waking  again  as  usual,  but
she  had  lost  her  clairvoyance.  She  had  a  faint  remembrance
about  having  seen  a  great  book ;  this  she  totally  lost  in  an¬
other  sleep.  She  never  regained  her  powers  of  prevision  or
her  clairvoyance  with  respect  to  diseases  and  the  means  of
curing.

From  this  time  improvement  in  the  disease  became  mani¬
fest.  The  involuntary  action  of  the  muscles  of  the  whole  left
side  ceased,  the  eyelids  twitched  less,  and  the  frequency  of  the
shaking  of  the  head  gradually  decreased.  When  mesmerised,
she  very  often  had  severe  pains  in  the  spine :  but  they  were
always  drawn  away  by  the  hand  or  dispelled  by  breathing.
She  now  began  the  deep  mesmeric  sleep  for  a  short  time  daily  :

*  See  No.  XXIV.,  pp.  337,  372-6,  for  remarks  on  this  subject. — Zoist.


288  Great  benefit  in  a  severe  Case  of

so  deep  was  this  that  she  could  neither  feel  nor  hear.  I  often
rigorously  tested  her  as  to  hearing ;  and  am  satisfied  she  did
not  hear.*  She  always  passed,  when  mesmerised,  into  sleep¬
waking;  my  hand  placed  on  the  abdomen,  outside  the  clothes,
in  a  few  seconds  induced  the  deep  sleep ;  from  which  she
again  passed  in  twenty  or  thirty  minutes  into  sleep-waking.
Placing  my  hand  on  her  head,  or  pointing  at  her  eyes,  had
no  effect  in  deepening  the  sleep.  I  could  not  by  any  means
get  her  into  the  long  deep  sleep  which  she  had  prescribed
for  herself.  I  frequently  put  her  into  sleep-waking  with
the  intention  of  allowing  the  state  to  exhaust  or  expend  itself,
hoping  a  long  deep  sleep  might  come  spontaneously :  but
it  did  not.  I  have  put  her  into  this  state  on  Tuesday  morn¬
ing,  and  it  has  lasted  until  Friday  night,  when,  seeing  her
in  a  state  half  normal  waking,  half  customary  sleep-waking,
I  deepened  this  and  awoke  her  at  once.  To  leave  her  two
days  and  nights  in  the  mesmeric  state  was  quite  common.
During  the  day  she  would  read,  write,  learn  lessons,  eat  her
meals,  play  with  her  dolls,  or  join  my  children  and  compa¬
nions  in  their  amusements,  just  as  if  she  were  awake  and  had
vision  with  her  eyes ;  at  night  she  would  curl  her  hair,  un¬
dress,  go  to  bed  and  pass  into  the  deep  mesmeric  sleep;  from
this  the  next  morning  she  would  awake  into  sleep-waking,  get
up,  wash,  comb,  and  dress,  come  down  to  breakfast,  and  pass
the  day  as  before.  In  her  sleep-waking  her  reasoning  and
all  other  faculties  were  as  active  as  or  more  active  than  in  her
normal  state.  When  restored  to  her  natural  state,  she  knew
not  anything  which  had  passed  in  her  sleep-waking,  and  we
had  always  difficulty  to  make  her  believe  the  day  of  the  week.
If  put  asleep  on  Monday,  and  awakened  on  Wednesday,  she
thought  the  day  was  still  Monday.  When  first  this  state  was
induced,  and  for  nearly  three  months  afterwards,  she  always
addressed  me  as  “  Nancy, ”  considering  me  her  sister.  She
was  capable  of  conducting  herself  rationally ;  she  read  tales
and  poems  with  as  much  interest  as  if  awake ;  and  yet  was
under  delusion  as  to  my  personality.

It  was  very  interesting  to  observe  how  she  reasoned  on
this  delusion,  and  maintained  it  by  other  delusions  whenever
we  attempted  to  make  her  understand  that  I  was  “  Mr.
Barth.”  If  her  attention  was  directed  to  my  clothing,  she
explained  it  by  saying  that  “  Nancy  had  got  cousin  Thomas's

*  When  hearing  is  lost,  I  always  consider  the  deepest  state  of  mesmeric  sleep
to  be  induced.  I  have  had  plenty  of  patients  so  deeply  mesmerised  as  neither  to
feel  nor  be  capable  of  speech  ;  but  whose  facial  muscles  were  yet  capable  of  giving
slight  expression  to  the  countenance.  On  purposely  saying  things  in  their  pre¬
sence  which  were  calculated  to  wound  or  to  gratify  their  feelings,  I  have  had
ample  evidence  by  watching  the  face  that  they  heard  and  understood  me.


St.  Vitus’s  Dance,  by  Mr.  Barth


289


clothes  on ;”  if  I  made  her  look  at  my  whiskers  and  feel
them,  telling  her  that  only  men  had  whiskers,  she  said,
“  You  have  got  the  tail  off  John’s  wooden  horse,  and  fastened
it  round  your  cheeks.”  To  her  my  face  was  her  sister’s  face ;
and,  whilst  this  delusion  existed  in  her  mind  as  a  reality,  no
persuasion  could  make  her  view  it  in  any  other  light.  No
doubt  but  some  particular  impression  made  on  her  brain,
when  first  the  mesmeric  state  was  induced,  caused  this  delu¬
sion  ;  and,  whenever  the  state  was  again  induced,  habit  re¬
produced  the  hallucination.  I  could  make  her  know  me  as
“  Mr.  Barth,”  in  the  early  portion  of  any  one  sleep-waking,
by  getting  her  to  promise  whilst  awake  that  when  asleep  she
would  know  that  I  was  “  Mr.  Barth,”  and  would  keep  this
promise  in  her  thoughts  whilst  she  was  going  to  sleep.

She  could  not  conceive  why  I  made  her  promise  this ;  but
the  impression  left  was  sufficiently  distinct  to  prevent  the
habitual  delusion  until  the  active  state  of  her  brain  in  sleep¬
waking,  which  was  ever  engaged  in  receiving  new  impressions,
withdrew  her  attention  from,  or  obliterated  the  impression  of
the  promise;  and  then  again  she  only  knew  me  as  “Nancy.”
Whilst  insisting  that  I  was  her  sister  Nancy,  she  still  be¬
haved  in  many  respects  as  if  she  was  quite  aware  who  I  really
was.  I  believe  she  would  have  blushed  at  the  thought  of
undressing  before  me ;  and  in  many  little  delicate  matters
she  invariably  manifested  the  modest  reserve  which  propriety
would  enforce  in  the  presence  of  a  gentleman,  instead  of  the
unconstrained  freedom  of  intercourse  which  exists  amongst
sisters.  Probably,  the  excitement,  whatever  its  nature,  which
caused  the  delusion,  affected  only  one-half  the  brain,  and
thus  she  had  a  divided  or  double  consciousness.  Towards
the  middle  of  December  she,  on  several  occasions  in  her  sleep¬
waking,  expressed  her  opinion  that,  “  I  had  a  look  like  Mr.
Barth she  then  seemed  puzzled  about  my  identity ;  and
on  Dec.  15th  decided  as  to  who  I  really  was,  though  “  you
still  look  very  much  like  Nancy ;  but  I  believe  you  are  Mr.
Barth  from  your  clothes ;  the  face  looks  like  yours  and  yet  it
seems  to  be  my  sister’s.”  This  delusion  now  passed  away
altogether.

About  this  time  she  always  passed  into  sleep-waking  spon¬
taneously  if  she  went  into  a  back  parlour,  where  we  were  in
the  habit  of  dining.  When  once  in  sleep-waking,  as  before
stated,  she  could  not  be  awakened  until  she  consented  to
awake.  This  habit  was  a  source  of  much  annoyance  to  us,
as  she  was  often  very  unruly  and  violent  in  her  sleep-waking,
though  an  exceedingly  good  little  girl  while  awake.  The
sleep  never  came  on  under  any  other  circumstances  or  in  any


290  Great  benefit  in  a  severe  Case  of

other  place,  unless  I  mesmerised  her  designedly.  I  could
not  discover  what  it  was  in  or  about  this  room  which  instantly
put  her  to  sleep.  This  effect  invariably  came  if  she  ran  into
it  but  for  two  or  three  seconds.  I,  therefore,  tried  a  plan
which  I  had  found  successful  in  other  cases.  I  gave  her  a
gold  locket  to  wear  in  her  bosom;  I  mesmerised  it,  and
ordered  that  neither  person  nor  thing  should  be  able  to  mes¬
merise  her  whilst  it  was  round  her  neck.  So  effectual  was
this,  that  not  only  could  she  remain  in  the  room  with  im¬
punity,  but  I  could  not  even  (by  persevering  efforts)  mes¬
merise  her  whilst  she  wore  it,  if  it  were  kept  duly  mesmerised.
It  always  felt  cold  when  any  of  my  mesmeric  influence  was
attached  to  it :  it  lost  this  in  about  two  days,  feeling  warm
to  her,  and  then  lost  its  protective  power  until  again  mes¬
merised.  This  was  somewhat  curious,  and  not  anticipated.

I  had  considered  it  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  the
locket  were  kept  mesmerised,  or  even  mesmerised  at  all,
provided  the  intended  cerebral  impression  was  made  on  her
brain.  I  have  often  mesmerised  some  article  to  be  worn  or
kept  about  the  person  to  prevent  the  return  of  a  periodical
pain;  to  prevent  subjects  from  being  mesmerised  by  any
other  person  than  myself,  or  to  enable  them  to  bear  associa¬
tion,  when  mesmerised,  with  others ;  and  for  various  purposes.
These  experiments  have  generally  been  successful :  but  I  have
attributed  their  efficacy  to  the  belief  of  the  patient  that  they
would  succeed,  rather  than  to  any  talismanic  effect  commu¬
nicated  by  the  mesmerisation.  In  the  present  instance  it
seemed  due  to  the  imparted  mesmeric  power  of  the  article,
or  to  such  a  sensibility  on  her  part  as  enabled  her  to  per¬
ceive  when  the  communicated  influence  was  exhausted ;  the
protection  being  only  associated  in  her  mind  with  a  feeling
of  the  influence.  When  the  locket  had  nearly  lost  its  charge,
if  she  sat  in  the  room  she  became  very  sleepy,  but  did  not
quite  go  off.  “  Oh  !  Mr.  Barth,”  she  would  say,  “  do  put
me  to  sleep,  or  else  mesmerise  my  locket — I  am  so  uncom¬
fortable — I  want  to  go  to  sleep  and  I  can’t.”

Towards  the  approach  of  Christmas  her  disease  was  greatly
mitigated.  She  now  seldom  shook  her  head  or  twitched  her
eye-lids.  We  could  rarely  detect  either  of  these  symptoms
more  than  three  or  four  times  in  a  day.  We  were  in  hopes,
notwithstanding  she  had  not  slept  the  long  sleep  prescribed
for  herself,  that  her  cure  might  be  accomplished  as  pre¬
dicted.  About  the  beginning  of  the  present  year  she  had  a
severe  hurt,  from  a  fall,  on  the  back  of  her  head,  exactly
on  the  place  which  she  had,  when  clairvoyant,  described  as
the  seat  of  her  disease.  This  immediately  threw  her  back,


St.  Vitus’s  Dance,  by  Mr.  Barth.


291


and  she  commenced  shaking  her  head  frequently.  A  lump
on  the  skull,  as  large  as  half  a  small  walnut,  and  acutely
tender  to  the  touch,  was  distinctly  perceptible.  It  was  nearly
a  month  before  this  was  removed  and  the  part  ceased  to  be
painful  on  pressure.  She  now  improved  again  as  to  her  dis¬
ease  ;  sometimes  she  would  not  shake  her  head  more  than
once  in  an  afternoon ;  and  then  it  was  but  a  little  shake,  very
different  to  the  continuous  shakes  prior  to  her  being  mes¬
merised.  Strangers  sitting  beside  her  were  not  aware  that
she  had  ever  been  subject  to  chorea  unless  told;  so  slight
was  the  evidence  which  remained  of  her  disease.  The  ten¬
dency  to  shake  her  head  a  few  times  daily  (though  perhaps
not  more  frequently  than  three  or  four)  was  very  tiresome,  as
whilst  it  existed  I  could  not  pronounce  the  case  cured.

Any  violent  mental  excitement  always  increased  the  ten¬
dency  to  shake;  but  this  soon  became  subject  to  the  child’s
controul.  If  she  asked  for  permission  to  go  home  and  spend
the  day  with  her  parents,  I  granted  it  conditionally ;  ex¬
acting  a  promise  that  she  would  not  shake  her  head, — and
requesting  that  she  might  be  watched,  to  observe  if  she  kept
her  promise.  She  rarely  was  seen  to  shake  when  she  had
promised  that  she  would  not.  This  was  not  a  promise  made
in  the  mesmeric,  but  in  her  waking  state.  In  March  of  the
present  year  she  had  discontinued  the  shaking  altogether;
and,  her  parents  being  anxious  for  her  return,  I  sent  her  home,
with  instructions  that  she  should  come  daily  for  a  short  mes¬
meric  doze  to  prevent  relapse.  Her  susceptibility  to  the  in¬
fluence  so  greatly  decreased,  that  sometimes  for  days  in  suc¬
cession  I  tried  and  could  not  put  her  asleep.*  When  she
slept  she  passed  at  once  into  the  deep  sleep,  instead  of  sleep¬
waking,  as  formerly,  and  awoke  spontaneously  in  ten  or
fifteen  minutes.  She  remained  well  for  some  time  after  her
return,  and  resumed  her  attendance  at  school ;  but  the  mes¬
merising  was  very  irregularly  performed,  and  her  parents
thought  it  no  longer  necessary  to  send  her  to  me.  She  was
corrected  one  morning  at  school  for  some  offence  or  mistake,
became  very  much  excited,  and  a  return  of  the  shaking  took
place.  The  movement  of  the  head  now  occurs  frequently
during  the  day,  and  is  always  increased  by  any  kind  of  mental
excitement ;  but  seems  still  under  her  controul.  She  can


*  As  the  symptoms  of  her  disease  decreased,  so  did  her  susceptibility  to  the
mesmeric  influence.  During  the  past  autumn  and  up  to  January  of  the  present
year  she  could  be  put  to  sleep  by  a  look  in  one  second,  or  drawn  any  where  by
tractive  passes,  or  her  hands  or  feet  be  made  to  adhere  to  anything  (excepting
leather),  or  her  jaws  be  locked,  tongue  paralyzed,  & c.,  whilst  awake,  by  my
merely  willing  it  strongly.


292  Medical  and  Mesmeric  Cure  of  Erysipelas  contrasted,

stop  it  if  she  chooses ;  and  is  conscious  of  a  desire  to  stop  it,
unless  her  attention  is  strongly  diverted  by  any  play  or  occu¬
pation.

I  now  regret  much  that  I  did  not  keep  her  under  my  own
roof  a  few  weeks  longer,  until  her  case  was  past  the  danger
of  relapse.  Mesmerism  is  commenced  again,  and,  if  it  is
punctually  attended  to,  I  have  no  doubt  of  a  successful  result.
The  result,  whether  successful  or  not,  I  will,  if  permitted,
communicate  for  some  future  number  of  The  Zoist ;  as  also
an  account  of  some  other  very  beautiful  and  curious  phe¬
nomena  which  occurred  during  the  treatment.

7,  Eversholt  Street,  Camden  Town.

May  21,  1849.

Miss  Newman  is  still  under  mesmeric  treatment,  as
symptoms  of  the  original  disease  remain.  There  is  much
which  is  unusual  about  the  case ;  she  is  sometimes  mesmerised
several  days  in  succession  without  any  effect,  and  on  other
occasions  she  immediately  passes  into  deep  sleep,  or  sleep¬
waking.  I  have  strong  hopes  of  making  a  perfect  cure  by
perseverance.  B.

Sept  15.


VI.  Medical  and  Mesmeric  Cure  of  Erysipelas  contrasted ;  and
Cure  of  a  Chronic  Inflammation  of  the  Gums.  By  Mr.
Barth.

Having  furnished  a  case  of  chronic  disease,  treated  for  seven
months,  and  not  yet  quite  cured,  I  will  relate,  in  the  words
of  the  patient's  dictation,  a  case  of  severe  acute  disease  cured
in  seven  hours.  Dr.  Elliotson  subsequently  saw  this  patient,
and  heard  her  account,  which  can  be  confirmed  by  most
respectable  testimony.

ERYSIPELAS  TREATED  MEDICALLY.

“  About  the  latter  end  of  November,  1847,  I  went  into
the  University  Hospital,  having  got  a  letter  from  Mr.  Alford,
of  Camden  Town,  to  Dr.  Croft,  who  admitted  me  the  same
day.  Dr.  A.  T.  Thompson  and  the  other  doctors  said  it  was
erysipelas.  I  was  put  to  bed,  and  had  hot  fomentations  that
night  and  next  day.  I  had  not  been  well  for  some  time,  and
had  been  severely  ill  for  two  days, — too  ill  to  do  any  work  :
had  pain  in  my  head,  and  my  face  was  swelled.  After  the
fomentations  they  did  my  face  and  neck  with  nitrate  of  silver,
which  made  me  quite  black  and  gave  me  great  pain.  They


by  Mr.  Barth.


293


did  that  twice  and  then  put  me  in  a  hot  bath,  and  gave  me
physic  continually,  and  three  ounces  of  port  wine  for  three
days  and  nights.  In  three  weeks  the  erysipelas  got  better :
then  I  had  inflammation  in  my  side  and  they  put  leeches  on
and  gave  me  more  physic.  After  being  in  six  weeks  I  w^as
discharged  cured.  They  were  very  kind  to  me  there,  and  I
feel  very  thankful  to  them  for  it.  This  is  the  truth.  Nov.  6,
1848.”

ERYSIPELAS  TREATED  MESMERICALLY.

“  About  the  22nd  or  23rd  of  June  last,  I  was  again  taken
ill  with  the  erysipelas ;  my  head  was  much  worse  than  before
with  the  pain,  and  my  face  was  worse  swelled.  On  Monday,
the  26th  of  June,  I  was  going  to  the  hospital  again  to  seek
medicine  or  medical  assistance,  but  a  friend  of  my  mistress,
Mr.  Barth,  came  in  and  saw  me,  and  said  he  could  do  me
some  good  he  thought,  if  I  came  to  him  at  his  house,  and  if
he  did  not  he  would  do  me  no  harm.  He  said  he  would  mes¬
merise  me.  I  went  to  him  about  2  o’clock  in  the  day,  and  in
a  very  short  time  I  went  to  sleep ;  I  suppose  so,  for  I  don’t
know,  only  I  have  been  told  so ;  and  my  fellow  servant  said
it  thundered  very  much  but  I  never  heard  it.  When  I  came
to  myself,  I  found  myself  lying  on  the  sofa  where  I  was  sitting
when  I  went  to  sleep,  and  Mr.  Barth’s  daughter  sitting  watch¬
ing  me.  Mr.  Barth  had  gone  out.  It  was  then  about  half¬
past  9  at  night.  The  pain  was  gone  that  was  in  my  head,
and  the  swelling  of  my  face  was  quite  gone  away,  and  I  felt
very  well.  I  had  a  slight  return  of  the  pain  the  next  day,
but  Mr.  Barth  mesmerised  me  on  the  Wednesday  and  on  the
Friday  after,  and  I  have  been  quite  well  ever  since  and  have
got  much  thinner  than  I  used  to  be.

“  Sarah  Plumb.”

I  affirm  the  statement  of  the  case  to  be  strictly  the  truth
as  relates  to  the  mesmeric  cure,  and  see  no  reason  to  dispute
or  doubt  the  young  woman’s  satement  of  her  treatment  while
in  University  College  Hospital.  The  case  is  open  to  enquiry
if  any  doubter  will  take  the  trouble  to  enquire.  The  medical
sceptic  who  will  say  the  thing  is  impossible  speaks  absurdly,
unless  he  can  shew  why  it  is  impossible ;  he  will  do  better  to
enquire  if  the  statement  is  or  is  not  true.  I  saw  the  patient’s
tumefied  face,  eyelids,  and  brow ;  the  eyes  half  closed,  the
cheeks  puffed  and  hanging  down ;  so  did  her  mistress  and
other  members  of  the  family.  An  impostor  might  sham  a
pain  ;  could  a  swelled  face  of  this  character  be  assumed,  even
supposing  any  object  could  be  attained  by  practising  imposi-
YOL.  VII.  Z


294  Cure  of  a  case  of  supposed  Consumption,

tion?  I  also  saw  this  swelling  gradually  disappearing  during
the  sleep  after  the  expiry  of  the  third  hour.  Mrs.  Norman
and  others,  who  saw  the  girl’s  swelled  face  when  she  left  home,
also  saw  her  return  home  without  it.

“  Sarah  Plumb  was  cook  in  my  service,  and  has  but  recently  left
me.  I  can  testify  to  the  accuracy  of  the  above  statement,  as  regards
her  illness  and  miraculous  cure  by  mesmerism  (for  so  it  seems  to  me).
It  can  also  be  vouched  for  by  other  members  of  my  family  if  necessary.

“  C.  Norman.

“  Mornington  House,  Mornington  Crescent,

“  December  8th,  1848.”

Cure  of  Chronic  Inflammation  of  the  Gums.

I  have  cured  hundreds  of  cases  of  tooth-ache  by  merely
local  mesmerising.  The  subjoined  is  a  good  specimen  of  the
class,  and  Mrs.  Hunt  can  be  personally  referred  to.

Mrs.  Mary  Hunt,  wife  of  Henry  Hunt,  watchmaker,  23a,
Guildford  Street  East,  Clerkenwell,  had  been  for  six  months
suffering  severely,  with  little  or  no  intermission,  from  face
and  tooth-ache.  The  teeth  got  loose  in  the  upper  jaw  on  each
side.  She  could  scarcely  eat,  and  slept  but  little.  About
the  middle  of  May  last  year,  she  was  casually  at  my  house,
and,  seeing  her  suffering  from  pain,  I  mesmerised  her  face
locally  for  six  or  eight  minutes ,  and  removed  the  pain.  The
teeth  in  a  few  days  were  fast  in  the  jaw  again,  and  she  has
never  had  any  return  of  pain  of  the  kind  since,  up  to  the
present  time,  May  30th,  1849.

“  I  cheerfully  confirm  the  above  statement  which  is  strictly  true,
and  am  truly  thankful  to  Mr.  Barth  for  his  great  kindness  in  curing
me.  “  Mary  Hunt.”


VII.  Cure  of  a  case  of  supposed  Consumption,  and  of  one  of
Chronic  Intermittent  Intestinal  Hemorrhage.  By  Mr.
Joseph  Hands.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

To  Dr.  Elliotson.

Dear  Sir. — I  transmit  to  you  two  cases  of  disease  cured  through  the
agency  of  animal  magnetism,  and,  if  you  think  them  appropriate  for
the  pages  of  The  Zoist ,  perhaps  you  will  forward  them  to  the  Editor.
The  fact  that  people  are  now  beginning  to  cast  off  old  prejudices  and
think  and  act  for  themselves  is  the  gladdening  conviction  that  forms
itself  upon  my  mind,  as  I  mark  the  steady  progress  of  mesmerism  ;
and  I  cannot  think  the  day  so  far  distant  as  you  deem  it,  when  men
will  accord  you  the  palm  for  having  so  gallantly  defended  a  science,
which  talents  like  your  own  could  alone  have  saved  from  the  overflow
of  public  opinion.  On  you,  Sir,  this  palm  can  bestow  no  lustre


by  Mr.  J.  Hands.


295


equal  to  that  which  the  world’s  obloquy  has  already  thrown  on  the
generosity  of  your  character.  Nevertheless,  your  benevolence  will
rejoice  in  the  day  when  that  world  will  be  able  to  appreciate  a  man
like  yourself — a  man,  who  in  return  for  all  its  injuries,  takes  the
noble  revenge  of  laying  it  under  an  everlasting  obligation  to  him.

I  remain,  dear  Sir,

Yours,  &c.,  &c.,

J.  Hands.

I.  Case  of  supposed  Consumption.

As  consumption  is  a  disease  so  justly  to  he  dreaded  from
the  chilliug  influence  of  our  ever  changeful  climate,  the  cure
of  this  supposed  case  I  am  about  to  relate  is  one  on  which  I
dwell  with  the  deepest  satisfaction.  The  perusal  of  it  will
afford  a  prospect  of  salvation  to  many  sufferers  who  may
finally  sink  under  the  reality  of  this  complaint,  and  will  also
soothe  the  dread  of  fearful  minds — minds  to  whom  anticipation
brings  woe  worse  than  the  event.

The  circumstances  of  this  most  interesting  case  are  as
follows.

In  1846,  May  16th,  Mr.  J.  N.,  barrister,  of  the  Temple,
visited  me  for  the  purpose  of  introducing  his  friend  Captain
D.,  who  had  come  from  India  and  was  then  on  leave  of  ab¬
sence  from  his  regiment  for  ill  health.  This  gentleman  had

been  residing  at  C - -  with  his  mother,  Lady  D.,  and  he

had  first  taken  advice  there  for  the  malady  under  which  he
laboured ;  but,  receiving  no  benefit,  he  came  up  to  town  and
tried  medical  treatment  with  equal  non-success.  It  was  in
this  dispiriting  state  of  things  that  he  met  my  friend  Mr.  N.,
who  advised  him  to  try  mesmerism,  and  for  this  purpose  the
Captain  presented  himself  to  me.  As  he  wished  to  see  one  of
my  clairvoyants  on  the  subject  before  I  examined  him,  E.
Dawson  (whose  case  will  be  found  in  The  Zoist,  No.  X.,
p.  226,)  was  desired  to  attend  at  my  house.  Ellen,  on  her  in¬
troduction,  was  requested  to  seat  herself  on  the  side  of  the
room  opposite  to  that  on  which  we  were  situated.  On  ob¬
serving  that  she  was  prepared,  I  gazed  at  her  intently  for  a
few  seconds,  and  the  result  of  that  intent  gaze  was  to  throw
her  into  the  deep  magnetic  sleep.  After  remaining  in  this  state
for  some  minutes,  she  heaved  a  deep  sigh  and  passed  into  the
sleep-waking  condition,  in  the  same  manner  as  somnambules
who,  from  their  natural  repose,  change  into  sleep-walkers.
She  now  left  her  chair  and  approached  our  locality  to  seek
me,  and  I  took  that  opportunity  of  asking  her  if  she  thought
she  could  discern  the  nature  of  the  disorder  of  the  gentleman
in  whose  presence  she  was.  Instead  of  replying  to  my  ques¬
tion,  she  observed  that  the  blood  in  the  superior  part  of  his

z  2


296


Cure  of  a  case  of  supposed  Consumption,


head  was  very  black,  and  she  added,  “  that  if  I  would  blow
over  it  the  blackness  would  pass  away  and  be  replaced  by  a
fresh  supply  of  reddened  fluid/”  I  blew  as  she  directed  over
his  head  ;  and  after  a  time  she  exclaimed,  “  that  will  do,  it  is
now  of  a  beautiful  scarlet.”

I  then  repeated  my  question  as  to  his  capability  of  effecting
the  purpose  for  which  she  was  summoned,  and  her  answer
was  “  I  will  try.”  Here  I  must  observe,  that  during  her  sleep
Ellen  always  takes  me  for  her  mother,  and,  addressing  me  as
such  at  this  juncture,  she  asked  me  for  “Mr.  Hands's  ring,”
which  she  always  desires  to  wear,  saying  that  it  protects  her
from  the  positive  influence  of  others  (or  cross-mesmerism),
and  that  it  also  heightens  her  powers  of  perception  and  sym¬
pathy.  I  desired  her  to  take  Captain  H.'s  hand,  and  she
then  resumed  her  favourite  position,  that  of  kneeling  at  the
feet  of  the  person  with  whom  she  is  in  this  apparent  mysterious
communion.

She  described  to  him  then  various  scenes  and  various  cir¬
cumstances  that  occurred  to  him  whilst  residing  in  India,  and
on  one  locality  she  dwelt  particularly,  which  the  Captain  re¬
cognized  “  right  well ;”  she  spoke  of  the  extreme  heat  of  the
weather,  and  said  she  saw  him  leave  his  tent  one  night  to  seek
repose  upon  the  ground  under  the  cooler  canopy  of  the  sky  ;
on  that  night  she  stated  his  malady  to  have  commenced,  and
added,  “  it  is  not  the  effect  of  your  first  cold,  but  from  the
effect  of  colds  repeated,  that  your  present  condition  has  been
induced.”

She  now  ran  over  his  feelings  and  sufferings  with  the
greatest  nicety  and  accuracy,  and  then  went  on  to  state  that
the  blood  was  stopped  in  its  course  through  the  fine  or  capil¬
lary  vessels  of  the  left  lung,  and  that  nature  had  not  since
been  able  to  throw  it  off  or  get  rid  of  the  engorgement,  and
that  now  this  viscus  looked  more  like  liver  than  lights  and
was  of  a  bluish  or  purple  hue  in  patches ;  she  further  stated
that  this  condition  of  the  organ  prevented  the  blood  and  air
from  passing,  or  that  it  obstructed  the  usual  pulmonary  cir¬
culation  and  respiration  through  that  portion  of  the  breathing
apparatus  which  was  spotted  or  mottled  with  kernels  here  and
there.  After  this  description  of  his  disease,  Captain  D.  asked
if  she  knew  of  any  remedy  for  it.  She  told  him  nothing
would  cure  him  but  mesmerism,  and  that  mesmerism  would
cure  it  rapidly.  Ellen  then  gave  him  certain  directions  rela¬
tive  to  his  diet,  beverage,  &c.,  and  thus  ended  this  interesting
colloquy.

After  Ellen's  departure,  I  proceeded  to  examine  the  Cap¬
tain  myself  and  found  him  labouring  under  hepatization  of


by  Mr.  J.  Hands.


297


the  left  lung  (or  that  state  where  this  organ  assumes  the  hard¬
ness  and  the  appearance  of  liver).  He  had  been  expectorating
for  some  time,  nature  trying  by  these  means  to  get  rid  of  the
injury.  His  cough  had  robbed  him  of  his  voice ;  his  colli¬
quative  perspirations  used  to  wet  and  permeate  the  bed-clothes ;
the  pulse  was  120  in  the  minute;  skin  pale,  and  muscular
fibre  lax.  The  lips  and  cheeks  were  sometimes  of  a  leaden
hue ;  the  respiration  was  more  frequent  than  usual  and  often
laborious  ;  the  air  taken  in  and  given  out  was  in  smaller  quan¬
tities  than  usual ;  and  there  was  a  purring  wheezing  noise  to
be  distinguished  on  applying  the  ear  or  the  stethoscope  to  the
chest,  and  the  sound  produced  from  the  left  lung  by  percussion
by  the  fingers  was  dull.  On  striking  the  two  lungs  alternately
they  threw  back  different  sounds ;  the  left  returning  that
similar  to  the  noise  produced  by  tapping  the  solid  wall,  and
the  right  giving  out  that  exhibited  by  repeating  the  same  ex¬
periment  on  the  door  of  the  room.  When  I  had  finished  my
manipulations,  it  was  agreed  that  I  should  visit  the  Captain
at  his  hotel,  and  on  the  following  morning  I  went  there.
During  our  conversation,  I  perceived  him  smile  at  clairvoy¬
ance,  although  at  the  time  he  was  travelling  with  Ellen  he
had  been  astonished  that  the  child  could  relate  so  accurately
some  of  the  events  of  his  life,  with  their  relative  contingencies
— a  species  of  vision  like  that  with  which  Heinrich  Zschokke
was  gifted  naturally — the  Hellsehen,  or  clear-seeing,  as  related
in  his  auto-biography.

But  to  proceed.  Having  desired  Captain  D.  to  be  seated,
after  two  or  three  passes  his  eyelids  closed,  and  in  a  few  mi¬
nutes  he  exclaimed,  “  How  strange  !  my  eyes  are  shut  yet  I
can  see  your  coat,  and  now  I  can  discern  you.  But  I  cannot
open  my  eyes,”  &c.,  &c.  Now  here  was  clairvoyance  without
the  subject  of  it  passing  into  the  deep  magnetic  sleep ;  for  no
change  came  over  him,  except  that  he  could  never  raise  his
eyelids  until  I  touched  and  made  outward  passes  over  them
with  my  thumbs.  This  is  the  second  gentleman  upon  whom
I  have  produced  this  singular  effect :  in  both  cases,  the  usual
succession  of  phenomena  did  not  ensue,  the  phenomena  which
generally  precede  clairvoyance.  This  was  like  the  second  sight
of  the  Celts,  but  with  this  difference, — that,  in  the  subjects
of  second  sight,  the  eyes  are  generally  described  as  open,

while  in  these  cases  they  were  closed.

•»

Both  the  men  upon  whom  I  produced  this  wonderful  effect
(wonderful  because  to  us  new)  were  men  of  large  brains,  fine
proportions,  athletic,  and  dark-haired,  and  all  in  fact  that
the  eye  contemplates  with  pleasure  for  masculine  strength  and
manly  beauty.


298  Cure  of  Chronic  Intermittent  Intestinal  Haemorrhage ,

After  magnetizing  Capt.  D.  for  half  an  hour,  I  opened
his  eyes  and  left  him.  On  repeating  my  visit  the  next  morn¬
ing,  he  told  me  he  had  slept  well  during  the  whole  night,
without  experiencing  those  horrid  perspirations.

I  daily  repeated  the  application  of  my  magnetic  fluid,  and
on  the  fourth  visit  I  found  the  Captain  had  recovered  his
voice,  the  chordae  vocales  answering  to  their  accustomed  sti¬
mulus,  and  the  next  day  he  told  me  with  great  glee  that  he
could  sing  again;  and,  having  examined  his  chest,  I  dis¬
covered  the  left  lung  getting  clear  of  its  obstruction.

He  progressed,  and  on  the  fourteenth  day  I  pronounced
him  well ;  and  so  equal  was  he  to  any  exertion,  that  he  pro¬
posed  going  to  the  races,  and  actually  went,  without  feeling
any  inconvenience  from  the  effort  of  going  through  the  journey,
or  from  the  excitement  of  the  day.  I  believe  he  has  remained
perfectly  well  up  to  the  present  period.*

II.  Cure  of  Chronic  Intermittent  Intestinal  Haemorrhage.

The  following  case  I  deem  worthy  of  notice,  not  less  from
the  length  of  its  duration  than  from  the  urgency  of  the  symp¬
toms  when  I  first  treated  it  mesmerically.

For  some  months  I  had  been  in  attendance  on  Mrs. - ,

a  lady  about  55  years  of  age,  residing  at  Kensington,  and
upon  whom  all  my  medicaments  had  been  tried  in  vain,  that
is  to  say,  had  only  palliated  the  symptoms.  All  the  medical
practitioners  by  whom  she  had  been  treated  for  many  years,
had  failed  to  effect  more  than  the  same  result.  The  predis¬
position  remained  and  only  waited  the  exciting  agent  to  be
again  renewed  in  a  more  aggravated  form.  This  lady’s  daughter
had  often  observed  these  features  in  her  mother’s  case,  and
latterly  having  heard  and  seen  something  of  animal  mag¬
netism,  she  wished  it  to  be  tried,  and  suggested  to  me  its
application  to  Mrs.  - - .

I  felt  happy  to  be  thus  allowed  to  exercise  a  power  which
appears  capable  of  influencing  all  disorders  and  diseases  fa¬
vourably — a  power  which  only  succumbs  to  time,  wdiose  effect
on  the  human  frame  it  can  neither  control  nor  arrest.  What
is  here  predicated  of  mesmerism  is  true  only  in  the  cases  of
appropriate  magnetizers  being  found  for  each  individual  ail¬
ment.  For  the  congenial  mesmeriser  would  effect  a  cure  upon
that  person  alone  to  whom  he  is  cognate,  and  injure  perhaps
in  the  next  case  where  another  would  be  found  to  succeed.
This  lady  had  experienced  haemorrhage  from  the  bowels  every

*  See  Mr.  Parsons’s  perfect  cure  of  a  similarly  diseased  lung,  supposed  to  be
consumption  and  condemned  by  Dr.  Todd,  No.  XIV.,  p.  249. — Zoist.


by  Mr.  J.  Hands.


299


three  or  four  weeks,  for  the  last  fifteen  years,  each  attack
being  preceded  by  excessive  pain  and  tenderness  of  the  left
side  over  the  descending  colon,  accompanied  by  sickness.  In
latter  years  the  breathing  had  become  difficult,  and  the  diffi¬
culty  was  increased  on  lying  down  and  especially  on  attempt¬
ing  to  walk  or  ascend  the  stairs.  There  would  be  sudden
starting  from  sleep,  with  a  sensation  of  choking;  the  respi¬
ratory  murmur  was  deficient,  and  the  sound  on  percussion
was  dull,  & c.,  and  I  concluded  that  fluid  was  thrown  out  in
the  chest.  I  have  often  observed  large  losses  of  blood  to
be  followed  by  dropsy  early  or  late.  In  this  case  I  considered
that  observation  verified  by  hydro-thorax  (or  water  in  the
chest)  taking  place.

It  would  appear  that  this  state  ensues  upon  the  veins  losing
their  usual  contractility  and  irritability  by  reason  of  the  blood
having  lost  some  of  its  stimulating  properties  either  in  consti¬
tuent  qualities,  or  decarbonizing  power.  Thus  the  free  circu¬
lation  of  the  vital  fluid  is  obstructed  in  them,  and  consequently
the  serum  escapes  by  exosmose  into  the  cavities  or  elsewhere.

But  to  resume.  I  commenced  magnetizing  my  patient
on  May  27,  1846,  and  at  the  end  of  a  few  days  the  bleeding
was  arrested,  and  she  was  capable  of  passing  the  night  un¬
disturbed.  She  felt  quite  refreshed  every  morning  after  her
nocturnal  repose.  In  three  weeks  she  was  able  to  go  up
stairs  or  take  a  walk  without  feeling  any  inconvenience ;  in
fact,  forgetting  her  malady  altogether.  During  the  applica¬
tion  of  the  magnetic  fluid,  this  lady  became  obviously  less
obese,  or  much  thinner — a  result  which  has  always  taken  place
in  every  patient  I  ever  mesmerised* — in  consequence  of  the
serum  or  water,  with  the  adipose  or  fatty  substances,  being
taken  up  by  the  absorbents,  whilst  the  muscles  became  en¬
larged,  the  strength  renewed,  and  finally  the  old  flesh  replaced
by  a  new  or  healthy  deposition  of  animal  matter.

Thus  progressing,  my  patient  perfectly  recovered,  and  at
the  end  of  the  summer  she  was  able  to  walk  miles,  and  ac¬
tually  ascended  Richmond  Hill  with  greater  impunity  than
any  of  her  companions,  with  whom  she  had  formed  a  party
to  visit  that  pleasant  spot.

This  simple  relation  of  facts  affords  phenomena  too  striking
to  require  any  comment  of  my  own  upon  them.  Yet  I  can¬
not  lay  them  before  the  world  without  expressing  my  earnest
desire  that  all  who  read  may  practically  illustrate  them  among
their  families  and  in  their  homes,  and  that  all  who  think  may
enquire  into  them,  in  a  spirit  of  impartial  investigation,  eager
to  discover,  and  ready  to  acknowledge,  truth  !  !

*  Does  this  accord  with  general  observation  ? — Zoist.


300


Cure  of  a  Scalded  and  Stiff  Arm ,


***  We  regard  the  first  of  these  two  cases,  so  remarkably
cured,  as  one  not  of  consumption,  but  of  inflammatory  conso¬
lidation  of  the  lung;  and  the  condition  of  the  chest  in  the
second  case  as  depending  entirely  on  the  hsemorrhage,  and
we  do  not  believe  that  a  cure  of  such  a  haemorrhage  was  ever
effected  by  ordinary  medical  art. — Zoist.


VIII.  Cure  of  a  case  of  Scalded  and  Stiff  Arm ,  and  of  one
of  Scrofulous  Sores.  By  the  Wife  of  a  distinguished
Mathematical  Philosopher.

Dear  Dr.  Elliotson. — I  am  happy  to  send  you  an  account  of
the  two  children’s  cases  which  you  wished  to  have  in  writing.

The  little  boy,  T.  F.,  a  delicate  child  of  five  years  old,  had
been  frightfully  scalded,  by  a  pan  of  boiling  water,  on  the
side  of  his  face,  the  right  arm,  side,  and  neck.  I  did  not
hear  of  the  accident  until  five  weeks  after  its  occurrence ;  but,
so  far  from  the  scald  being  healed,  it  was  for  the  most  part  in
a  suppurating  state.  The  poor  little  sufferer  could  neither
bear  his  clothes  to  be  put  on,  nor  could  he  stand  without  sup¬
port.  His  appetite  was  gone ;  he  dozed  during  the  day,  and
was  restless  and  feverish  at  night.  From  his  frequent  cough,
flushed  cheek,  and  brilliant  looking  eye,  with  the  night  fever
and  perspirations,  I  feared  that  he  was  in  danger  of  becoming
consumptive,  and  learnt  from  his  mother  that  his  medical
attendant  expressed  the  same  apprehension.

He  was  put  into  a  slight  sleep  in  twenty  minutes ;  coughed
less  afterwards,  and  slept  better  at  night.  For  a  few  days  I
went  to  his  father's,  putting  him  into  a  sound  sleep  in  half
or  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  and  finding  him  every  day  in  a
better  state.  On  the  fourth  day  I  was  pleased  to  find  that  he
could  walk  a  little  without  help.  As  from  the  extent  of  the
sores  they  could  not  be  dressed  without  causing  most  severe
pain  to  the  child,  his  mother  was  really  afraid  to  remove  the
dressings,  which  had  become  stiff  and  adhered  to  the  wound.
I  determined  to  take  these  away,  and  found  to  my  great  grati¬
fication  that  the  little  boy’s  insensibility  to  pain  in  his  mes¬
meric  sleep  enabled  me  to  remove  the  stiffened  rags,  and  to
wash  and  cover  the  whole  surface  of  the  wound  with  gold¬
beaters’  skin ;  during  which  process  my  little  patient  neither
moved  nor  uttered  a  sound.*  In  a  week’s  time  he  was  able  to
bear  his  clothes  on ;  and  in  ten  days  (there  was  then  a  very
small  portion  of  the  wound  unhealed)  he  walked  to  my  house,

*  See  how  mesmerism  enabled  Mrs.  Salmon  to  dress  her  son’s  head  without
pain,  No.  III.,  p.  325. — Zoist.


and  of  Scrofulous  Sores.


301


rather  more  than  half  a  mile,  to  be  mesmerised.  At  this
time  the  cough  was  much  less  frequent,  and  the  flush  in  his
cheek  and  brilliancy  of  eye  were  greatly  diminished.  He  had
lost  his  fretfulness,  and  gained  an  appetite.  I  perceived  that
there  was  danger  of  the  scalded  arm  contracting,  as  he  held
it  always  bent,  and,  from  the  tenderness  of  the  scalded  skin,
could  not  bear  it  to  be  straightened  at  all.  In  a  fortnight
more,  the  wounds  were  skinned  over  and  the  child’s  general
health  improved.*  Owing  to  my  being  a  good  deal  occupied
at  this  time  he  did  not  come  to  me  for  three  weeks,  when  I
was  told  by  his  mother  that  the  poor  child  had  become  languid
and  feverish  again.  He,  therefore,  came  again  to  be  mes¬
merised.  The  arm  was  now  rigidly  contracted,  and  had  a
wasted,  unhealthy  appearance.  I  therefore  applied  myself,
during  the  little  patient’s  sleep,  to  the  cure  of  the  contracted
arm.  Its  rigidity  relaxed  during  mesmerism,  and,  by  grad¬
ually  stretching  it  out,  breathing  on  it,  and  mesmerising  over
it,  the  elbow  joint  at  length  recovered  its  flexibility,  and  the
arm  was  straightened  and  restored  to  use  and  strength.  This
occurred  in  five  weeks  after  his  return  to  be  mesmerised.  He
was,  at  the  time  I  ceased  to  mesmerise  him,  in  perfect  health,
and  stronger  and  more  active  than  he  had  ever  been  before  in
his  life.  I  have  this  day  seen  the  little  boy’s  mother,  and
been  pleased  to  find  that  his  scalded  arm  is  as  strong  as  the
other,  and  that  he  continued  in  perfect  health, — as  she  ex¬
presses  it,  “  quite  a  different  child  to  what  he  was  before  the
accident.”  I  also  learnt  that  the  surgeon  who  had  prescribed
for  the  child  said  that  there  was  no  cure  whatever  for  the  con¬
traction,  t

The  foregoing  case  occurred  last  autumn ;  the  other  of
which.  I  told  you  took  place  in  January.  A  little  girl,  six
years  old,  had  been  for  some  weeks  under  the  care  of  an
excellent  and  skilful  surgeon  here.  His  note  to  me  states,
that  “  the  case  was  scrofulous,  presenting  sores  of  that  cha¬
racter,  and  having  the  puffy  lymphatic  appearance  met  with
in  the  early  development  of  that  disease.”  This  gentleman,
in  the  kindest  and  most  liberal  manner,  permitted  me  to  try
mesmerism  on  his  little  patient,  whose  mother,  a  poor  woman,
was  very  anxious  that  I  should  do  so.  He  assured  me  that
he  should  congratulate  me  if  he  found  any  improvement  from
my  treatment.

*  See  Miss  Wallace’s  cures  of  scalded  patients,  No.  XVI.,  pp.  462,  464,  and
Mr.  Barth’s,  No.  XIX.,  p.  297.

f  Such  a  case  of  contraction  is  ordinarily  treated  with  a  severe  and  uncertain
operation,  followed,  even  should  it  be  performed  under  chloroform,  by  long  subse¬
quent  suffering  before  the  wound  is  healed.  See  cures  of  contractions  in  No.
XI.,  pp.  318,  339 ;  XIX.,  p.  288  ;  XX.,  p.  370  ;  XXI.,  p.  39  ;  XXIII.,  p.  283.


302


Cure  of  Scrofulous  Sores,  fyc.


This  little  girl  was  usually  put  to  sleep  in  about  half  an
hour,  during  a  part  of  which  time  I  made  passes  over  the
sores  and  glandular  swellings.  In  a  week  the  sores  were
healed ;  in  another  week  the  cough  which  had  been  incessant
was  so  diminished  as  to  be  a  very  slight  inconvenience,  and
at  the  end  of  three  weeks  I  sent  the  little  girl  to  her  former
kind  doctor,  and  received  from  him  the  assurance  that  he
could  see  nothing  the  matter  with  her.  By  your  advice  I
continued  mesmerising  the  child  for  a  short  time  after  you
had  kindly  seen  and  pronounced  her  well.*

My  friend,  the  medical  gentleman  above  referred  to,  had
felt  some  doubt  as  to  the  probability  of  being  able  to  benefit
children  by  mesmerism.  I  can  truly  say  that  many  of  my
patients  have  been  young  children,  and  that,  whether  they
have  slept  or  not,  I  always  have  been  successful,  at  least  in
doing  them  good.  The  treatment  of  a  child  by  mesmerism
has  never,  in  my  case  at  least,  been  attended  with  exhaustion,
an  assertion  which  I  could  not  make  in  the  case  of  grown
persons  labouring  under  severe  illness.

Among  all  the  interesting  cases  of  cures  recorded  in  The
Zoist,  I  find  a  comparatively  small  proportion  of  those  details
which,  though  they  may  seem  too  insignificant  to  record,  yet
throw  much  light  on  one  part  of  the  subject, — I  mean  the
healing  of  scalds,  sores,  and  wounds.  Numerous  instances
have  no  doubt  occurred  to  all  mesmerisers,  in  which  a  painful
suppurating  wound  has  been  healed  in  an  incredibly  short
time.  An  instance  of  this  happened  to  me  lately.  A  poor
woman  had  a  wound  made  by  a  nail  or  splinter,  in  the  outer
side  of  the  foot.  She  had  been  under  medical  treatment  for
several  days,  and  told  me  she  was  certainly  much  better  than
she  had  been.  Still,  when  she  came  to  me  the  sore  was  larger
than  a  shilling,  and  she  could  not,  without  great  pain,  set
her  foot  to  the  ground,  or  bear  the  lightest  touch  on  the  skin
about  the  wound.

I  mesmerised  the  foot  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  draw¬
ing,  as  she  called  it,  the  pain  to  the  end  of  the  toes,  and
afterwards  holding  the  points  of  my  fingers  steadily  to  the
injured  part.  When  my  fingers  tingled,  as  they  almost  im¬
mediately  began  to  do,  she  called  out  that  a  sharp  pain  pierced
the  centre  of  the  wound,  and  we  could,  in  a  very  few  minutes,
see  a  marked  change  in  its  appearance.  Action  had  evidently
begun.  Bound  the  edge  of  the  wound  was  a  red  line,  as  if
the  small  blood  vessels  were  filling,  and  a  healing  or  granu¬
lating  appearance  was  presented.  In  the  centre,  drops  of

*  See  cures  of  obstinate  ulcers,  No.  XI.,  p.  316;  XII.,  pp.  519,  520;
XXII.,  p.  199.


303


Cure  of  long-standing  Epilepsy,  fyc.

clear  serum  successively  collected  and  dried  up.  By  tlie  end
of  the  time,  she  left  me  with  a  small  scabbed  wound  not
larger  than  a  fourpenny-piece,  and  with  no  uneasiness  in  the
foot  except  that  caused  by  its  stiffness  and  tingling.

I  hope  that  what  appears  to  me  the  galvanic  action  of  the
fingers  will  be  much  observed.  Is  it  not  worth  enquiry,  whe¬
ther  there  may  not  be  two  operations  in  mesmerism  ?  One,
the  healing  or  supposed  galvanic  action  above  referred  to ;  the
other,  that  mysterious  process  by  which  sleep  is  induced.
As  it  seems  that  this  latter  state  may  sometimes  be  produced
without  the  active  operation  of  the  mesmeriser,  and  be  not
necessarily  attended  with  the  healing  process,  there  appears
to  be  a  difference  between  the  two  modes  of  action.  One  fact
seems  certain,  that  the  healing  process  takes  place  more  effect¬
ually  during  the  mesmeric  sleep.

It  is  impossible  not  to  perceive  the  connection  between
the  results  of  Professor  Matteucci's  experiments,  the  more
recent  ones  of  Mr.  Alfred  Smee,  and  the  healing  action  of  the
hand  in  mesmerism.  I  hope  that  mesmerisers,  who  have
been  the  first  to  observe  and  record  the  more  wonderful  phe¬
nomena,  will  not  neglect  this  first  step  in  a  discovery  that  in
all  truth  belongs  to  them.

I  am,  dear  Dr.  Elliotson,

Yours  very  truly

*  *  *  *


IX.  Cure  of  long-standing  Epilepsy ;  with  Clairvoyance  and
other  phenomena.  By  Miss  Aglionby.  Communicated
by  Dr.  Elliotson.

Wigton  Hall,  Wigton,  Cumberland,
May  11,  1849.

Dear  Sir, — Your  so  kindly  saying  in  your  last  note,  that  you  would
not  object  to  receive  any  further  communication  from  me,  induces  me
to  send  you  an  account  of  the  first  and  best  mesmeric  patient  I  ever
had.  She  was  a  rare  specimen,  and  her  case  was  a  very  interesting
one  ;  but  she  is  now,  alas  !  no  more.  I  need  not  add  that  you  are
at  liberty  to  make  any  use  you  please  of  the  papers  that  I  send,
though  the  incidents,  having  occurred  a  few  years  ago,  may  perhaps
make  it  even  less  valuable  than  thev  would  otherwise  have  been.  It

V

would  be  a  great  gratification  to  me  if  I  could  hear  an  improved  ac¬
count  of  your  health,  which  was  not,  I  fear,  some  time  ago  as  good

as  the  friends  of  truth  and  science  could  wish  it  to  be.  Sincerelv
#  •>

hoping  that  it  may  now  be  better,

I  remain,  dear  Sir,

Yours,  with  profound  esteem,

E.  A.  Aglionby.


304


Cure  of  long-standing  Epilepsy,


Nunnery,  March,  1849.

Ann  Pattinson,  a  very  poor  woman,  about  34,  living  at
Knecroft,  a  village  nearly  a  mile  from  here,  had  for  many
years  been  afflicted  with  epileptic  fits  to  such  a  degree,  that
she  could  not  be  safely  left  alone,  and  her  speech  was  ren¬
dered  thick  and  hesitating.  Besides  this,  she  was  in  general
bad  health,  and  so  weak  and  lame  in  one  side  that  she  could
hardly  walk  across  a  room  without  a  stick.  We  had  sent  her
for  several  summers  to  Shap  Wells,  and  she  had  also  con¬
sulted  different  doctors,  and  been  for  some  weeks  in  the
Carlisle  Infirmary,  but  all  without  receiving  any  real  benefit.
In  August,  1844,  I  attended  a  lecture  of  Spencer  HalPs  on
mesmerism  at  Carlisle,  and  saw  and  heard  much  of  his  cures.
As  Ann  Pattinson  was  then  in  a  most  pitiable  and  apparently
incurable  state,  it  occurred  to  me  that  mesmerism  could  do
her  no  harm  and  might  do  her  good.  At  that  time  I  knew
nothing  of  this  great  “  gift  of  God,”  and  was  besides  going
to  Ireland  for  two  or  three  months,  and  so  could  not  attend
to  her  myself ;  I  therefore  spoke  to  Mr.  Castle,  a  most  intel¬
ligent  chemist  in  Carlisle,*  who  had  much  experience  in  mes¬
merism,  and  who  most  kindly  took  her  under  his  care  for
some  weeks  during  my  absence,  and,  I  believe,  produced
many  of  the  phenomena  which  were  afterwards  so  beautifully
developed  when  she  was  under  my  treatment.  At  any  rate
when  I  returned  to  Nunnery  in  November,  I  found  her  at
Knecroft  in  much  improved  health,  her  lameness  rather
better,  and  her  fits  quite  gone ;  all  the  result  of  her  seances
with  Mr.  Castle.  Thinking  that  still  further  good  might  be
done,  I  determined  to  continue  the  process  myself.  On  21st
November  I  mesmerised  her  for  the  first  time,  and  did  so
daily,  with  very  few  omissions,  until  the  beginning  of  April,

1845,  when  I  ceased,  her  cure  being  then  perfected.  She
had  good  general  health,  distinct  speech,  no  fits  and  no  lame¬
ness,  and  was  capable  of  walking  nine  or  ten  miles  and
working  out  in  the  fields — a  wonderful  change  from  her  former
feebleness  and  infirmity.  Her  health  continued  good,  but
unfortunately  not  so  her  conduct,  and  she  was  obliged  to  go
into  the  Penrith  workhouse  in  the  winter  of  1845.  She  bore
a  child  there,  and  did  not  come  home  till  the  autumn  of

1846.  Her  health  soon  after  her  return  declined,  and  in  the
summer  of  1847  she  died  of  a  dropsical  complaint ;  but  never
experienced  any  more  fits.  So  ends  Ann’s  life  and  history,
and  I  must  return  to  her  mesmeric  characteristics.

*  Very  many  chemists  and  druggists  have  disinterestedly  declared  their  con¬
viction  of  the  truth  of  mesmerism  and  practised  it,  while  all  the  medical  men
around  of  all  denominations  have  scorned  to  examine  it  and  have  reviled  it. —
Zoist.


with  Clairvoyance  and  other  Phenomena .


305


She  displayed  beautiful  examples  of  phreno-mesmerism,
answering  to  pressure  of  almost  all  the  organs,  and  she  was
also  a  clairvoyant  of  no  mean  order.  Her  limbs  were  capable
of  the  highest  degree  of  cataleptic  rigidity.  I  have  mesmer¬
ised  her  outstretched  arm  and  hung  on  the  tips  of  her  fingers
a  15  lb.  weight,  which  she  sustained  for  a  considerable  time
without  bending  a  joint.  By  passes  I  have  fixed  her  hand  to
the  back  of  a  chair  so  firmly  that  by  no  efforts  of  her  own  or
others  could  it  be  disengaged,  until  I  demesmerised  it.  On
both  these  occasions  the  mesmerism  was  but  local,  she  herself
not  being  in  the  trance.  She  was  very  easily  affected,  a
single  pass  or  look  throwing  her  into  the  coma.  By  pressing
my  hand  upon  her  lips,  and  gazing  stedfastly  at  her,  I  could
lock  her  jaw  so  completely  that  I  have  occasionally  had  dif¬
ficulty  in  demesmerising  it.  When  in  the  trance,  she  would
converse  freely  with  others,  as  well  as  with  me.  She  had
community  of  feeling  with  her  mesmeriser,  but  had  no  dislike
to  the  approach  of  strangers.  At  times  she  appeared  to  be
able  to  read  my  thoughts;  but  her  lucidity  was  uncertain,
being  much  greater  on  some  days  than  others.  Wonderful
as  she  was,  had  I  known  as  much  of  mesmerism  then  as  I  do
now,  I  have  no  doubt  I  could  have  elicited  still  stranger  phe¬
nomena.  She  expressed  the  different  feelings,  excited  by  the
pressure  of  the  cerebral  organs,  in  a  most  striking  manner
both  by  speech  and  actions.  She  would  also  imitate  my  ges¬
tures  in  a  most  ludicrous  manner.  She  would  frequently  tell
me  what  persons  I  had  spoken  to  on  my  road  to  her  cottage,
and  what  I  had  said  to  them.  I  once  put  a  letter  in  its
envelope  into  her  hand,  and  asked  her  who  it  was  from,  and
what  was  its  subject.  She  replied  it  was  from  a  very  pretty
lady  with  long  fair  ringlets,  and  it  was  all  about  mesmerism.
This  answer  both  as  to  the  matter  of  the  note  and  its  writer,
was  quite  correct.  I  asked  her  if  I  should  ever  visit  Italy.
“  Oh  yes!”  quoth  Ann.  “When?”  “Very  soon;  next
summer;  but  you  will  only  be  there  for  a  week.”  I  smiled
at  her  answer,  and  thought  to  myself  that  a  clairvoyant  is
not  always  a  prophetess ;  for  at  that  time  I  had  no  prospect
of  going  abroad.  The  following  summer,  however,  I  went
on  the  continent,  crossed  the  Alps,  and  passed  one  week  of
beauty  and  delight  on  the  shores  of  the  Italian  lakes.  This
was  I  think  Ann's  only  attempt  to  read  the  future,  and  it
was  certainly  a  successful  one.

These  are  the  principal  particulars  which  at  this  distance
of  time  I  can  recollect,  and  I  regret  that  I  kept  no  regular
journal  of  our  seances.  The  few  notes  which  I  did  take  I  will
copy  out  of  my  pocket-book  for  that  year.  They  are  as  follows.


306


Cure  of  long-standing  Epilepsy,

Asked  Ann  Pattinson,  when  in  her  trance,  what  hypnot¬
ism  meant ;  to  which  she  replied,  “  Mesmerism.”  I  then
asked  her  what  is  mesmerism.  She  answered,  “An  over¬
coming  of  the  body  and  a  curing  it.”

I  left  Ann  asleep  and  went  on  to  Ainstable  to  see  Nanny
Pelter,  not  naming  my  intention  to  any  one.  When  I  re¬
turned,  I  asked  Ann  where  I  had  been.  She  said  at  Ainstable
in  Pelter’s  house,  and  that  I  had  seen  Nanny  and  the  chil¬
dren,  but  not  Pelter  himself,  and  that  Nanny  was  up  and
dressed,  but  sitting  on  the  bed ;  which  was  all  true.  She  has
correctly  explained  the  words  lucidity,  magnetism,  and  animal
magnetism,  and  she  is  also  able  to  repeat  after  me  sentences
in  different  foreign  languages.

Asked  Ann  who  had  been  at  Nunnery  the  day  before.
She  said,  “  Mr.  Castle  (her  first  mesmeriser),  who  had  come
in  a  gig  with  a  light  horse ;”  which  was  true ;  and  she  also
told  me  exactly  what  he  had  said  of  two  mesmeric  patients  of
his,  in  whom  I  was  interested.  I  asked  how  she  knew  this ;
she  said  she  saw  things,  but  they  did  not  always  come,  and
then  she  could  not  tell  things.  She  distinguished  between
Latin  and  Italian  which  was  repeated  to  her,  and  she  added
they  were  much  the  same  languages,  only  Latin  was  older.
It  must  be  remembered  that  in  her  normal  state  she  was  a
very  ignorant  person,  able  to  read  very  little  and  not  to  write
at  all.

She  can  now  tell  what  o'clock  it  is  by  a  watch  being  held
to  the  back  of  her  neck.  She  also  told  me  who  was  to  dine
at  Nunnery  to-day,  and  that  Mr.  Graham  was  asked,  but
could  not  come ;  which  was  the  fact.

To-day  I  mesmerised  some  water  and  gave  to  Ann  in  her
trance.  She  said  it  tasted  very  rough,  and  that  it  was  mes¬
merised.  I  then  made  her  daughter  (a  child  of  five  or  six)
drink  it,  and  she  fell  directly  into  a  state  of  coma.  I  came
up  to-day  to  Ann's  cottage  partly  on  a  pony,  and  partly  on
foot,  and  she  told  me  exactly  all  the  circumstances,  where  I
had  mounted  and  dismounted,  &c.,  which  she  could  have  no
common  means  of  knowing.

I  was  much  distressed  to-day  in  my  mind  about  the  death
of  my  poor  dog  Nero,  and  was  thinking  of  him  whilst  I  mes¬
merised  Ann,  and  consequently  she  appeared  very  uncom¬
fortable  during  the  whole  seance.  The  tears  rolled  down  her
cheeks,  and  she  kept  moaning  and  muttering  about  Nero.
I  placed  a  watch  behind  her  neck,  without  myself  observing
the  hour,  and  asked  her  what  o'clock  it  was ;  but  she  could
not  tell.  I  then  ascertained  the  time,  and  on  asking  her
again,  she  told  me  correctly.  I  gave  her  some  mesmerised


with  Clairvoyance  and  other  Phenomena.


307


water  when  awake :  she  said  it  tasted  very  rough,  and  then
fell  into  a  sort  of  half  trance,  shutting  her  eyes,  and  com¬
plaining  of  being  giddy.

To-day  Mr.  Aglionby  mesmerised  her,  and,  besides  the
usual  phenomena,  she  displayed  community  of  feeling,  shrink¬
ing  when  his  hand  was  pricked  or  his  hair  pulled,  and  rubbing
her  own  hand  or  head.  She  also  imitated  him  most  ludicrously
in  all  his  motions.

I  desired  Ann  to  open  her  eyes ;  but  she  said  the  more  she
opened  them  the  less  she  saw.  She  then,  upon  my  asking
what  heaven  was  like,  fell  into  a  sort  of  ecstatic  vision.  She
said  there  was  an  angel  standing  before  her  like  a  child,
and  clothed  in  shining  white  robes,  and  another  near  her  with
white  wings.  She  exclaimed,  she  heard  beautiful  music,  and
saw  golden  gates  with  large  pillars  and  a  great  light  within
the  gates,  and  the  shades  of  many  people.  She  described  all
this  so  beautifully  and  vividly,  that  I  could  almost  have
thought  that  I  too  stood  among  angels.  After  she  awoke,
she  said  she  thought  there  had  been  some  music,  which  was
the  only  time  I  ever  knew  her  retain  a  trace  of  her  mesmeric
visions  on  awaking.

When  I  put  some  mesmerised  water  on  my  own  hand,  she
drew  back  hers,  and  exclaimed  that  something  hurt  her.  She
says  she  sees  things  from  the  side-  of  her  head.

I  desired  Ann  to  go  to  Beaulieu,  a  place  where  I  had
been  staying  in  the  autumn,  and  to  look  for  a  dear  friend  of
mine,  and  to  tell  me  what  she  was  like.  She  said  she  was
old  and  walked  on  crutches,  and  had  white  hair  and  blue  eyes,
and  wore  a  black  gown,  and  often  talked  of  me ;  which  was
all  a  most  correct  description  of  my  valued  old  friend.  Ann
added  that  there  were  two  other  ladies  at  Beaulieu — young
and  dark,  and  three  gentlemen — one  of  whom  was  old.  She
then  described  the  furniture  in  the  hall  very  minutely,  saying,
there  was  a  glass  door,  a  horse,  but  not  a  live  one,  and  a  long
necked  brass  thing,  which  she  did  not  know  the  name  of.
By  this  she  meant  a  long  slender  shaped  old  canon,  which
stood  in  the  hall,  and  the  horse  was  a  large  child’s  rocking
horse,  which  I  had  forgotten  till  she  reminded  me  of  it.  She
then  of  her  own  accord  went  to  the  drawing  room  and  said
the  windows  looked  through  beautiful  trees  towards  something
like  the  sea  where  there  were  many  ships  and  boats ;  and,  in
truth,  those  windows  do  look  over  a  wooded  lawn  to  the
mouth  of  the  Boyne,  where  large  vessels  pass  to  and  from
the  harbour  at  Drogheda.  This  was  the  only  effort  at  mental
travelling  I  ever  heard  Ann  make,  but  it  was  correct  in  all
particulars.  I  ought  to  remark  that  my  sister  and  I  had  no


308


Cure  of  long-standing  Epilepsy.


maid  with  us  at  Beaulieu,  so  that  Ann  could  not,  in  her  nor¬
mal  state,  have  come  to  any  knowledge  of  the  place  or  family.

These,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  are  the  only  notes  that  I  took
of  Ann's  case,  which  was  a  most  singular  one,  and  displaying
every  day  some  new  and  beautiful  phenomenon.  Whilst
attending  her  I  had  also  two  other  women  under  mesmeric
treatment.  One  was  Mary  Dixon,  a  blind  woman  of  70.
The  passes  had  no  visible  effect,  but  she  always  declared  that
after  a  seance  she  could,  for  a  short  time,  distinguish  the  dim
outline  of  objects,  which  she  could  not  do  at  any  other  time.
It  is  impossible  to  determine  whether  she  would  ever  have
received  any  ultimate  benefit  from  mesmerism,  as  I  was  un¬
able  to  pursue  my  treatment  of  her  for  any  length  of  time,
and  she  is  now  dead.  My  other  patient  was  Nanny  Pelter,
an  elderly  woman  of  very  broken  constitution.  When  I  began
to  mesmerise  her,  she  was  pronounced  by  the  parish  doctor
to  be  dying.  Her  symptoms  were  exceeding  feebleness,  want
of  appetite,  constant  diarrhoea,  tendency  to  erysipelatous  in¬
flammation  in  the  head  and  eyes,  spitting  of  blood,  and  violent
rheumatic  pain  in  one  elbow.  After  being  under  my  mes¬
meric  treatment  for  six  weeks,  I  left  her  in  comparatively
good  health,  all  the  symptoms  I  have  named  having  left  her
one  by  one.  This  is  four  years  since,  and  she  is  now  at  this
present  time  living  and  well,  and  able  to  do  her  work,  so  that
I  think  it  is  hardly  unfair  to  attribute  her  cure,  and  indeed
her  life,  through  God's  blessing,  to  mesmerism.  Before  I  took
her  under  my  care  the  doctor  had  given  up  both  physicking  and
visiting  her,  as  he  said  “  she  was  done  and  it  was  of  no  use."
She  exhibited  no  phenomena  except  partial  rigidity  of  the
limbs,  but  was  very  easily  thrown  into  the  coma,  which  usually
lasted  about  two  or  three  hours,  and  from  which  she  awoke
voluntarily.  When  I  had  had  her  for  two  or  three  weeks
under  my  hands,  I  was  absent  for  a  few  days ;  and  when  I
returned  I  found  her  in  bed  and  in  a  sad  state.  She  had
presumed  on  her  newly  acquired  strength,  and  had  gone  out
and  got  cold,  which  confined  her  to  her  bed  with  violent  in¬
flammation  of  the  head  and  eyes.  I  mesmerised  her  lying
and  suffering  as  she  was,  and  threw  her  into  a  deep  sleep
which  lasted  for  four  hours.  She  awoke  from  it  in  a  violent
perspiration,  but  free  from  pain  and  illness,  and  a  few  more
seances  soon  regained  for  her  the  ground  she  had  lost  by  her
own  imprudence  and  my  absence.

E.  A.  Aglionby.

***  We  rejoice  that  Miss  Aglionby  has  not  been  at  all
intimidated  by  Dr.  Thomas  Mayo.  See  No.  XXIV.,  p.  378 ;
No.  XXV.,  p.  49. — Zoist.


(  309  )


X.  The  unscrupulous  conduct  of  the  London  Medical  Gazette

exposed  by  the  Morning  Post.

u  Dr.  F.*  need  be  under  no  apprehension  of  an  attack  in  the  mesmeric  maga¬
zine  affecting  him  in  the  opinion  of  the  profession.  The  journal  only  finds  cir¬
culation  among  the  class  of  impostors  who  record  their  doings  in  it.” — London
Medical  Gazette,  April  12,  1845.  Notices  to  Correspondents.

“  It  is  with  surprise  and  regret  we  learn  that  Dr.  Elliotson  has  been  appointed
to  deliver  the  Harveian  Oration  at  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians  on  the  27th
inst.  Considering  the  notoriety  which  the  orator  elect  has  acquired  as  a  patron
of  mesmerism,  we  should  have  supposed  that  a  more  appropriate  selection  might
have  been  made.  We  cannot  bring  ourselves  to  believe  that  the  majority  of
the  Fellows  concur  in  the  step  which  has  been  taken  by  the  College,  and  we  feel
confident  that  it  will  create  great  dissatisfaction  in  the  profession.” — Ibid.,  June
19,  1846.

In  our  last  number,  p.  153,  it  appeared  that  Lord  Ducie  at
the  formation  of  the  Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute  had  publicly
said  that

“  He  experienced  a  very  severe  attack  of  rheumatic  gout,  and  as
he  was  lying  in  bed  with  a  great  deal  of  nervous  irritability,  and
without  any  power  of  sleep,  he  thought  he  would  try  mesmerism,
and  sent  for  the  lady.  The  very  first  time  he  was  mesmerised  she
succeeded,  and  left  the  room  without  his  knowing  it ;  he  was  enabled
to  get  rest,  and  was  much  tranquillized.  Day  after  day  she  pro¬
duced  similar  effects,  always  being  able  to  get  out  of  the  room  with¬
out  his  knowledge,  and  he  experienced  very  great  relief  from  the
mesmeric  treatment.  Owing  to  the  benefit  he  had  thus  received,  he
was  induced  every  morning  for  three  months  to  go  to  a  surgeon  in
London  who  practised  mesmerism.  While  attending  upon  him  he
saw  such  a  number  of  cases,  so  many  extraordinary  cures,  and  such
a  number  of  instances  in  which  persons  were  readily  relieved  of  in¬
tense  pain  and  suffering,  that  he  really  could  not  very  well  doubt
what  he  saw.”

Upon  this  the  Medical  Gazette  of  July  8,  or,  in  plain  lan¬
guage,  Dr.  Alfred  Taylor,  wrote,

“We  are  inclined  to  think  that  the  affair  is  a  hoax  from  begin¬
ning  to  end,  and  that  the  concoctor  of  the  so  called  report  has  been
guilty  of  a  species  of  ‘  mental  travelling,’  by  no  means  uncommon
among  enthusiastic  advocates  of  particular  doctrines.  From  what
we  can  learn,  the  facts  are  these.  About  two  years  since,  Lord
Ducie,  after  having  undergone  a  fair  trial  for  the  treatment  of  gout

*  Dr.  Fluder,  the  medical  attendant  of  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Hare  whose  won¬
derful  mesmeric  cure  by  Mr.  Kiste  is  recorded  in  No.  IX.,  p.  96,  with  a  merited
reproof  for  his  sad  conduct  in  the  matter,  when  stung  by  the  success  of  mesmerism
after  his  own  useless  attendance  upon  the  case  for  years.  The  Gazette  does  not
name  The  Zoist : — a  rule  as  religiously  observed  by  it,  the  Lancet ,  and  other  me¬
dical  journals,  as  that  of  not  laying  any  of  our  cases  before  their  readers.  This  is
as  senseless  an  infatuation  as  the  conduct  of  Charles  X.,  Louis  Philippe,  and  M.
Guizot,  up  to  the  very  moment  that  the  storm  rattled  about  their  ears  and  put
them  to  an  ignominious  flight. — Zoist.

VOL.  VII.


A  A


310  The  unscrupulous  conduct  of  the  London  Medical

by  mesmerism,  in  the  hands  of  various  lay  and  medical  mesmeric
practitioners,  became  so  much  worse  that  he  consulted  Dr.  Robert
Fergusson  respecting  his  condition.  By  the  advice  of  this  physician,
he  went  to  the  Mediterranean  for  a  change  of  climate.  While  abroad
and  since  his  return,  he  has  been  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Spencer
Wells,  who  has  never  practised  mesmerism ;  and  we  are  credibly  in¬
formed,  that  wdiile  under  his  care,  Lord  Ducie  has  not  submitted  to
mesmeric  practices  from  others.  His  lordship,  notwithstanding  the
boasted  results  of  mesmeric  treatment,  is  not  yet  cured  of  gout.

“We  notice  this  subject,  because  any  statement  alleged  to  have
been  made  on  Lord  Ducie’s  authority,  is  calculated  to  meet  with
attention  from  the  public ;  and  this  statement  of  the  cure  of  gout  by
mesmerism,  which  has  been  falsely  attributed  to  him,  reflects  unde¬
servedly  upon  the  non-mesmeric  portion  of  the  medical  profession.
In  one  report  it  is  alleged  that  he  has  been  cured  ;  in  another  that  he
has  experienced  very  great  relief :  but  that  neither  report  is  worthy
of  credit,  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  after  so  much  mesmeric  treat¬
ment  his  Lordship  was  compelled  to  go  abroad  for  the  benefit  of  his
health.  Like  a  reasonable  man  he  discontinued  these  mesmeric  ab¬
surdities,  which  had  actually  brought  him  to  a  worse  condition,  and
thenceforth  took  regular  advice  under  an  experienced  medical  prac¬
titioner.  We  put  it  to  our  readers  whether  it  is  at  all  probable  that
a  nobleman  of  Lord  Ducie’s  standing,  who  has  thus  practically  shown
his  entire  disbelief  of  the  alleged  benefits  of  mesmerism,  should  have
given  utterance  to  the  fulsome  laudation  of  this  species  of  quackery
which  the  mesmerists  wish  the  public  to  believe.”

This  article  occasioned  letters  to  be  addressed  to  the
Editor,  as  appears  in  the  following  article  of  his  number  for
July  the  27th  : —

“THE  BRISTOL  MESMERISTS  AND  THEIR  DELUSIONS.  THE  CASE

OF  LORD  DUCIE.

“We  insert  the  following  correspondence  in  reference  to  an  arti¬
cle  which  recently  appeared  in  this  journal,  on  the  Bristol  Mesmeric
Institute  and  the  case  of  Lord  Ducie.

(Copy.)

“  ‘ Sir, — Having  had  my  attention  drawn  to  your  leading  article
in  the  Medical  Gazette  of  July  6th,  in  which  you  designate  the
published  report  of  the  public  meeting  held  at  Bristol,  for  the  pur¬
pose  of  establishing  a  Mesmeric  Institute,  ‘a  hoax  from  beginning  to
end’ — and  that  ‘  the  concoctor  of  the  so-called  report  has  been  guilty
of  a  species  of  mental  travelling,’  &c., — in  answer  to  this  unfounded
assertion,  I  beg  to  hand  you  a  copy  of  a  letter  just  received  from
Mr.  G.  F.  Powell,  which  will  effectually  eradicate  from  your  mind
the  mental  delusion  under  which  you  appear  to  have  been  labouring.’

“‘Quay,,  Ilfracombe,  July  16,  1849.

“  *  To  Dr.  Storer.

“  *  Sir, — I  can  have  no  hesitation  in  assuring  you  that  the  report


Gazette  exposed  by  the  Morning  Post.


311


of  the  meeting  of  the  Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute,  Earl  Ducie  in  the
Chair,  which  appeared  in  the  Bristol  Mercury ,  was  a  faithful  report
of  proceedings  which  took  place  upon  that  occasion.  It  was  not  the
‘  concoction’  of  any  person,  but  a  fair  and  tolerably  ample  transcript
of  notes  taken  by  me,  in  the  usual  mode,  of  the  observations  which
fell  from  the  different  speakers.  There  were  among  the  audience,
clergymen,  medical  practitioners,  and  other  persons  fully  qualified  to
judge  of  the  fidelity  of  the  report;  and  I  think  that  I  may  venture  to
rest  my  professional  reputation,  as  well  as  that  of  the  paper  I  repre¬
sent,  upon  their  decision. — I  have  the  honour  to  be,  sir,

“  ‘  Your  obedient  servant,

“  ‘  George  F.  Powell.’

“  *  With  regard  to  your  statement  respecting  Earl  Ducie,  that  ‘  he
has,  like  a  reasonable  man,  discontinued  these  mesmeric  absurdities.’
I  beg  to  call  your  attention  to  the  following  letter,  which  1  have  had
the  honour  of  receiving  from  his  lordship,  after  having  sent  him
your  Gazette  in  question.

“  ‘  Sir, — I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  sending  me  the  Medical
Gazette.  The  editor  is  perfectly  correct  in  saying  that  I  have
consulted  Dr.  Fergusson,  and  that  I  have  been  benefited  (beyond  my
most  sanguine  hopes)  by  the  kind  attention  paid  to  me  by  my  friend
Mr.  Spencer  Wells,  to  whom  I  would  earnestly  recommend  every
sufferer  from  rheumatic  gout  to  apply  at  24,  Belgrave  Square.
Nevertheless,  what  I  stated  at  Bristol  is  equally  correct — viz.,  that  I
had  been  relieved  from  inflammatory  pain  by  the  action  of  mes¬
merism,  and  that  in  the  state  of  nervous  weakness  produced  by  my
attacks,  I  had  been  tranquillized,  and  rest  had  been  produced  by  the
same  means.

“  *  And  believe,  &c.,

“ ‘  Ducie.

“ ‘  To  S.  D.  Saunders,  Esq.’

“  ‘  The  originals  of  the  two  foregoing  letters  are  in  my  possession,
and  I  should  feel  much  pleasure  in  submitting  them  for  the  perusal
of  any  parties  that  you  may  appoint.

“  ‘Believing  that  you  take  a  pride  in  following  out  an  honourable
line  of  conduct,  I  have  no  doubt  that  this  communication  will  be
placed  fairly  before  your  readers  in  your  next  impression.

“  ‘  I  remain,  Sir,

“  ‘Yours  obediently,

“  ‘  S.  D.  Saunders,

“  ‘  Mon.  Sec.  to  the  Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute .’

“  ‘  Under  the  above  title  in  your  leading  article  of  the  week
before  last,  you  have  assumed  the  late  proceedings  of  the  Bristol
Mesmeric  Institute  to  be  a  hoax,  and  you  state  that  the  concoctor
must  have  been  labouring  under  that  species  of  hallucination  known
as  mental  travelling.  You  also  assert  that  Earl  Ducie  stated  that  he
had  been  cured  of  gout  by  mesmerism.  Now,  if  you  will  take  the
trouble  to  read  the  report  which  was  sent  to  you,  I  do  not  think

a  a  2


312  The  unscrupulous  conduct  of  the  London  Medical

even  by  implication  that  this  construction  can  be  drawn.  That  Earl
Ducie  is  desirous  of  doing  justice  to  all  parties  in  the  case  is  suffi¬
ciently  proved  by  the  accompanying  note  from  his  lordship  (see
supra)  addressed  to  the  Secretary.  I  also  enclose  you  another  from
the  reporter  of  the  proceedings  in  the  Bristol  Mercury.

“  ‘  If  necessary,  I  could  forward  you  the  attestations  of  the  vari¬
ous  speakers  on  the  occasion — also  of  a  large  number  of  auditors —
who  would  willingly  bear  witness  to  the  truthfulness  of  the  meeting,
and  to  the  fidelity  of  the  report.

“  ‘  Your  insertion  of  this  in  your  next  Gazette ,  with  the  accom¬
panying  notes,  will,  I  trust,  be  felt  as  a  necessity  in  justice  to  all
parties.

“  ‘  I  am,  Sir,

“  ‘  Yours  obediently,

“  ‘  Henry  Storer,  M.D.

“  ‘  Physician  to  the  Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.
“  ‘  Bristol,  July  17th,  1849.’

*;K*  “  It  therefore  appears  that  the  meeting  was  not  a  hoax,  and
that  there  is  really  a  Mesmeric  Institute  in  Bristol,  provided  with  a
Secretary,  &c.  We  can  assure  Dr.  Storer,  that  we  read  the  pub¬
lished  report,  and  were  so  shocked  at  the  absurdity  of  the  pro¬
ceedings,  that  we  preferred  believing  it  to  be  a  ruse  for  the  en¬
couragement  of  mesmerism,  rather  than  adopting  the  supposition,
that  any  grown-up  and  decently  educated  persons  should  by  their
presence  have  given  their  sanction  to  such  proceedings.  We  take
the  following  extract  from  the  speech  of  a  Mr.  Janson,  one  of  the
Vice-Presidents,  who  moved  the  adoption  of  the  report:  —

“  ‘  It  was  not  for  him  (Mr.  Janson)  to  say  much  of  his  own
doing,  but  he  might  state  that  he  had  practised  mesmerism  for  the
period  of  six  years,  during  which  time  he  had  had  come  under  his
personal  observation  every  mesmeric  phenomenon  which  he  had  ever
read  or  heard  of — not  only  the  lower  phenomena  of  coma,  traction,
insensibility  to  pain,  rigidity,  &c.,  but  the  higher  phenomena,  com¬
munity  of  taste,  mental  travelling,  introvision,  and  latterly  one  case
of  prevision,  which  he  conceived  to  be  the  highest  power — -for  yjhat
could  exceed  the  power  of  prophecy?  This  power  was  almost  too
high  to  be  mentioned  at  a  mixed  public  assembly,  for  our  present
state  of  knowledge  was  not  sufficiently  advanced  for  it.  In  the  case
he  referred  to,  the  patient  had,  by  the  power  of  prevision,  foretold
every  circumstance,  even  to  the  most  minute — not  only  the  progress
of  the  disease,  the  period  at  which  she  would  be  affected  by  parti¬
cular  symptoms,  but  she  had  likewise  foretold  other  things ,  in  regard
of  which  there  could  have  been  no  deception  or  collusion.  For  instance,
the  patient  once  said,  ‘  I  shall  have  a  letter  delivered  to  me  next
Thursday,  at  three  o’clock.’  He  had  put  down  the  fact  in  his  note¬
book.  The  patient  had  told  him  what  would  be  the  contents  of  the
letter,  and  had  dictated  those  contents  word  by  word,  some  of  the
matters  treated  of  not  being  mere  common-place  matters.  He  had
written  down  the  letter  from  the  dictator,  and  when  it  afterwards
arrived  had  taken  the  letter  in  one  hand  and  the  note-book  in  his


Gazette  exposed  by  the  Morning  Post.


313


other,  and  had  found  them  correspond  in  every  particular.  He
scarcely  expected  this  fact  to  be  believed — the  power  was  too  much
in  advance  of  the  present  day:  but  he  considered  it  right  to  place
before  the  meeting  all  he  knew/

“  According  to  the  speaker,  mesmerism  can  convey  a  power  of
prophecy.  Thus,  we  are  required  to  believe  not  only  that  a  person
may  travel  mentally,  and  describe  minutely  places  which  he  has
never  visited,  and  persons  whom  he  has  never  seen, — that  he  may
see  objects  with  his  navel,  and  read  Greek,  or  even  Coptic,  with  the
point  of  his  elbow;  but  there  is  a  still  higher  power  than  this  which
the  mummery  of  mesmerism  is  alleged  to  be  capable  of  conveying, —
a  power  which  has  hitherto  been  considered  by  all  right-minded  per¬
sons  to  be  the  especial  gift  of  the  Supreme  Being, — namely,  that  of
prophecy.  The  speaker  rightly  judges  that  his  ‘fact,’  or,  more  cor¬
rectly  speaking,  his  assertion,  will  not  be  believed, — ‘the  power  was
too  much  in  advance  of  the  present  day.’  It  is  incredible  that  men
of  religious  principles,  and  possessing  common  sense,  should  allow
such  blasphemy  to  pass  without  protesting  against  the  sentiments  of
the  speaker.  Miss  Nottidge  has  lately  been  pronounced  insane  upon
high  authority,  because  she  believed  that  the  President  of  the
Agapemone,  or  Abode  of  Love  in  Devonshire,  a  certain  Mr.  Prince,
was  the  Almighty !  Dr.  Conolly  might,  we  think,  now  examine  the
cases  of  the  Bristol  mesmerists,  and  tell  us  whether,  if  Miss  Not¬
tidge  should  be  confined,  the  mesmerists  who  believe  in  the  gift  of
prophecy  should  be  allowed  to  go  at  large.  The  mesmerists  are  cer¬
tainly  not  dangerous  to  themselves  or  others,  and  their  subscriptions
to  carry  out  impossible  designs  may  not  seriously  damage  their
worldly  means;  but  when  they  adopt  such  delusive  views  as  that  the
Divine  gift  of  prophecy  can  be  conveyed  by  ‘  sundry  manipulations,
it  is  surely  necessary  for  their  own  protection,  the  peace  of  their
families,  and  the  comfort  of  society,’  that  they  should  be  put  under
temporary  confinement  in  an  asylum.

“  Either  Dr.  Conolly  must  be  prepared  to  allow  Miss  Nottidge  to
go  free,  and  enjoy  her  belief  that  Mr.  Prince  is  the  Almighty,  or  he
must  join  us  in  the  opinion  that  a  large  number  of  mesmerists
possessed  of  property  should  be  dealt  with  on  the  principles  which
he  would  apply  to  her  case.

“One  word  with  respect  to  Lord  Ducie.  We  reassert,  in  spite
of  Mr.  Saunders’s  inuendo,  that  his  lordship  has  discontinued  these
mesmeric  absurdities.  He  is  now,  and  has  been  for  two  years,
under  the  treatment  of  respectable  professional  men,  who  would  not
lend  their  sanction  to  any  mesmeric  practices.  It  is  clear  from  his  own
letter  that  his  lordship  has  no  real  faith  in  mesmerism, — 1st,  be¬
cause  if  he  had,  he  would  still  continue  to  resort  to  it;  and  2nd,  he
recommends  every  sufferer  from  rheumatic  gout  to  apply  for  relief —
not  to  the  mesmerists  at  the  Bristol  Institute,  but  to  his  friend,
Mr.  Spencer  Wells,  at  24,  Belgrave  Square,  a  highly  respectable
naval  surgeon.  It  is  certainly  to  be  regretted  that  Lord  Ducie  should
give  even  a  theoretical  support  to  these  proceedings:  but  we  judge
rather  from  a  man's  acts  than  his  speeches;  and  as  his  lordship,  by


314  The  unscrupulous  conduct  of  the  London  Medical

entirely  laying  aside  mesmeric  treatment,  has  shown  no  faith  in  it,
the  Bristol  Institute  may  make  the  most  of  his  speech  as  an  adver¬
tisement  for  procuring  subscribers.”

Dr.  Storer  wrote  the  following  letter  to  the  Editor,  who
declined  to  take  any  notice  of  his  communication  because  his
name  had  not  been  mentioned  : —

“8th  August,  1849.

“  To  the  Editor  of  the  Medical  Gazette .

“  Sir, — As  your  journal  professes  to  be  guided  by  courtesy,  to
say  nothing  of  its  boasted  morale ,  I  am  surprized  that  you  should
not  have  allowed  the  insertion  of  the  rejoinders  sent  in  answer  to
your  late  remarks  on  the  Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.  I  have  been
favoured  with  a  copy  of  Mr.  Janson’s  letter  in  reply  thereto,  and
think  it  fully  meets  your  flippant  and  ignorant  remarks  on  the  subject.

“You  are  so  far  candid, — you  admit  what  you  cannot  deny,  viz.,
that  the  Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute  is  not  a  hoax  :  but  you  now  try  to
undermine  its  utility  by  wholesale  charges  of  blasphemy  against  its
various  supporters,  clergymen  of  all  denominations,  physicians  and
surgeons,  and  a  large  and  respectable  portion  of  the  laity.  Your  op¬
position  merely  proves  that  you  are  entirely  ignorant  or  prejudiced
on  the  subject  you  have  ventured  to  criticise.

“  Had  such  conduct  proceeded  from  one  of  your  cotemporaries,
Mr.  Wakley,  the  assumed  editor  of  the  Lancet ,  I  should  not  have
felt  the  least  surprize,  knowing  him,  from  his  own  writings,  to  be
most  unprincipled  in  reference  to  mesmerism  ;  but  when  such  remarks
proceed  from  the  Medical  Gazette ,  which  has  always  assumed  such
a  high  tone  of  virtue,  and  thorough  condemnation  of  the  acts  of
its  cotemporary,  I  can  only  view  the  matter  as  simply  ridiculous.

“  In  future  I  would  advise  you  to  confine  your  remarks  to  sub¬
jects  that  you  understand,  however  limited,  and  when  you  write,  to
do  so  on  what  you  are  able,  without  prejudice.

“  I  am,  Sir,

“Your’s  obediently,

“Henry  Storer,  M.D.,

“  Physician  to  the  Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute .”

Mr.  Janson  also  wrote ;  but  his  letter  was  too  difficult  for
the  Gazette  to  venture  a  reply.

“  To  the  Editor  of  the  London  Medical  Gazette.

“  Sir, — A  copy  of  your  periodical  (July  27,  1 849)  has  just  been
sent  to  me,  in  order  to  afford  me  an  opportunity  of  perusing  your
strictures  upon  the  Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute,  which  I  hope  you  are
by  this  time  convinced  is  by  no  means  a  nonentity  !  Your  expres¬
sions  of  horror  at  so  dreadful  a  state  of  things,  are  exquisitely
amusing,  and  ludicrously  remind  me  of  the  print  in  a  recent  number
of  Punch,  of  (  a  parcel  of  old  women  frightened  at  a  nasty !  great !
ugly !  Jew  Bill.’

“  So  far  as  mesmerism  alone  is  concerned,  your  remarks  are


Gazette  exposed  by  the  Morning  Post.


315


merely  a  reiteration  of  what  has  always  been  the  stronghold  of  the
obstructives  ;  and  which  may  be  fully  expressed  in  these  few  words,
*  We  don't  believe ,  and  nobody  else  ought  /’  If,  however,  your  party
would  be  content  to  state  the  plain  truth,  namely,  ‘We  cannot  believe
in  mesmerism/  or  ‘  it  is  more  than  we  can  swallow,’  &c.,  I  should
he  the  last  man  to  interfere  with  you :  but  when,  not  satisfied  with
this,  you  go  on  (as  almost  all  of  you  do)  to  vilify  those  who  con¬
scientiously  differ  from  you  in  opinion  upon  this  matter,  it  then  be¬
comes  a  subject  for  grave  reply ;  and,  as,  in  your  late  effusion,  you
have  gone  the  length  of  charging  me  with  ‘  blasphemy  /’  I  think  it
very  allowable  to  administer  a  timely  check.

“  If,  instead  of  suffering  your  mind  to  be  swayed  and  misled  by
idle  namby-pamby  trumped  up  by  the  opposition,  you  had  conde¬
scended  to  inform  yourself  by  the  careful  perusal  of  some  of  the
standard  works  on  the  mesmeric  subject,  you  might,  ere  this,  have
understood  that  all  the  ‘  phenomena  of  mesmerism’  are  strictly  na¬
tural.  There  is  not  one,  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest,  that  does
not  occur,  at  times,  quite  spontaneously  ;  and  what  we  call  the  *  mes¬
meric  influence,’  is  merely  a  mode  of  inducing,  or  bringing  on,  these
different  states.  I  might  refer  to  the  works  of  divines,  of  lawyers,
of  medical  men,  &c. ;  but  as  the  latter  may  have  more  weight  with
you,  I  will  mention  the  work  on  Human  Magnetism ,  by  Mr.  Newnham,
surgeon,  of  Farnham,  as  being  sufficient  to  settle  this  difficulty  in
the  mind  of  any  reasonable  person.

“Your  mistake  about  the  blasphemy  of  mesmeric  prevision  is
exactly  on  a  par  with  that  of  the  late  Mrs.  Tonna  (‘  Charlotte  Eliza¬
beth’),  who  thought  that  a  patient’s  fancying  water  to  be  wine  was
a  wicked  burlesque  upon  the  transmutation  recorded  in  the  second
chapter  of  St.  John’s  gospel!  Such  a  notion,  Sir,  was  excusable  in
an  old  lady  ;  but  in  the  editor  of  a  medical  gazette ,  we  look  for  a
little  more  enlargement  of  mental  capacity.  The  opponents  of  mes¬
merism  are  merely  taking  advantage  of  the  present  state  of  public
ignorance,  to  calumniate  a  branch  of  natural  science,  of  intense
interest,  and  great  importance ;  and  I  counsel  them  to  make  good
use  of  their  time  (which  I  can  assure  them  is  now  running  very
short),  for  every  atom  of  their  foolish  opposition  will  return  upon
their  own  heads.

“  In  conclusion.  Sir,  I  entreat,  that  if  you  should  think  it  ne¬
cessary  to  attack  us  again,  you  will  at  least  spare  us  the  imputation
of  ‘  blasphemy ,’  which  I,  as  a  professor  of  religion,  and  a  member
of  the  church,  as  by  law  established,  entirely  repudiate.

“  I  shall  now  place  your  article  in  my  archives,  along  with  a
similar  one  by  your  respectable  cotemporary  and  coadjutor,  the
editor  of  the  Lancet,  which  I  preserve  as  a  great  curiosity !  Rich
things  indeed  they  will  be,  some  years  hence ;  when  the  only  marvel
of  mesmerism  will  be,  what  upon  earth  all  the  opposition  was  about !

“  1  am  Sir,

“  Your  most  obedient,

“  H.  U.  Janson.

“  Pensylvania  Park,  Exeter,  July,  1849.”


316  The  unscrupulous  conduct  of  the  London  Medical


Some  one  of  the  clique  of  the  Medical  Gazette,  anxious  to
injure  mesmerism,  wrote  now  to  the  Morning  Post,  and  made
matters  worse  than  ever  for  the  Gazette .

The  following  is  an  article  in  the  Morning  Post  for  Aug.  8,
and  its  sound  sense  and  morality  contrast  strongly  with  the
party  of  the  Medical  Gazette : —

“  EARL  DUCIE,  THE  MESMERISTS ,  AND  THE  MEDICAL

PROFESSION.

“to  the  editor  of  the  morning  post.

“  Sir* — The  very  able  manner  in  which  you  have  exposed  the  gross  fallacies
published  by  Doctors  Carlisle,  Ashley,  Chadwick,  and  Smith,  induces  me  to  hope
that  you  will  also  assist  in  refuting  the  false  statements  of  other  almost  equally
ignorant  pretenders  to  medical  knowledge.  I  therefore  send  you  a  correspondence
between  Lord  Ducie  and  the  conductors  of  the  British  Mesmeric  Institute,  with
some  excellent  remarks  by  the  editor  of  the  Medical  Gazette  in  that  journal  last
week.

“You  may  remember  a  paragraph  which  went  the  round  of  the  papers  some
time  since  on  this  subject.  The  affair  was  treated  as  a  hoax  by  the  Medical
Gazette,  as  the  editor  knew  that  Lord  Ducie  had  been  under  regular  medical
care  for  two  years.  The  result  was  the  correspondence  and  remarks  before  you,
which  I  think,  for  the  credit  of  the  orthodox  profession,  ought  to  be  as  widely
circulated  as  the  first  erroneous  statements  of  the  mesmerists.  Will  you,  there¬
fore,  allow  me  to  request  the  favour  of  its  insertion,  and  subscribe  myself  very
respectfully  yours,

“August  6th.  “  A  Physician.

“We  willingly  comply  with  the  wish  of  our  correspondent,  so
far  as  his  own  letter  is  concerned;  but  we  see  no  necessity  to  reprint
the  whole  of  the  five  epistles  which  have  appeared  in  the  Medical
Gazette.  The  journal  named  referred  to  the  report  of  a  meeting
said  to  have  taken  place  at  Bristol,  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  a
Mesmeric  Institute,  and  pronounced  the  affair  to  be  ‘a  hoax  from
beginning  to  end.’  Messrs.  George  F.  Powell,  S.  D.  Saunders,  and
Henry  Storer,  M.D.,  show  that  the  meeting  was  actually  holden
and  accurately  reported.  It  seems  that  on  the  occasion  alluded  to
the  name  of  Earl  Ducie  was  introduced,  and  this  circumstance  excited
the  misgivings  of  the  editor  of  the  Medical  Gazette ,  who  believed
his  lordship  had,  4  like  a  reasonable  man,  discontinued  mesmeric
absurdities.’  The  following  communication,  addressed  to  Mr.  S.
D.  Saunders,  honorary  secretary  to  the  Bristol  Mesmeric  Institution,
will  best  prove  how  far  the  editor’s  conviction  was  well  founded  : —

“  Sir — I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  sending  me  the  Medical  Gazette.  The
editor  is  perfectly  correct  in  saying  that  I  have  consulted  Dr.  Fergusson,  and  that
I  have  been  benefited  (beyond  my  most  sanguine  hopes)  by  the  kind  attention
paid  to  me  by  my  friend  Mr.  Spencer  Wells,  to  whom  I  would  earnestly  recom¬
mend  every  sufferer  from  rheumatic  gout  to  apply,  at  24,  Belgrave  Square.
Nevertheless,  what  I  stated  at  Bristol  is  equally  correct — viz.,  that  I  had  been
relieved  from  inflammatory  pain  by  the  action  of  mesmerism,  and  that  in  the  state
of  nervous  weakness  produced  by  my  attacks,  I  had  been  tranquillized,  and  rest
had  been  produced  by  the  same  means. — And  believe,  Sec.,

“  Ducie.

“  Such  is  a  brief  statement  of  the  facts  which  we  have  endea-


Gazette  exposed  by  the  Morning  Post.


317


voured  to  make  without  favour  to  either  party;  but  according  to
them  we  do  not  see  what  ‘  A  Physician’  expects  to  gain  by  publicity
for  the  side  he  espouses.  The  Medical  Gazette  was  mistaken,  and
its  convictions  are  demonstrated  to  have  been  erroneous.  Yet  we
regret  that  when  the  truth  was  made  known,  the  usual  course,  under
similar  circumstances,  was  not  adopted.  The  journal  refuses  to
retract  or  to  apologise,  but  endeavours  to  justify  a  line  of  conduct
which  obviously  is  injustifiable.  In  the  vagaries  of  mesmerism,  or
the  tales  told  by  persons  who  profess  to  have  seen  strange  things
enacted,  the  Medical  Gazette  seeks  to  ground  its  defence;  but  whe¬
ther  mesmerism  itself  be  an  art  or  a  humbug,  and  whether  those
who  practise  it  are  worthy  of  credit  or  deserving  of  laughter,  seems
to  us  to  be  wholly  beside  the  question.

“We  deeply  lament  the  spirit  in  which  such  disputes  are  con¬
ducted,  and  we  also  regret  that  the  members  of  the  medical  profes¬
sion  should  entertain  an  idea  that,  connected  with  the  most  difficult
of  sciences,  there  can  exist  anything  we  can  view  as  established  doc¬
trine.  The  word  ‘  orthodox’  may  be  stretched  as  far  as  our  corre¬
spondent  pleases,  but  we  can  imagine  it  will  be  made  to  represent  no
sense  that  shall  be  acceptable  to  the  public  mind  when  applied  to
physic.  The  medical  art  is  in  its  nature  essentially  progressive,  and
its  foremost  duty  is  to  investigate.  We  do  not  accuse  it  of  being
stationary,  although  such  a  reproach  has  been  urged  against  it.  On
the  contrary,  we  rejoice  in  the  many  evidences  it  has  recently  given
of  its  advance ;  but  associated  with  it  we  dare  not  recognize  a  term
which  would  seem  to  imply  that  its  labours  were  either  concluded  or
limited  to  one  line  of  inquiry.

“Mesmerism  has  yet  to  be  characterized.  The  public  at  present
know  not  how  to  esteem  it.  That  it  has  been  abused  by  those  who
pretended  to  explain  or  illustrate  its  mode  of  action  is  obvious ;  but
that  it  has  neither  been  understood  nor  exposed  by  those  who  under¬
took  the  right  of  pronouncing  upon  its  merit,  is  not  to  be  denied.
Proofs  are  wanting  in  both  directions,  but  these  must  be  sought  in  a
different  temper  to  that  which  has  hitherto  been  displayed.  To  show
that  it  is  something  more  than  a  delusion  would  be  an  easy  task,  but
to  prove  that  it  is  anything  like  that  which  too  many  of  its  advocates
pretend  would  perhaps  be  an  impossibility.  It  is  now  a  riddle,  but
it  has  claims  as  such  to  the  attention  of  the  medical  profession;  and
we  do  not  like  the  feeling  of  prejudice  a  large  number  of  practitioners
think  they  are  called  upon  to  express  towards  it.  The  name  of  the
first  practical  physician  of  this  country  gives  countenance  to  the  belief
that  mesmerism  is  not  entirely  based  upon  deception.  The  heavy
sacrifices  which  Dr.  Elliotson  made  rather  than  deny  his  opinions
are  conclusive  as  to  the  sincerity  of  his  convictions ;  and  we  cannot
but  remember  that  to  his  acuteness  the  British  public  are  indebted
for  the  introduction  of  several  of  those  reforms  which  have  been  uni¬
versally  adopted.  Dr.  Elliotson,  therefore,  had  become  a  teacher,
in  the  largest  meaning  of  the  word,  when  he  undertook  to  instruct
his  profession  with  regard  to  that  influence  or  power  which  is  de¬
nominated  mesmerism.  He  had  shown  his  ability  to  judge,  and  his


318


The  Clairvoyance  of  Mr.  Haddock’s  Subject,


judgment  had  benefited  the  practice  of  his  art.  His  capability  and
his  right  to  decide  on  any  question  connected  with  the  science  he
had  improved,  therefore,  was  established,  so  far  as  any  title  of  the
kind  possibly  could  be ;  but  we  must  remember  that  when  his  con¬
victions  did  not  strictly  accord  with  the  belief  of  his  profession,  the
services  he  had  rendered  and  the  station  he  had  gained  were  in  an
instant  forgotten.  A  greater  injury  or  a  more  flagrant  injustice  was
never,  we  think,  perpetrated ;  and  it  is  to  prevent  the  repetition  of
similar  transactions  that  we,  on  principle,  decline  to  make  party  with
persons  who,  members  of  the  medical  profession,  show  a  disposition
to  oppose  inquiry.”


XI.  The  Clairvoyance  of  Mr.  Haddock’s  Subject.

By  Dr.  Elliotson.

“We  look  upon  Adolphe,  Alexis,  and  the  whole  tribe  of  clairvoyants,  as  im¬
postors.  In  all  cases  where  there  is  no  imposition,  and  there  has  been  any  posi¬
tive  success,  the  facts  can  be  accounted  for  on  ordinary  principles,  without  the
aid  of  mesmerism. ” — London  Medical  Gazette,  Aug.  10,  1849,  p.  264.*

In  the  Bolton  Chronicle  of  the  early  part  of  this  month  was
the  following  account : —

“  INTERESTING  CASE  OF  CLAIRVOYANCE.

“  RECOVERY  OF  £650.

“  Having  heard  various  rumours  in  the  town  to  the  effect  that  a
large  sum  of  money  had  been  recovered  through  the  instrumentality
of  clairvoyance,  we  were  induced  to  make  some  enquiries;  and  the
result  is,  that,  according  to  the  testimony  of  several  of  the  parties
concerned,  the  following  is  a  correct  narrative  of  the  circumstances :  —
“On  Saturday,  July  14th,  a  letter  was  received  by  Messrs.  P.  R.
Arrowsmith  and  Co.  of  this  town,  from  Bradford,  Yorkshire,  con¬
taining  a  Bank  of  England  note  for  £500,  another  for  £50,  and  a
bill  of  exchange  for  £100.  These,  Mr.  Arrowsmith  handed  over  in
his  regular  mode  of  business  to  Mr.  William  Lomax,  his  cashier,
who  took  or  sent,  as  he  supposed,  the  whole  to  the  Bank  of  Bolton,
and  made  an  entry  accordingly  in  his  cash-book.  The  bank-book
was  then  at  the  bank,  so  that  no  memorandum  of  the  payment  was
received  or  expected.  After  the  expiration  of  about  five  weeks,  upon
comparing  the  bank-book  with  the  cash-book,  it  was  found  that  no
entry  for  these  sums  was  in  the  book.  Inquiry  was  then  made  at
the  bank,  but  nothing  was  known  of  the  money,  nor  was  there  any
entry  existing  in  any  book  or  paper  there;  and  after  searching,  no
trace  could  be  found  of  the  missing  money.  In  fact,  the  parties  at
the  bank  denied  ever  having  received  the  sum,  or  knowing  anything
of  the  transaction.  Before  the  discovery  of  the  loss  the  bill  had  be-

*  How  the  Editor  can  “look  upon  the  whole  tribe  of  clairvoyants  as  im¬
postors,  ”  and  yet  admit  that  there  are  “  cases  where  there  is  no  imposition,”  he
is  bound  to  explain  to  his  employers,  as  they  must  feel  their  position  ridiculous
till  the  editor  of  their  publication  explains  himself. — J.  E.


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


319


come  due ;  but  upon  inquiry,  after  the  loss  was  discovered,  it  was
found  that  it  had  not  been  presented  for  payment.  It  was  therefore
concluded,  that  as  the  notes  and  bill  could  not  be  found  at  the  bank,
nor  any  trace  or  entry  connected  with  them,  the  probability  was,
that  they  were  lost  or  stolen,  and  that  the  bill  had  been  destroyed
to  prevent  detection.  Mr.  Lomax  had  a  distinct  recollection  of
having  received  the  notes,  &c.  from  Mr.  Arrowsmith;  but  from  the
length  of  time  that  had  elapsed,  when  the  loss  was  discovered,  he
could  not  remember  what  he  had  done  with  them;  whether  he  had
taken  them  to  the  bank,  or  sent  them  by  the  accustomed  messenger;
nor  could  the  messenger  recollect  anything  about  them.

“  As  might  be  expected,  this  unaccountable  loss  occasioned  great
anxiety  to  Mr.  Lomax;  and,  in  this  emergency,  he  applied  to  a
friend  to  whom  the  discovery  of  Mr.  Wood’s  cash  box  was  known,  to
ascertain  the  probability  of  the  notes,  &c.,  being  found  by  the  aid  of
clairvoyance.  The  friend  replied  that  he  saw  no  greater  difficulty  in
the  case  than  in  Wood’s,  and  recommended  him  to  make  the  inquiry,
which  he  said  he  would  do,  if  only  for  his  own  satisfaction.  After
some  further  consideration,  it  was  determined  to  ask  Mr.  Haddock,
of  Cheapside,  to  make  the  enquiry,  but  not  to  inform  him  of  any
particulars  of  what  the  letter  contained.  Mr.  Haddock  was  accord¬
ingly  applied  to,  and  from  his  knowledge  of  the  respectability  of  the
parties,  he  consented  to  make  the  experiment.

“  On  Friday,  August  24th,  Mr.  Lomax,  accompanied  by  Mr.  F.
Jones,  of  Ashburner  Street,  Bolton,  called  on  Mr.  Haddock  for  this
purpose.  The  clairvoyant  was  put  in  the  psychic  state,  and  then
into  connection  with  Mr.  Lomax.  She  directly  asked  for  *  the
papers ,’  meaning  the  letter  in  which  the  notes  and  bill  were  en¬
closed;  but  this  Mr.  Lomax  did  not  happen  to  have  in  his  possession,
and  she  said  she  could  not  tell  anything  without  it.  The  sitting,
therefore,  was  so  far  useless.  The  next  day  Mr.  Lomax  brought  the
letter,  and  Mr.  Haddock  requested  that  the  contents  might  not  be
communicated  to  him,  lest  it  should  be  supposed  that  he  had  sug¬
gested  anything  to  her.  After  considerable  thought  and  examination,
the  clairvoyant  said,  that  there  had  been  three  different  papers  for
money  in  that  letter,  not  post-office  orders,  but  papers  that  come
out  of  a  place  where  people  kept  money  in  (a  bank),  and  were  to  be
taken  to  another  place  of  a  similar  kind.  That  these  papers  came  in
the  letter  to  another  gentleman  (Mr.  Arrowsmith),  who  gave  them
to  the  one  present  ( Mr.  Lomax),  who  put  them  in  a  paper,  and  put
them  in  a  red  book  that  wrapped  round  (a  pocket  book).  Mr.
Lomax  then,  to  the  surprise  of  Mr.  Haddock,  pulled  from  his  coat
pocket,  a  deep  red  pocket  book,  made  just  as  she  had  described  it,
and  said  that  was  the  book  in  which  he  was  in  the  habit  of  placing
similar  papers.

“Mr.  Haddock  thought  she  was  wrong  as  to  the  number  of
papers,  for  he  conceived  that  the  letter  contained  a  cheque;  but  the
clairvoyant  persisted  in  saying  that  there  were  three  papers,  two  of
which  were  of  the  same  kind  and  of  the  same  sort  of  paper,  but  one
more  valuable  than  the  other ;  and  the  other  on  different  paper,


320  The  Clairvoyance  of  Mr.  Haddock’s  Subject,

with  a  stamp  on  it.  Mr.  Haddock  somewhat  baffled  and  irritated
her  by  his  enquiries  in  this  respect,  and  by  his  not  crediting  her
statement,  but  thinking  she  was  in  error,  and  this  tended  to  obscure
her  meaning.

“Mr.  Lomax  now  said  that  the  clairvoyant  was  right;  that  the
letter  contained  two  Bank  of  England  notes  and  a  bill  of  exchange;
but  did  not  say  what  was  the  value  of  the  notes.  Mr.  Haddock
then  put  a  ten  pound  Bank  of  England  note  into  the  clairvoyant’s
hand;  she  said  that  two  of  the  papers  were  like  that,  but  more
valuable,  and  that  the  black  and  white  word  at  the  corner  was
longer.  She  further  said  that  these  notes,  &c.,  were  taken  to  a
place  where  money  was  kept  (a  bank)  down  there  (pointing  towards
Deansgate).  Beyond  this  no  further  enquiry  was  made  at  that
sitting.

“  In  the  evening,  Mr.  Arrowsmitli  called,  with  Mr.  Makant,  of
Gilnow  Croft,  Mr.  Lomax,  and  Mr.  F.  Jones,  to  finish  the  inquiry.
But  in  the  interim,  the  clairvoyant  had  unexpectedly  become  mes¬
merised,  and  a  letter  from  Scotland,  having  some  reference  to  cholera,
being  put  into  her  hands,  she  went  in  quest  of  a  cholera  patient,
whose  case  she  said  proved  fatal.  She  was  much  interested  in  this
case;  said  how  it  might  have  been  cured;  and  spoke  of  her  exami¬
nation  of  the  corpse.  The  inquiries,  however,  made  such  an  impres¬
sion  on  the  organic  system  of  nerves,  that,  notwithstanding  precau¬
tions  were  taken,  she  soon  manifested  symptoms  of  cholera  after
she  awaked,  which  became  so  urgent  that  strong  measures  were
required  to  subdue  them.  She  was,  therefore,  too  ill  for  any  fur¬
ther  enquiry,  and  the  gentlemen  retired  without  witnessing  any
experiment.  Mr.  Arrowsmith  left  the  sealed  letter,  to  be  used  when
she  was  again  fit  for  the  inquiry,  but  no  further  use  was  made  of  it
till  Monday.

“On  that  day  Mr.  Lomax  called  again.  The  clairvoyant  was
now  well,  and  she  went  over  the  case  again,  entering  more  minutely
into  particulars.  She  persisted  in  her  former  statements;  that  she
could  see  the  f  marks’  of  the  notes  in  the  red  pocket-book,  and  could
see  them  in  the  banking-house;  that  they  were  in  paper,  and  put
along  with  many  more  papers  in  a  private  part  of  the  bank;  that
they  were  taken  by  a  man  at  the  bank,  who  put  them  aside  without
making  any  entry,  or  taking  any  further  notice  of  them.  She  said
the  people  at  the  bank  did  not  mean  to  do  wrong,  but  that  it  arose
from  the  want  of  due  attention.  Upon  its  being  stated  that  she
might  be  wrong,  and  requesting  her  to  look  elsewhere,  she  said  that
it  was  no  use;  that  she  could  see  they  were  in  the  bank,  and  no¬
where  else;  that  she  could  not  say  anything  else,  without  saying
what  was  not  true;  and  that  if  search  was  made  at  the  bank,  she
said  they  would  be  found  there.  In  the  evening,  Mr.  Arrowsmith,
Mr.  Makant,  and  Mr.  Jones  came  again,  and  she  was  put  into  the
psychic  state  to  repeat  these  particulars  in  their  presence,  which
she  did.

“  Mr.  Haddock  then  said  to  Mr.  Arrowsmith,  that  he  was  to¬
lerably  confident  that  the  clairvoyant  was  right,  and  that  he  should


321


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


recommend  him  to  go  next  day  to  the  bank  and  insist  on  a  further
search,  stating  that  he  felt  convinced  from  inquiries  he  had  made
that  his  cashier  had  brought  the  money  there.  Mr.  Makant  also
urged  the  same  course  on  Mr.  Arrowsmith.

“The  following  morning  (Tuesday,  August  28th),  Mr.  Arrow-
smith  went  to  the  bank,  and  insisted  on  further  search.  He  was
told  that  after  such  a  search  as  had  been  made  it  was  useless;  but
that  to  satisfy  him,  it  should  be  made  again.  Mr.  Arrowsmith  left
for  Manchester,  and  after  his  departure  a  further  search  was  made,
and  among  a  lot  of  papers  in  an  inner  room  at  the  bank,  which  were
not  likely  to  have  been  meddled  with  again  probably  for  years,  or
which  might  never  have  been  noticed  again,  were  found  the  notes
and  bill  'wrapped  in  paper ,  just  as  the  clairvoyant  had  described
them”


I  have  not  the  pleasure  of  Mr.  Haddock's  acquaintance  :
but  wrote  to  him  requesting  to  be  informed  how  far  the  state¬
ment  was  correct;  and  the  following  is  that  gentleman's
obliging  reply : —

“Bolton,  Sept.  22,  1849.

“  Sir, — The  account  of  the  recovery  of  Mr.  Arrowsmith’ s  money
by  the  aid  of  clairvoyance  is  true  in  every  particular.  There  were
many  interesting  things  said  during  the  sittings,  which  were  sup¬
pressed,  to  avoid  hurting  the  feelings  of  any  party.  The  account  in
The  Times  was  not  verbatim  from  the  Bolton  Chronicle ,  but  indi¬
rectly  from  the  Liverpool  Courier.

“  An  account  of  the  recovery  of  Mr.  Wood’s  cash  box,  you  will
find  in  the  Appendix  of  the  accompanying  work.”

The  work  is,  Somnolism  and  Psycheism ;  otherwise  Vital
Magnetism,  or  Mesmerism  :  considered  physiologically  and  phi¬
losophically  :  being  the  substance  of  Lectures,  delivered  under
the  auspices  of  the  Bolton  Mechanic’s  Institution.  With  an
Appendix,  containing  Notes  of  Mesmeric  and  Psychical  Expe¬
rience.  By  Joseph  W.  Haddock,  Surgeon-Apothecary.

The  case  is  thus  detailed  at  p.  60 : —

“On  Wednesday  evening,  December  20th,  1848,  Mr.  Wood,
grocer,  of  Cheapside,  Bolton,  had  his  cash  box,  with  its  contents,
stolen  from  his  counting  house.  After  applying  to  the  police,  and
taking  other  precautionary  steps,  and  having  no  clue  to  the  thief,
although  he  suspected,  what  was  proved  to  be  an  innocent  party ;
and  having  heard  of  Emma’s  powers  as  a  clairvoyant,  he  applied  to
me,  to  ascertain,  whether,  by  her  means,  he  could  discover  the
party  who  had  taken  it,  or  recover  his  property.  I  felt  considerable
hesitation  in  employing  Emma’s  powers  for  such  a  purpose;  fearing,
that  both  the  motive  and  agency  might  be  grossly  misrepresented.
But  the  amount  at  stake,  the  opportunity  for  experiment,  and  Mr.
Wood  being  a  neighbour,  induced  me  to  comply  with  his  request  ;
and  nine  o’clock,  next  morning,  was  appointed  for  the  trial.  At


322


The  Clairvoyance  of  Mr.  Haddock’s  Subject.


that  hour  Mr.  Wood  came  to  my  residence,  and  I  then  put  Emma,
by  mesmerism,  into  the  internal  state,  and  then  told  her  that  Mr.
Wood,  (whom  I  put  en  rapport ,  as  it  is  called,  with  her,)  had  lost
his  cash  box,  and  that  I  wished  her  to  tell  us,  if  she  could,  where
the  box  was  taken  from  ?  what  was  in  it  ?  and  who  took  it  ?  She
remained  silent  a  few  minutes,  evidently  mentally  seeking  for  what
she  had  been  requested  to  discover.  Presently  she  began  to  talk  with
an  imaginary  personage,  as  if  present  in  the  room  with  us ;  but  as
it  subsequently  proved,  although,  invisible  and  imaginary  to  us,  he
was  both  real  and  visible  to  her ;  for  she  had  discovered  the  thief,
and  was  conversing  with  his  mind  on  the  robbery.  She  described,
in  the  course  of  this  apparent  conversation,  and  afterwards  to  us,
where  the  box  was  placed ;  what  the  general  nature  of  its  contents
was,  particularizing  some  documents  it  contained ;  how  he  took  it,
and  that  he  did  not  take  it  away  to  his  residence  at  once,  but  hid  it
up  an  entry ;  and  her  description  of  his  person,  dress,  associations,
&c.,  was  so  vivid,  that  Mr.  W.  immediately  recognized  the  purloiner
of  his  property  in  a  person  the  last  to  be  suspected.  Feeling  satis¬
fied  from  the  general  accuracy  of  her  descriptions,  and  also  from  her
describing  the  contents  of  the  box,  that  she  had  really  pointed  out
the  delinquent,  Mr.  W.  went  directly  to  the  house  where  he  resided,
and  which  she  had  pointed  out,  even  to  the  letters  on  the  door-plate ;
and  insisted  on  his  accompanying  him  to  my  house ;  or,  in  case  of
refusal,  to  the  police  office.  When  brought,  and  placed  in  connec¬
tion  with  Emma,  she  started  back  from  him,  as  if  he  had  been  a
serpent ;  telling  him  that  he  was  a  bad  man,  and  observing  also,  that
he  had  not  the  same  clothes  on  as  when  he  took  the  box ;  which  was
the  fact.  He  denied  strenuously  all  knowledge  of  the  robbery,  then,
and  up  to  a  late  hour  in  the  afternoon  ;  but  as  he  was  not  permitted
to  go  at  large,  and  thus  had  no  opportunity  for  destroying,  or  effec¬
tually  concealing  the  box ;  and  as  Mr.  Wood  had  promised  for  the
sake  of  his  connections,  not  to  prosecute,  if  confession  was  made,
and  the  box  and  contents  recovered,  he,  at  last,  admitted,  that  he
had  taken  it,  and  in  the  manner  described  by  Emma ;  and  the  box
and  contents  were  found  in  the  place  where  he  had  secreted  it;  broken
open;  but  the  property  safe.  It  should  be  observed,  that  Emma
had  pointed  out  the  place  where  the  box  was  concealed,  but  we  could
not  be  certain  of  the  place  she  meant,  without  permitting  her,  while
in  the  internal  statey  to  lead  us  to  it :  this  the  confession  rendered
unnecessary.”

Mr.  Haddock  thus  continues  in  his  letter  to  me : —

“As  a  further  explanation  of  Mr.  Wood’s  case,  I  should  say,
that  towards  the  close  of  last  year,  a  gentleman  from  Newcastle-on-
Tyne  called  on  me  with  a  commercial  gentleman  of  Manchester ;  the
former  to  enquire  clairvoyantly  into  the  case  of  his  daughter.  He
said  the  clairvoyant  had  accurately  described  the  case  of  his  daughter,
and  also  the  house,  &c.,  where  she  resided.  The  latter  gentleman
the  same  day  called  on  Mr.  Wood  in  the  course  of  his  business,  and
told  him  what  he  had  just  seen  in  my  house.  When  Mr.  Wood  was


Death  of  Miss  Barber.


323


robbed,  it  occurred  to  him  to  ask  me  if  there  was  any  probability  of
discovering  the  thief,  &c.,  by  the  help  of  my  clairvoyant ;  and,  he
being  a  neighbour,  I  consented  to  make  the  experiment.  Soon  after
my  book  was  published  our  paper  noticed  it,  and  gave  extracts,  and
thus  the  affair  became  public.  Mr.  Wood  has  furnished  me  with  a
letter  of  attestation,  which  I  enclose.”

The  following  is  Mr.  Wood’s  letter  to  me : —

“  Bolton,  Sept.  22,  1849.

“Bear  Sir, — I  have  been  requested  by  Mr.  Haddock,  for  your
further  satisfaction,  to  add  my  testimony  to  the  truth  of  the  state¬
ment  of  the  recovery  of  my  cash  box  through  his  clairvoyant  men¬
tioned  in  his  little  work.  The  whole  of  the  affair  from  beginning  to
end  is  true ;  the  name  of  the  party,  and  many  other  things  con¬
nected  with  the  affair,  are  suppressed  in  the  account,  from  the  family
being  so  well  known  and  respected  in  the  town.

“  Should  you  require  any  further  information  upon  the  subject,  I
shall  be  most  happy  to  communicate.

“  Your’s  truly,

“  Henry  Wood.

“  To  John  Elliotson,  Esq.”

Mr.  Haddock  thus  concludes  his  letter : —

“  I  have  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  Bermondsey  affair.  I  do
not  like  putting  such  questions,  especially  unsolicited.  I  have  found
who  is  the  writer,  and  from  what  I  have  previously  heard,  I  think
that  only  imaginative  vagaries  may  be  expected  from  that  quarter.
I  regret  much  the  publicity  given  to  the  anonymous  note,  as  it  tends
to  bring  what  is  true  into  discredit.  I  have  written  to  The  Twnes
disclaiming  the  note,  &c.,  but  it  seems  as  if  they  will  not  insert  my
letter.  In  our  Bolton  Chronicle  of  this  day,  I  have  contradicted  the
report  or  opinion  of  my  being  the  writer,  and  this  was  also  done  in
the  Manchester  Guardian  of  Wednesday  last.

“  I  send  with  this  a  Manchester  paper  containing  a  verbatim  copy
of  the  Bolton  article.  With  the  exception  of  the  first  paragraph,  it
was  written  by  myself.  To  my  private  notes  of  the  bank  case,  I
have  Mr.  Lomax’s  signature,  as  an  attestation.

“The  clairvoyante  is  not  my  daughter,  but  a  young  woman  ori¬
ginally  hired  by  me  for  a  domestic  servant.

“  I  am,  Sir,

“  Your  obedient  servant,

“  J.  W.  Haddock.

“  To  Dr.  Elliotson.”


XII.  Death  of  Miss  Barber.

It  is  a  year  since  I  detailed  the  perfect  cure  of  the  true  cancer
of  Miss  Barber’s  breast.  I  have  now  to  announce  her  decease
from  other  diseases,  totally  unconnected  with  her  cancer,


324  - '  Death  of  Miss  Barber.

and  all  forced  upon  her  by  accidental,  unfortunate  circum¬
stances.

Her  frame  was  delicate,  lier  hair  red,  soft,  and  glossy,
and  her  skin  fine  and  of  that  whiteness  common  in  red  haired
persons.  She  had  for  many  years  been  often  laid  up  with
severe  colds ;  and  had  been  bled,  blistered,  &c.,  repeatedly.
Since  the  commencement  of  her  disease,  she  had  been  very
badly  nourished,  though  I  was  not  aware  of  it,  from  her
inability  to  continue  her  business.  After  her  cure,  she  still
felt  the  effects  of  her  privations  and  sorrows.  Many  ladies,
after  the  publication  of  her  case,  gave  her  work,  even  made
work  for  her,  and  assisted  her  in  every  way.  Some  ladies,
however,  living  in  a  boarding  house  in  Chandos  Street,  treated
her  heartlessly.  They  sent  for  her  on  the  pretence  of  giving
her  orders  for  dresses ;  and,  on  her  obeying  their  command,
behaved  so  as  to  give  her  the  impression  that  they  had  sent
for  her  merely  to  stare  at  her  as  a  wonder.  She  was  promised
various  orders  for  dresses  :  but  her  two  or  three  walks  to  them
ended  in  an  order  for  a  frock,  the  making  up  of  which,  in¬
cluding  her  necessary  expenses  for  tape,  &c.,  amounted  to
four  and  sixpence.  She  got  wet  through,  especially  in  her
petticoats,  shoes,  and  stockings,  in  her  last  visit  to  these
patronesses,  and  went  home  broken  hearted,  and  fell  into
hysterics  at  their  heartless  treatment.  The  cold  she  caught
ended  in  violent  rheumatism  of  the  nerves  of  her  hips,  loins,
and  legs ;  and  she  never  afterwards  left  the  house.

A  succession  of  misfortunes  succeeded.  After  I  had
greatly  relieved  her  by  mesmerism,  the  window  or  the  door
was  open  on  days  and  at  hours  when  this  should  not  have  been
the  case  :  the  bed-room  was,  on  several  occasions,  scoured  very
late  in  the  day,  so  as  to  be  wet  when  she  went  to  bed.  In  cold
weather,  she  sometimes  had  not  a  blanket  wrapped  round  her
legs  as  she  sat,  although  I  had  ordered  it,  fear  being  enter¬
tained  that  it  would  be  dirtied.  She  lived  a  mile  and  a  half
from  me,  and,  though  I  did  not  miss  twelve  times  in  the  last
twelve  months  to  visit  her  and  send  her  into  sleep-waking,  and
always  stayed  as  long  as  I  could  to  stiffen  her  well,  to  make
passes  down  her  hips,  &c.,  &c.,  it  was  not  in  my  power  to  give
her  a  quarter  of  the  mesmerism  she  required.  Her  mother
was  eighty,  and  her  niece  was  constantly  hard  at  work,  clean¬
ing  the  rooms  and  stairs,  waiting  upon  them,  doing  needle¬
work,  and  doing  what  was  to  be  done  out  of  doors.  Her  assi¬
duous  mesmerism  was,  therefore,  not  what  it  should  have  been
in  strength,  frequency,  or  duration.  A  magnet  kept  her
asleep,  but  in  a  day  or  two  it  produced  ill  temper,  and  at  last
ferocity,  a  taste  of  blood  in  her  mouth,  and  a  desire  to  injure


Death  of  Miss  Barber .


others  and  herself,  so  that  she  could  not  continue  with  it.
Crystals  of  alum  mesmerised  her  like  the  magnet,  but  soon
caused  heat,  thirst,  loss  of  appetite,  constipation,  and  a  taste  of
alum.  Plain  iron,  gold,  and  other  metals,  rock  crystal  and
other  crystals  not  soluble  in  the  hand,  were  substituted  inno¬
cuously,  but  their  mesmeric  power  was  not  so  great.  Two
hours  twice  a  day  of  a  healthy  mesmeriser,  with  intermediate
contact  passes  on  the  affected  parts  in  the  mesmeric  state,
would,  I  believe,  have  cured  her.  Pier  neuralgia  was  such
that  the  least  movement  of  a  foot  by  another  caused  a  vibration
of  agony  up  to  her  loins  and  near  her  heart.  Gradually  she
lost  the  power  of  moving  her  legs ;  the  left  completely.  Her
back  grew  tender  from  the  necessity  of  her  lying  continually
upon  it :  but  by  great  care  it  was  preserved  sound,  till  one
unlucky  day  when  they  drew  the  sheet  roughly  from  under  her
and  rubbed  off  the  skin  at  the  part.  Ulceration  and  very  ex¬
tensive  mortification  took  place.  But  this  with  great  attention
was  all  subdued,  and  the  large  wound  was  filled  up  to  the  level,
and  was  healing  up,  and  I  am  persuaded  would  have  healed
completely,  as  well  as  her  neuralgia  and  palsy  of  the  legs
have  been  cured ;  for  her  pains  were  astonishingly  reduced,  and
she  moved  even  her  left  leg  better  and  better.  I  gave  her  a
bottle  of  port  wine  every  three  days.  But  she,  fancying  to
get  strong,  and  being  permitted  to  drink  a  little  beer,  took
brown  stout,  without  consulting  me,  and  from  over  stimula¬
tion,  I  imagine,  was  seized  one  morning  with  palsy,  her
eyes  diverging  and  seeing  quadruple,  her  mouth  drawn  to  the
left  side,  her  speech  thickened,  her  right  arm  weakened,  her
head  aching,  and  her  thoughts  being  a  little  delirious.  These
symptoms,  however,  quickly  declined.  But  at  my  visit  late
on  Sunday  afternoon,  September  16,  I  found  her  seized  with
one  of  her  former  fits  of  asthma,  from  which  she  had  long
been  very  free,  and  a  little  inflammation  of  her  lungs.  The
latter,  it  afterwards  appeared,  increased  rapidly  during  the
night,  and  before  I  could  see  her  in  the  morning  she  was
no  more.

I  examined  the  whole  body  minutely.  A  very  small  de¬
posit  of  fibrine  and  albumen,  the  result  of  a  little  recent  in¬
flammatory  state,  was  seen  at  the  base  of  the  brain,  where  lie
the  nerves  of  sight  and  of  the  motions  of  the  eyes  and  face ;
but  all  else  was  healthy  in  the  head.  In  the  chest  the  only
unhealthiness  was  the  marks  of  recent  severe  inflammation
of  the  right  lung,  with  old  adhesions  at  its  upper  part,  left
by  former  attacks.  All  was  healthy  in  the  abdomen.  All
was  healthy  in  the  pelvis,  except  that  one  ovarium  had  a  very
little  cyst  full  of  blood,  and  that  two  small  and  innocent  fibrous

VOL.  VII.  B  B


326  Books  received ,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  fyc.

tubercles  existed,  one  upon,  and  the  other  in,  the  substance
of  the  uterus,  such  as  we  often  meet  with  in  women  and
which  could  not  have  interfered  with  her  health  ;  and  a  super¬
ficial  ulceration  of  the  central  portion  of  the  internal  surface
of  the,  organ,  apparently  of  a  common  description,  just  what
occurs  every  day  in  females.  The  internal  surface  at  the
fundus,  and  just  above  the  cervix,  and  the  whole  cervix  and
margin  of  the  os,  and  the  vagina,  were  quite  healthy.  No
induration  or  enlargement  existed  any  where.  A  thick,  white
secretion  lay  in  the  cervix,  and  the  os  was  dilated.  The
breast  was  as  free  from  disease  as  when  I  described  its  cure ;
and,  with  the  disappearance  of  the  disease,  the  gland  itself  and
nipple  had  shrunk  amazingly,  the  skin  remaining  a  little  in¬
durated.  I  had  a  cast  made  of  the  whole  bosom,  which  I  shall
be  happy  to  shew  to  any  reader  of  The  Zoist ;  and  to  medical
men  ipsas  mammas  uterumque  inspicere  licebit.

John  Elliotson.


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

Ideas ;  or,  Outlines  of  a  New  System  of  Philosophy.  By  Antonie  Claude
Gabriel  Jobert,  author  of  the  Philosophy  of  Geology,  &c.  Two  Vols.

We  have  no  space  at  present  to  notice  this  interesting  work.

The  Cholera,  considered  Psychologically.  By  Forbes  Winslow,  M.D.

This  appears  to  be  a  cunning  supply  of  twaddle.

The  Mechanic’s  Magazine,  Museum,  Register,  Journal,  and  Gazette.  No.
1358.  August  18,  1849.

This  number  contains  a  very  able  and  philosophical  article  in  favour  of  mes¬
merism,  worthy  of  the  journal :  and  highly  is  it  to  the  credit  of  the  editor  thus
to  assist  a  great  cause  with  his  powerful  aid  and  shame  the  puny  editors  of  the
medical  journals  who  have  neglected  their  duty  and  also  done  what  they  ought
not  to  have  done.

Tract  1,  and  Report  of  the  Meeting  of  the  Vegetarian  Society  at  Manchester.

A  startling  Letter  to  C.  J.  Bloomfield,  D.D.,  Lord  Bishop  of  London;  to
which  is  added  some  remarks  upon  the  words,  Devil,  Satan,  and  Hell.  By
Arthur  Trevelyan.

Zoistic  Magnetism  :  being  the  substance  of  Two  Lectures  descriptive  of  ori¬
ginal  views  and  investigations  respecting  this  mysterious  agency :  delivered  by
request,  at  Torquay,  on  the  24th  of  April  and  1st  of  May,  1849.  By  the  Rev.
W.  Scoresby,  D.D.,  F.R.S.,  Member  of  the  Institute  of  France,  of  the  Ame¬
rican  Institution,  Philadelphia,  &c.,  &c.

Here  is  another  disgrace  to  the  medical  profession  :  a  treatise  on  mesmerism
by  a  doctor,  but  not  a  doctor  of  medicine — absolutely  by  a  doctor  of  divinity,
who  has  enquired  into  the  subject  by  careful  and  diligent  experiment.  This  is  the
fourth  treatise  on  mesmerism  by  living  English  clergymen,  two  of  which  are
now  standard  works  and  in  their  second  edition.  Fellows,  examiners,  and  lec¬
turers  in  the  medical  profession  appear  daily  to  greater  disadvantage  in  their
unwise  and  hopeless  course.


Books  received,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  fyc.  32 7

Considered  as  testimony  to  our  great  truth  and  as  a  little  collection  of  illustra¬
tions,  the  present  work  is  valuable.  But  we  regret  that  Dr.  Scoresby  has  pub¬
lished  in  the  form  of  a  book.  His  own  experience  is  yet  necessarily  limited
and  has  not  furnished  him  with  materials  for  a  treatise  suited  to  those  who  desire
to  learn  mesmerism  :  and  on  the  other  hand  his  facts  are  either  for  the  most  part
quite  familiar  to  persons  conversant  with  the  subject,  or  simply  interesting  in¬
dividual  variations,  similar  to  what  each  of  us  could  furnish,  and  which  would  be
highly  appropriate  and  charming  in  a  mesmeric  journal.

We  regret  also  that  he  has  invented  the  term  zoistic  magnetism.  A  new  name
should  never  be  invented  except  for  a  new  thing.  For  a  new  substance,  pheno¬
menon,  principle,  or  process,  a  new  name  is  required:  but  to  multiply  names
for  known  and  already-named  things  is  not  the  way  of  a  master  mind.  The  great
discoverer.  Gall,  did  not  invent  a  single  name :  Spurzheim,  his  ambitious  and
not  over  scrupulous  disciple,  invented  an  abundance  for  Gall’s  discoveries.  The
term  mesmerism  is  established  and  in  habitual  use.  That  is  enough.  Its
origin  is  now  quite  unimportant.  An  arbitrary  word  is  as  good  as  the  best  de¬
vised,  when  once  established.  Mesmer’s  toils  and  persecution,  and  our  obliga¬
tion  to  him  for  shewing  forth  in  a  blaze  of  light  the  mighty  facts  which  were  in
his  day  lying  in  darkness  and  neglect,  and  might  without  him  have  still  so  lain,
justify  the  word  mesmerism.  He  was  no  more  selfish  and  reprehensible  than  large
numbers  of  scientific  men  whose  great  deeds  only  are  recounted,  but  whose  lives
were  anything  but  dignified  or  worthy  of  imitation.  Plectrum,  amber,  is  but
one  electric  substance,  yet  the  word  electricity  is  universally  used  and  contents
us.  Mesmer  was  the  one  source  of  mesmeric  knowledge  for  a  time.  An
American  writer,  named  Grimes,  uses  the  term  etheropathy :  an  Edinburgh
writer,  named  Arnott,  does  not  mesmerise,  but  spiritualise :  Mr.  Haddock,  of
Bolton,  Lancashire,  does  Psycheism :  and  Dr.  Scoresby  practises  Zoistic  Mag¬
netism.  The  three  former  terms  spring  from  hypotheses :  the  second  and
third  of  the  three  proceed  from  an  hypothesis  of  bygone  times,  lingering  among
mystics  and  the  unphilosophic  only.  The  word  zoistic  magnetism  springs  from
the  title  of  our  work  The  Zoist ,  and  signifies  of,  from,  or  pertaining  to  The
Zoist :  but  we  really  do  not  desire  this  honour.  We  suppose  that  Dr.  S.  wishes
to  signify  vital  or  animal  by  it :  zoe  (Zodti)  is  life,  and  zoon  (Za >ov)  an  animal ;  but
neither  will  furnish  zoistic.  From  them  both  we  invented  the  term  Zoist ,  as  was
explained  in  No.  II..  p.  219,  for  our  new  work  on  the  joint  subjects  of  mes¬
merism  and  cerebral  physiology,  for  which  two  united  there  was  no  expression  :
mesmerism  being  connected  with  life,  and  cerebral  physiology  with  animals.  Be¬
sides  what  verb  are  we  to  use  if  we  adopt  Dr.  S.’s  invention  ?  Are  we  to  say  we
zoistically  magnetize  ?  and  are  we  to  say  zoistically  magnetic  ?  Again,  the  term
magnetism  is  inappropriate  to  our  science.  It  is  applied  to  a  distinct  subject :
and  to  say  we  magnetize  a  patient,  when  we  mesmerise  him,  is  productive  of
confusion.  The  editor,  we  believe  the  bigotted  and  irascible  Mr.  Colquhoun,
of  a  short-lived  mesmeric  journal,  published  in  Edinburgh  in  1839,  correctly
prefixed  zoo ,  and  named  it  zoo-magnetic.  Still  magnetic  was  incorrect,  as  be¬
longing  to  a  subject  distinct  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge.

Another  source  of  regret  is  that  he  thus  begins  his  book,  “It  required  no
small  amount  of  moral  courage  to  speak  publicly  on  a  subject  at  which  numbers
look  with  suspicion,  &c.”  Now  all  virtues  and  talents  are  graces  and  gifts,  and  to


328  Books  received,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  fyc.


be  thankful  for,  not  to  boast  of ;  and  clergymen  should  be  especially  penetrated
with  this  conviction;  and,  after  all,  the  day  is  past  for  moral  courage  in  mesmerism.
Dr.  Scoresby  lectures  when  the  battle  is  won.  Eleven  years  ago  Dr.  Elliotson
gave  clinical  lectures,  most  respectfully  listened  to  in  crowded  theatres  upon  his
mesmeric,  just  as  upon  his  other,  patients  in  University  College  Hospital ;  nine  or
even  five  years  ago,  the  various  mesmeric  lecturers  in  London  and  the  provinces
met  with  the  most  vulgar  rudeness,  coarseness,  abuse,  and  even  rioting,  and  espe¬
cially  from  the  medical  portion  of  the  audience.  But  all  this  has  subsided.  The
highly  repectable  and  professed  lecturers  about  the  country,  as  Mr.  Davey,  Mr.
Beattie,  and  the  amateur  lecturers,  as  the  excellent  and  able  Mr.  Smith  of  Malton,
have  long  been  treated  with  the  utmost  respect  and  attention.  The  various  English
medical  works  on  mesmerism  are  in  every  house ;  our  Zoist  is  read  extensively  in
Europe  and  America,  though  childishly  excluded  from  the  public  medical  libra¬
ries  of  this  country.  An  ignorant  and  pert  scoffer  of  mesmerism  in  a  party  is
sure  to  meet  with  a  rebuke.  We  really  see  no  cause  for  self-glorification  in  the
fact  of  Dr.  S.  giving  two  lectures  upon  mesmerism.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Townshend
and  Mr.  Sandby,  and  Mr.  Pyne,  displayed  no  little  moral  courage  in  publishing
their  books  when  they  did,  but  not  one  of  them  hinted  at  his  own  courage.

The  analogy  of  many  of  the  ordinary  phenomona  to  those  of  electricity  and
electro-magnetism,  so  much  dwelt  upon  by  Dr.  S.,  has  struck  every  mesmerist;
and  at  the  lectures  on  electricity  at  the  Royal  Institution  we  have  heard  mes¬
merists  remarking  to  each  other  how  strongly  the  results  of  various  experiments
upon  inanimate  matter  reminded  them  of  what  they  were  in  the  habit  of  wit¬
nessing  in  their  own  mesmeric  proceedings  with  their  living  patients ;  and  we
are  all  as  satisfied  as  he  of  the  distinctness  of  electric  or  magnetic  and  mesmeric
phenomena.

He  is  not  yet  convinced  of  the  mesmeric  excitement  of  distinct  cerebral  organs.
But  does  he  disregard  the  experiments  related  in  No.  III.,  pp.  242-46  ?

He  doubts  of  mesmerism  at  a  distance,  First,  because  his  experiments  proved
to  him  that  the  mesmeric  effect  lessened  in  proportion  as  distance  increases.  But
why  should  great  distance  annihilate  effect.  The  various  bodies  in  space  affect  each
other  though  immensely  separated;  and  if  the  mesmeriser  is  very  intense  in
his  will  or  thought,  and  the  other  party  very  susceptible,  or  even  if  one  of  these
conditions  exist,  what  power  of  prevention  can  any  distance  on  this  earth  possess  ?
Secondly,  because  he  knows  an  instance  in  which  a  patient  was  told  she  should  be
willed,  was  not  willed,  and  went  to  sleep  from  sheer  imagination.  Why  this
argument  applies  to  every  mesmeric  fact :  every  one  may  be  induced  by  imagina¬
tion  when  once  it  has  been  induced  mesmerically.  Dr.  S.  might  as  well  doubt
the  effect  of  passes  because  a  person  goes  to  sleep  when  told  that  passes  are  making
towards  him  on  the  other  side  of  a  door,  though  they  are  not  made  (see  No.  IX.,
p.  47).  Mr.  Thompson’s  facts  on  the  power  of  will  are  as  positive  as  can  be
desired  (No.  XI.,  p.  319  ;  XII.,  p.  477).

He  does  not  abstain  from  speculative  argument,  nor,  like  a  philosopher,  leave
the  decision  respecting  the  highest  clairvoyance  to  simple  fact,  but  argues  against
its  possibility  because  future  events  may  be  contingent  on  the  human  will.  As  if
profound  thinkers  do  not  perceive  that  the  human  will,  like  all  else  in  nature,
obeys  general  laws,  and,  however  freely  we  may  will,  our  willing  is  as  completely
the  inevitable  result  of  circumstances  as  the  falling  of  a  sparrow  to  the  ground


Books  received,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  fyc.  329


and  the  minutest  or  greatest  occurrence  in  inanimate  matter  :*  and  that  all  things
are  connected  together,  animate  and  inanimate,  however  different  and  distant,
and  all  dependent  upon  the  most  pervading  laws.

He  falls  into  the  very  green  error  of  fancying  that  mesmerism  is  the  result  of
will.

He  does  not  condescend  to  refer  to  any  writer,  and  thus,  while  he  fancies  his
work  original,  he  raises  a  smile  in  the  better  informed.  He  talks  much  of
polarity  as  though  we  had  not  the  facts  of  Reichenbach  and  those  recorded  in
No.  VI.,  p.  215-16.  He  would  have  found  electric  views  of  mesmerism  in  abund¬
ance  in  French  writers. f  We  should  think  him  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  in  the
deepest  coma  there  is  often  perception  of  what  passes  around,  and  thus  an  influ¬
ence  from  imagination  when  a  superficial  observer  would  not  suppose  it :  and  that
many  phenomena  apparently  independent  of  the  patient’s  will  are  in  reality  willed
by  his  brain,  though  unconsciously  and  involuntarily.  His  observation  that  no¬
thing  electric  can  be  detected  in  the  phenomena  is  one  long  ago  made  in  London :
and  his  idea  that  insulation  does  not  increase  power  did  not  hold  good  with
Mr.  Collins  (No.  XX.,  p.  20), J  while  his  observations  upon  the  effect  of
silk,  &c.,  do  not  hold  good  with  patients  in  general  (we  have  never  seen  them
exemplified)  :  and  we  suspect  that  he  has  not  observed  the  absolutely  necessary
precaution  of  saying  not  a  syllable  of  his  views,  either  to  the  patient  in  any  state,
or  to  others  at  any  time.  The  effect  of  various  substances  depends  partly  upon
idiosyncracy,  but  not  a  little  upon  fancy,  which  is  lighted  up  by  such  hints,  as  a
person,  so  little  learned  in  the  matter  as  Dr.  S.,  would  not  consider  possible.
We  have  known  many  experimenters  in  mesmerism  fancy  themselves  at  first,
from  want  of  knowledge,  to  have  made  great  discoveries,  which  were  mere  pecu¬
liarities  and  indeed  often  the  effect  of  imagination  or  some  casual  circumstance
on  the  first  performance  of  the  experiment.

The  book  is  written  earnestly,  though  with  pompous  pretensions,  and  proves
the  writer  to  be  a  lover  of  scientific  truth  and  a  good  experimenter,  though  burn¬
ing  with  an  intense  desire  to  look  very  original  while  there  is  nothing  original  in
his  work.  It  will  be  productive  of  good  as  the  testimony  of  an  able  man  to  some
of  the  truths  of  mesmerism  :  but  Dr.  S.’s  imperfect  knowledge,  real  or  appa¬
rent,  of  the  subject  and  of  the  experiments  of  other  writers,  will  do  harm,  by
prejudicing  the  learner  against  very  many  of  the  higher  and  undoubted  facts  in  the
science;  and  his  indulgence  in  speculations,  altogether  out  of  place  in  a  po¬
pular  lecture,  may  lead  the  ignorant  to  suppose  that  all  is  uncertainty,  and  the  vain
and  dreamy  not  to  labour  in  the  rigid  investigation  of  nature  with  all  modesty  and
simplicity.


*  Had  we  statistics  in  perfection,  all  human  deeds  would  be  predicted  as  ac¬
curately  as  the  return  of  comets  :  and  indeed  the  number  and  variety  of  offences
within  a  given  period  are  accurately  foretold  by  those  who  have  studied  these  mat¬
ters  in  a  given  place.

f  Some  Germans  have  called  mesmerism  electro-physiology.  See  Sandby,

p.  112.

X  Mr.  Collins,  in  relating  his  experiments,  modestly  says,  “  It  is  very  possi¬
ble  this  may  have  been  tried  before.”


330  Books  received,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  fyc.


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

The  papers  on  Capital  Punishment,  or  Hanging  according  to  Law,  by
L.  E.  G.  E.,  by  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  W.  F.  S.,  a  Lady,  Mr.  Armour,  Capt.
Bagnold,  Mr.  Davey,  Mr.  Elliot,  Mr.  Harley,  Lieut.  Hare,  Mr.  Jacob,  Dr.
Storer,  Mr.  Saunders,  Mr.  Tubbs,  will  to  a  certainty  appear  in  our  Christmas
number  ;  and  also  those  by  Mr.  Hazard  and  Mr.  Saunders,  subsequently  received.


THE  ZOIST.

No.  XXVIII.


JANUARY,  1850.


I.  Capital  Punishment ;  or,  Killing  according  to  Law ,

Recent  events  again  force  upon  our  consideration  one  of  the
great  questions  of  the  day — capital  punishment.  We  have
so  frequently  presented  our  views  on  this  subject,  that  we  are
conscious  we  have  but  little  to  advance  which  can  be  con¬
sidered  new ;  but  several  cases  have  occurred  within  a  short
period,  which  clearly  prove  how  little  the  majority  of  indi¬
viduals  understand  the  laws  which  govern  the  human  organism,
and,  consequently,  how  ignorant  they  remain  of  the  treat¬
ment  to  which  that  organism  should  be  subjected,  when
labouring  under  positive  disease.

During  the  last  few  months,  the  gibbet  has  been  frequently
erected,  and  the  miserable  specimens  of  humanity  which  have
dangled  therefrom,  proclaim  in  language  most  clear  and  dis¬
tinct,  that  the  cause  of  man’s  actions  is  not  understood,  and
that  our  rulers,  our  legislators,  and  our  judges  continue  to
enforce  and  to  defend  a  course  of  procedure,  which  experience
proves  to  be  unavailing,  and  which  science  long  ago  denounced
as  being,  not  only  useless,  but  unjust.  With  a  few  exceptions,
we  have  ceased  to  be  influenced  by  thoughts,  the  produce  of
an  age  when  men  were  strung  up,  fourteen  in  a  row,  for  the
most  trivial  offences, — an  age  when  the  punishment  inflicted
clearly  led  to  the  supposition,  that  a  horse  and  a  sheep  were
of  the  same  value  as  the  life  of  a  man,  public  strangulation
being  the  penalty  inflicted  for  stealing  the  former  and  cutting
the  throat  of  the  latter.  These  were  the  doings  of  a  period
which  now  happily  belongs  to  history,  for  after  years  of  phi¬
lanthropic  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  great  men  who  have  been
removed  from  amongst  us,  the  punishment  of  death  may  be
considered  as  reserved  for  the  crime  of  murder  only.  Since
1841,  there  has  not  been  an  execution  for  any  other  crime.

VOL.  vii.  c  c


332


Capital  Punishment ;  or,


The  Criminal  Law  Commissioners,  in  their  last  report,
express  their  opinion,  “  that  the  right  even  of  the  legislature
to  inflict  capital  punishment  rests  on  the  ground  of  strict  and
cogent  necessity,  and  that  to  go  beyond  this  involved  a  trans¬
gression  which  was  criminal  in  the  legislature.”

Is,  then,  the  punishment  of  death  necessary  ?  If  we  are
told  that  it  is  necessary,  does  experience  prove  that  the  judi¬
cial  death  of  one  man  prevents  others  from  committing  crime?
Out  of  167  persons,  who  had  been  executed  during  a  certain
period,  it  was  proved  on  the  most  unquestionable  testimony
that  164  had  been  present  at  executions;  and  the  ordinaries
of  Newgate  affirm,  that  it  is  very  rarely  that  any  one  suffers
at  the  Old  Bailey,  who  has  not  previously  been  a  witness  at
a  similar  scene.  So  much,  then,  for  the  supposition  that
example  prevents  the  commission  of  crime.  This,  however,
is  not  the  portion  of  the  question  to  which  we  are  anxious  to
direct  the  attention  of  our  readers, — they  will  find  these
matters  discussed  in  former  numbers  of  this  Journal.*  There
is  one  argument  which  does  not  legitimately  belong  to  our
pages,  but,  since  it  is  constantly  brought  forward,  deserves  a
passing  remark.  Whenever  the  question  of  capital  punish¬
ment  is  discussed  on  philosophical  or  moral  grounds,  the  ad¬
vocate  for  the  abolition  of  the  punishment  is  met  by  the
quotation,  “  Whoso  sheddeth  man’s  blood,  by  man  shall  his
blood  be  shed.”  As  a  specimen  of  the  line  of  argument  pur¬
sued  by  individuals  who  think  that  this  quotation  from  the
Mosaic  law  is  a  sufficient  authority,  we  present  the  following
extract  from  a  sermon  preached  by  the  Dean  of  Exeter,  in  the
cathedral  of  that  city,  on  the  25th  of  April,  1849  : —

“  Doubtless  it  ought  not  only  to  make  us  pause  before  we  condemn
a  fellow-man  to  death,  but  to  be  well  assured  that  we  have  God’s
warrant  for  what  we  do.  I  hold  it  for  a  most  certain  truth,  that  we
have  not  this  warrant,  except  only  in  the  instance  of  actual  murder,
and,  perhaps,  in  cases  involving  the  guilt  of  murder,  such,  for  exam¬
ple,  as  overt  acts  of  treason  ;  and  that  human  legislatures  have  no
authority  from  God — however  largely  they  may  have  assumed  it —
to  take  the  life  of  any  human  being,  for  the  sake  of  protecting  all
the  property  of  all  the  whole  wrorld :  and  I  thank  God  that  our
statute-book  is  no  longer  polluted  and  disgraced  by  those  sanguinary
laws  which  inflicted  the  full  penalty  of  death  on  offences  for  which
a  short  imprisonment  would  now  be  regarded  as  an  adequate  punish¬
ment.  But,  whilst  I  say  this,  I  am  so  far  from  giving  in  to  that

*  No.  I.,  pp.  50-4,  by  Dr.  Elliotson ;  No.  II.,  pp.  101 — 110,  by  L.E.G.  E. ;
p.  140,  by  Dr.  E.  ;  No.  VII.,  pp.  295 — 316,  by  L.  E.  G.  E. ;  No.  VIII.,  pp.
443,  449 — 455,  by  Dr.  E. ;  No.  X.,  pp.  134-8,  by  Dr.  E. ;  No.  XI.,  pp.  275 —
281,  by  Dr.  E.  See  also  Dr.  Elliotson’s  arguments  in  his  Tract  upon  Courvoi-
sier,  published  by  Highly,  Fleet  Street.


Killing  according  to  Law.


333


spurious  sentimentality,  which,  under  the  garb  and  pretext  of  re¬
ligion,  would  shelter  a  murderer  from  capital  punishment,  that  I
affirm  it  to  be  one  of  the  clearest  and  strongest  of  our  religious  duties
to  pursue  such  an  one  to  death  !  that,  however  we  may  recoil  from
the  performance  of  the  duty,  when  the  commission  of  the  crime  has
been  fully  proved,  we  must  not  spare  the  offender  for  any  human
consideration,  or  even  through  dread  of  the  second  death,  which
may  await  him  hereafter.  God  Himself  has  laid  on  us  His  positive
command,  ‘  Whoso  sheddeth  man’s  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood
be  shed ;  for  in  the  image  of  God  made  He  man and  it  is  our
part  to  execute  the  doom,  and  to  leave  the  final  issue  in  His  hands.

“  But,  it  is  asked,  are  we,  then,  to  cut  him  off  in  the  midst  of
his  sins  ?  Yes,  inexorably .  ‘  Let  not  tliine  eye  pity  him,  or  spare
him*  He  has  cut  off  another  in  the  midst  of  his  sins ;  and  it  is
God,  not  man,  who  has  pronounced  his  doom,  and  commands  us  to
fulfil  it.  We,  in  executing  it,  are  but  His  instruments,  the  accom-
plishers  of  His  will  :  and  whenever  His  will  is  fully  and  unequivocally
declared,  all  that  we  have  to  do  is  to  obey  it.”

As  we  have  already  said,  this  is  not  the  place  to  discuss
the  question  on  theological  grounds ;  but,  since  we  believe
that  the  teachers  of  religion  are  the  great  opponents  of  the  abo¬
lition  of  capital  punishment,  we  cannot  avoid  remarking  that,
if  the  sixth  verse  of  the  ninth  chapter  of  Genesis  is  the  only
authority  which  can  be  produced  for  the  infliction  of  capital
punishment,  in  our  opinion  the  position  assumed  is  not
tenable  for  one  moment.  There  is  no  authority  for  capital
punishment  in  the  New  Testament.  On  the  contrary,  the
whole  tenor  of  the  moral  code  there  developed  leads  us  to
form  the  opposite  conclusion.  There  is  not  a  single  passage
in  the  new  law  which  can  by  any  system  of  interpretation  be
considered  as  authorizing  the  infliction  of  this  punishment.
Notwithstanding  this,  which  we  hold  to  be  clear  and  distinct,
to  the  question,  “  Are  we  then  to  cut  him  off  in  the  midst  of
his  sins  ?”  The  Dean  of  Exeter  answers,  “  Yes,  inexorably.”
“Let  not  thine  eye  pity  him,  or  spare  him.”  In  the
most  perfect  good  faith  we  ask,  whether  these  are  the  opinions
which  should  be  promulgated  by  one  whose  life  is  devoted  to
the  enunciation  of  a  code  of  morals  which  clearly  inculcates
the  abhorrence  of  revenge,  and  the  encouragement  of  repent¬
ance  ?  “  Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said,  an  eye  for  an

eye  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth ;  but  I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  re¬
sist  not  evil,  but  whosoever  shall  smite  thee  on  the  right
cheek  turn  to  him  the  other  also.”

To  our  view,  then,  it  is  a  monstrous  perversion  of  principle
for  Christians  to  advocate  the  justice  of  death  punishment.
The  annihilating  and  ruthless  wishes  of  the  Dean  were  scon
gratified,  for  a  very  few  days  after  he  preached  this  sermon

c  c  2


334


Capital  Punishment ;  or}


the  following  dreadful  scene  occurred  within  a  few  miles  of
his  residence.  We  can  scarcely  believe,  for  we  must  presume
that  he  possesses  the  ordinary  attributes  of  humanity,  but
that  his  eye  did  express  pity  when  he  perused  details  which
most  assuredly  caused  the  majority  of  individuals  to  recoil
with  pity,  indignation,  and  disgust.

^EXECUTION  OF  SARAH  HARRIET  THOMAS,  FOR  MURDER.

“  Yesterday  this  wretched  criminal  underwent  the  extreme  sen¬
tence  of  the  law  at  Bristol.

“The  spectacle  of  a  public  execution — the  first  after  a  lapse  of
fourteen  years — attracted  an  immense  concourse  of  spectators,  many
of  whom  conducted  themselves  with  that  disgusting  levity  too  often
witnessed  beneath  the  very  shadow  of  the  gallows.  The  ceremony
was  rendered  intensely  painful  by  the  tenacity  with  which  the  un¬
happy  criminal  clung  to  life.  No  prayers  nor  entreaties  could  induce
her  to  walk  a  step  towards  the  fatal  drop,  and  she  had  literally  to
he  dragged  from  her  cell,  shrieking  frantically ,  and  struggling  all
the  time,  until  she  was  carried  to  the  platform,  and  handed  to  Cal-
craft  the  hangman,  who  at  once  fastened  the  fatal  noose.  She  ex¬
claimed,  ‘  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me.  I  hope  my  mother  and  none
of  them  are  here and  she  was  almost  instantly  cast  off,  and  in  a
few  moments  was  dead.”

It  was  stated  that  the  usual  disgraceful  scenes  were  wit¬
nessed  at  the  execution.  The  mob  was  occupied  till  the  clock
struck  the  fatal  hour  with  all  kinds  “  of  fun  and  frolic.”  A
local  paper  states  that  the  behaviour  of  the  mob  “  was  charac¬
terized  by  that  levity  and  excitement  which  always  charac¬
terizes  large  crowds  assembled  on  such  an  occasion.”  Whe¬
ther  her  relations  were  present  we  have  not  been  able  to
ascertain.  Her  sister,  the  day  before  the  execution,  asked  a
neighbour  whether  “  she  wras  going  to  see  Sal  hung  ?”  And
the  mother  went  to  a  shop  the  day  before  the  execution,  and
purchased  some  cakes,  and  told  the  shopkeeper  that  they
were  for  the  girl  “  who  was  to  be  hung  to-morrow  !”

The  following  case  is  interesting  and  instructive  in  another
way,  and  is  the  one  to  w'hich  we  wish  to  draw  attention.

“THE  BIRMINGHAM  MURDER  CASE.

“  Matthew  Davies  was  next  placed  at  the  bar,  charged  with  the
wilful  murder  of  his  wife,  Mary  Davies,  at  Birmingham,  on  the  1 3th
of  October  last.

“  Elizabeth  Yarnold  :  I  am  a  char-woman  living  in  Birmingham  ;
was  acquainted  with  the  deceased  Mary  Davies.  She  was  the  wife  of
the  prisoner  ;  he  kept  a  public  house  and  eating  house  in  Moor  Street ;
I  have  occasionally  been  employed  to  work  there ;  was  there  on  the
13th  October  last ;  before  then  I  had  known  quarrels  between  the
prisoner  and  his  wife ;  they  were  in  the  back  kitchen ;  she  wras  wash-


Killing  according  to  Law.


335


ing  her  hands  with  soap  and  flannel ;  he  was  peeling  potatoes  on  a
dish  which  stood  upon  the  floor ;  he  had  a  knife  in  his  hand.  I
heard  him  say  something  to  his  wife — he  was  begging  her  not  to  go
before  the  magistrates  against  him ;  he  said,  ‘if  you  don’t  go  I  will

be  tidy,  Mary — such  d - d  nonsense.’  She  said,  ‘  I  will  go  if

God  spares  me  he  said,  ‘  d — n  your  eyes,  you  shan’t  go.’  Words
of  this  kind  took  place  some  time.  She  once  said  she  would  give
him  a  knock  on  the  face  if  he  did  not  go  off  with  his  nonsense.  I
saw  him  steel  the  knife  five  or  six  times ;  he  rubbed  it  on  a  steel ;
he  stood  on  her  left  side,  and  put  his  right  arm  round  her  neck,
having  the  knife  in  his  hand,  as  if  he  was  going  to  kiss  her ;  she
was  washing  her  hands  ;  I  heard  him  say,  ‘  D — n  you,  you  shall
go,’  and  I  immediately  saw  the  blood  gush  from  her  throat ;  I  ran
down  the  entry  and  hooted,  ‘  Murder  ! — he’s  cut  her  throat.’  I  re¬
turned,  and  met  deceased  with  her  hand  to  her  throat,  and  the  blood
gushing  through  her  fingers.  There  had  been  no  struggle  between
them  previously.  She  ran  the  space  of  three  or  four  yards,  and
then  fell  on  her  left  side  ;  I  stood  close  by  where  she  fell,  and  saw
the  large  wound  in  her  throat  afterwards.  Mr.  Macpherson  was
sent  for,  but  I  believe  she  was  dead  when  he  arrived ;  she  lived
about  five  minutes.  The  prisoner  went  and  stood  with  his  back
towards  the  kitchen  fire,  with  his  hands  in  his  trowser’s  pockets ;  he
remained  there  till  the  policeman  came.  A  number  of  persons  as¬
sembled  directly  I  gave  the  alarm ;  he  did  not  appear  intoxicated ;
there  was  no  appearance  of  excitement  about  him.

“  Cross-examined :  He  sharpened  his  knife  whilst  he  was  peeling
the  potatoes  ;  I  did  not  see  him  cry  that  morning ;  she  told  me  he
had  been  crying  that  morning  before  I  went ;  I  saw  him  go  down  on
his  knees  before  he  began  peeling  the  potatoes  ;  he  was  not  crying
when  he  was  on  his  knees  ;  he  knelt  to  his  wife  ;  he  did  not  shed
tears  when  on  his  knees  that  morning ;  this  was  on  a  Tuesday  ;  it
was  on  the  fair  Friday  that  he  cried  ;  he  attempted  to  kiss  her,  and
it  was  then  she  threatened  to  give  him  a  slap  on  his  face ;  he  stooped
down  over  her ;  at  the  time  I  saw  the  blood  come  he  put  his  arm
round  her  neck  the  same  as  I  had  seen  him  before  when  he  used  to
kiss  her ;  after  it  was  over  he  stood  with  his  back  to  the  fire  as  if
nothing  had  occurred ;  he  was  in  the  back  kitchen.

“  Re-examined  :  It  was  the  third  time  she  had  had  him  before
the  magistrates ;  he  did  not  attempt  to  go  away.

“  By  Mr.  Macaulay  :  Mary  Micheli. — I  live  next  door  to  where
deceased  lived.  I  lived  there  for  nine  months  before  she  died  ;  I  saw
Davies  frequently ;  I  could  see  from  overhead  into  the  yard  at  the
back,  where  there  was  a  carpenter’s  shop  ;  the  men  used  to  mock
him,  and  call  him  ‘  mad  Davies,’  and  all  the  fools  they  could  do ;  I
have  seen  them  throw  raddle  and  raddle  pots  over  him,  out  of  the
shop  window.  They  used  to  call  out,  ‘  who  stole  the  chitlings  ?’
He  said  he  never  stole  anything  ;  he  used  to  knock  his  own  buckets
and  things  about ;  that  was  what  he  used  to  do  when  the  carpenters
insulted  him.  We  all  said  he  was  not  in  his  right  senses ;  I  have
met  him  in  the  entry,  and  he  has  said,  ‘  Good  morning,  Mrs.  Micheli,’


336


Capital  Punishment ;  or,


when  it  has  been  evening;  he  would, say,  ‘Excuse  me,  I  didn’t
know.’  I  have  seen  his  son  strike  him  with  a  shoe;  the  prisoner
did  nothing  but  went  down  street.  I  have  seen  an  effigy  hanging
from  the  carpenter’s  shop  window,  but  I  did  not  see  prisoner  about
the  place  till  it  was  taken  down ;  he  has  complained  to  me  about  his
head.  I  saw  a  woman  throw  a  bucket  of  cold  water  over  him,  and
he  shook  his  coat  and  said,  ‘  See  how  I’m  used  now.’  He  seemed
very  fond  of  his  wife,  if  he  could  have  his  own  way.

“  Cross-examined  :  The  carpenters  overlook  the  yard;  they  are
middle-aged  men,  and  used  to  play  tricks  on  the  prisoner.  I  have
seen  him  have  a  sup  of  drink  frequently;  they  mostly  insulted  him
when  he  was  drunk.  He  used  to  brew  his  own  beer,  and  was  master
of  the  place.

“  George  Andrews :  I  am  in  the  employ  of  Mr.  Cassera,  and
have  occasionally  taken  meals  at  Davies’.  In  June  last  I  saw  prisoner,
who  seemed  very  wild  in  his  looks;  but  I  should  say  he  had  not  had
beer.  It  was  a  fine  morning,  but  he  said  it  would  soon  be  cloudy,
though  there  was  no  appearance  of  clouds.  I  have  seen  him  grinning
and  gnashing  his  teeth,  and  clenching  his  fists;  he  occasionally  got
up  for  a  second  or  so,  and  then  sat  down.

“  By  a  juryman  :  I  do  not  think  he  was  drunk.

“Examination  continued, — I  remember  a  man  of  the  name  of
Dunifer  coming  in  on  one  occasion,  and  prisoner  told  him  to  turn
all  his  customers  out,  and  gave  him  a  note,  and  said  he  (Dunifer)
was  master  of  the  premises.

“  The  foreman  of  the  Jury  :  We  think  he  is  going  too  much  upon
*  I  believe,’  and  *  I  think.’

“Mr.  Wilmore  said  he  would  notice  that  in  his  cross-examination.

“Examination  continued, — I  once  saw  him  throw  apiece  of  beef,
I  should  think  about  301bs.  weight,  dish  and  all,  into  the  dust-hole.
I  thought  him  quite  sober,  but  he  appeared  very  much  irritated  from
the  twitching  of  his  eyes  and  the  grinding  of  his  teeth.  From  his
general  conduct  he  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  man  that  was  insane.  On
the  4th  of  June  I  thought  him  totally  insane,  and  made  a  memoran¬
dum  of  it  in  a  book.  He  once  jumped  up  and  said  he  would  knock
a  hole  through  the  back  of  the  grate,  which  he  struck  with  his  fist,
and  knocked  the  back  part  of  his  hand  all  to  pieces ;  no  one  had  said
anything  to  him ;  he  had  been  sleeping  before.  Upon  several  occa¬
sions  he  broke  the  glasses  by  throwing  them  on  the  floor.  I  once
asked  him  why  he  did  it.  He  replied,  f  What’s  that  to  you  V  I
have  heard  him  speak  of  some  person  and  his  wife ;  there  has  been
no  reason  for  such  observations.  I  have  seen  his  wife  strike  him
with  the  tongs  and  him  try  to  get  away  from  her.

“Cross-examined  :  I  have  seen  prisoner’s  wife  quarrel  with  him.
She  has  told  me  she  has  had  him  before  the  magistrates.  I  should
say  he  was  not  drunk  from  not  seeing  him  drink  at  the  time  I  have
described.  I  have  seen  him  drunk.  I  have  told  deceased  she  ought
to  have  somebody  to  look  after  him.

“  Charles  Salisbury,  shoemaker,  of  Birmingham  :  I  have  known
the  prisoner  for  three  years,  and  noticed  alterations  in  his  demeanour


Killing  according  to  Law.


337


and  appearance.  I  have  had  interviews  with  him  two  or  three  times
a  week.  I  have  noticed  alterations  in  him  more  than  two  years ;
they  have  appeared  to  increase.  I  remember  his  coming  to  me  once
in  his  shirt  sleeves;  I  live  a  mile  from  him.  I  do  not  think  he  was
drunk,  but  he  could  not  make  himself  intelligible.  He  came  to  me
and  wanted  to  see  his  son  who  worked  for  me.  I  wished  to  know
why  he  wished  to  see  him.  He  talked  in  so  confused  a  manner  that
all  I  could  gather  was  that  he  had  some  complaint  to  make  against
his  son’s  work,  I  had  made  no  complaint,  and  would  not  call  him
down.  He  became  so  noisy,  that  I  thought  it  advisable  to  get  him
away ;  it  was  about  this  time  two  years.  The  children  and  neigh¬
bours  seemed  alarmed,  and  I  asked  him  to  go  to  a  beer  house  to  get
him  away ;  but  he  talked  so  loud  among  the  customers  that  I  took
him  into  the  yard,  where  he  became  more  excited,  and  I  had  to
follow  him  up  and  down  the  yard  to  try  to  appease  him.  When  we
had  had  a  pint  of  beer  I  prevailed  upon  him  to  go  home.  He  did  not
appear  at  the  time  in  the  possession  of  his  reason.  I  consider  him  a
man  of  mild  disposition.  I  have  observed  him  shake  his  head,  and
heard  him  complain  of  it ;  I  have  seen  twitching  of  the  eyes  and
drawing  of  the  mouth  more  frequently  than  I  have  heard  him  com¬
plain.

‘‘James  Dunifer,  a  bailiff:  I  remember  the  morning  of  the  4th
of  June  last,  he  appeared  to  me  perfectly  sober  :  he  said  he  had  been
walking  about  the  street  all  night ;  he  signed  a  paper  to  deliver  his
goods  up  to  me  :  it  was  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Hall,  the  lawyer.  I  put
two  men  in  possession,  and  turned  the  customers  out  by  his  order.
He  was  greatly  excited,  and  towards  evening,  with  the  assistance  of
the  men,  I  got  him  in  a  top  attic ;  I  nailed  the  window  down,  for
he  was  going  to  jump  through  it  he  said.  He  never  went  to  bed  all
night.  I  never  allowed  him  any  drink  from  the  time  I  was  in  pos¬
session.  He  walked  about  all  night  raving;  his  noise  brought  a
constable  to  the  house.  The  next  morning  I  withdrew  possession  :
Mrs.  Davies  paid  another  party  for  possession.

“  Cross-examined  :  None  of  my  men  are  here.  I  have  been  a
bailiff  on  my  own  head  for  thirteen  years.  I  took  possession  on  the
prisoner’s  authority.  He  was  jealous  of  his  wife.  The  auctioneer
got  catalogues  out,  and  he  paid  me.

“  John  Griffiths  :  I  have  known  the  prisoner  two  years  and  a
half,  and  have  been  in  the  habit  of  frequently  going  to  his  house.
Have  seen  him  challenge  his  best  customers  to  fight,  without  any
provocation,  and  kick  the  glass  out  of  his  windows,  and  knock  his
screen  and  other  things  about,  till  his  hands  were  swollen  nearly
double  their  size.  I  have  heard  him  say  he  received  a  blow  from  a
special  constable’s  staff  at  Newton,  in  Montgomeryshire,  and  had
never  been  right  since.  I  have  seen  the  constable  who  struck  him  ;
he  is  since  dead.

“  Elizabeth  Hughes  :  I  have  lived  with  prisoner  and  his  wife  at
Newtown  and  also  at  Birmingham,  and  have  heard  him  complain  of
the  blow  on  his  head.  I  recollect  his  going  out  one  day  with  Mrs.
Davies  to  pay  the  rent ;  when  he  came  back  he  laid  down  on  the


338


Capital  Punishment ;  or,

screen,  and  liis  head  began  to  shake  at  a  very  fast  rate,  and  we
applied  vinegar  and  water.  There  had  been  no  quarrel.  He  said,
‘oh,  my  head,’  twice  over.  He  said,  ‘hush,  hush,’  when  there
was  no  one  speaking,  and  put  his  hands  to  his  ears.  I  thought  he
always  seemed  fond  of  his  wife.  I  have  seen  her  violent  with  him,
and  then  he  has  put  his  hand  round  her  neck  and  tried  to  coax  and
kiss  her ;  this  I  have  often  seen.  At  Christmas  he  threatened  to
set  fire  to  the  house.  We  were  obliged  to  have  a  man  to  watch  over
him  from  Saturday  to  Sunday  mid-day,  when  the  man  took  him  a
walk,  and  he  seemed  better.  One  frosty  night  he  uncovered  the
potatoes  in  the  garden,  and  when  told  of  it  the  next  morning,  he
said  he  knew  nothing  about  it.  He  has  a  very  bad  memory,  his
customers  could  deceive  him  in  any  way  ;  I  am  sorry  to  say  he  was
not  competent  to  conduct  the  affairs  of  a  public  house.  On  one  oc¬
casion  he  broke  his  watch  all  to  pieces,  and  the  next  morning  he
said  he  knew  nothing  about  it.

“  Cross-examined  :  He  would  revenge  himself  in  drink  when  he
quarrelled  with  his  wife ;  when  she  struck  him  he  would  run  away
and  sit  down.  I  have  seen  her  take  the  broom  to  him,  and  strike
him  writh  the  tongs.  I  think  she  tempted  him  to  break  the  peace  in
order  to  have  him  bound  over.

“  Mr.  Thomas  Birt,  surgeon,  of  Leamington,  said  he  had  had
experience  from  private  practice,  and  from  being  senior  assistant  for
twelve  months  in  a  private  lunatic  asylum,  in  cases  of  lunacy.  Had
examined  the  prisoner’s  head  ;  he  appeared  to  have  had  a  severe  blow
on  the  left  side  of  the  back  part  of  it.  A  blow  of  that  description
might  affect  the  brain.  A  blow  might  be  the  predisposing  cause  of
insanity,  which  might  take  place  from  other  exciting  causes ;  the
grinding  of  the  teeth  was  a  particular  evidence  of  an  affection  of  the
brain  ;  have  known  repeated  instances  of  suicidal  attacks  by  lunatics
during  paroxysms,  and  one  homicidal  attack,  for  it  was  made  on
myself.  From  the  prisoner’s  apathy  after  the  act  I  think  that  he
must  have  been  unconscious  of  the  extent  and  nature  of  what  he  had
previously  committed.  It  cannot,  in  my  opinion,  be  explained  upon
any  other  ground  than  insanity.

“  Dr.  Hanson,  a  physician,  practising  at  Leamington,  had  had
experience  in  cases  of  insanity  in  the  Hanwell  Lunatic  Asylum.  If
there  is  a  predisposition  to  insanity  it  is  likely  to  be  increased  by
violent  or  irritating  treatment,  or,  on  the  contrary,  lessened  by
soothing  treatment ;  I  agree  with  Mr.  Birt,  and  I  have  observed  the
skulls  of  some  of  the  lunatics  at  Hanwell  of  similar  construction  to
that  of  the  prisoner — of  a  suicidal  or  felo-de-se  tendency  ;  the  struc¬
ture  of  the  head  indicates  a  predisposition  to  insanity.  Similar  apa¬
thy  to  that  shewn  by  the  prisoner  after  he  had  committed  the  act
has  been  carried  out  since  he  has  been  in  custody.

“  Cross-examined  :  I  infer  that  he  was  in  a  paroxysm  when  the
catastrophe  occurred  ;  numbness  of  the  brain  and  vague  listlessness
would  succeed  ;  they  return  from  the  active  to  the  passive  state  in  a
surprizingly  short  period  of  time.

“  After  about  five  minutes’  consideration,  the  jury  requested  to


Killing  according  to  Law.


339


retire,  and  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  they  returned  into  court  with
a  verdict  of  GUILTY.

“His  Lordship  having  put  on  the  black  cap,  proceeded,  amidst
profound  silence,  to  pass  sentence  upon  the  prisoner.  In  addressing
him  he  said  the  prisoner  had  been  convicted  of  a  most  horrid  murder,
namely,  cutting  the  throat  of  his  wife,  and  the  way  in  which  he  had
done  it  showed  that  at  the  time  he  did  it  he  was  well  aware  what  he
was  about,  and  his  violent  temper  and  irregular  habits  clearly  proved
that  there  was  no  foundation  in  the  defence  which  had  been  set  up  in
his  behalf.  The  offence  of  the  prisoner  was  one  of  the  very  few
which  the  laws  of  the  country  visited  with  death,  which  he  had  no
power  of  mitigating  in  this  instance,  nor  would  he  be  justified  in
holding  out  the  slightest  hope  of  the  kind  from  any  other  quarter  ;  he
would  do  well  therefore  to  prepare  himself  for  suffering  that  punishment
at  the  end  of  a  very  short  time.  Though  mercy  was  not  to  be  ex¬
pected  in  this  world,  yet  in  a  quarter  where  it  was  incomparably  more
superior,  it  was  not  to  be  despaired  of,  and  he  must  therefore  pre¬
pare  for  that  fate  which  all  expected,  and  which  would  be  his  in  a
very  short  time  indeed.  His  crime  was  one  of  a  most  atrocious  cha¬
racter;  he  had  put  his  arm  round  the  neck  of  his  wife  under  pretence
of  kissing  her,  and  had  taken  that  opportunity  of  inflicting  a  horrid
gash  in  her  throat,  which  needed  only  to  be  described  to  induce  the
utmost  horror  at  his  conduct.  Those  men  who  had  no  control  over
their  passions,  and  indulged  in  intemperate  habits,  as  it  had  been
proved  to  have  been  the  case  with  the  prisoner,  were  most  likely  to
produce  outrages  such  as  the  prisoner  had  been  guilty  of.  There  was
not  any  provocation  to  the  prisoner  unless  he  had  been  inwardly  evil
disposed.  He  would  not  dwell  further,  and  there  was  no  occasion  in
that  audience  to  press  upon  them  that  what  the  prisoner  had  done
was  not  only  prohibited  by  law,  but  was  a  crime  at  which  human  na¬
ture  recoiled. — His  Lordship  then  passed  sentence  in  the  usual  way.

“The  prisoner  received  his  sentence  without  any  perceptible  emo¬
tion,  and  walked  with  a  firm  step  from  the  dock.

“The  Court  was  densely  crowded  throughout  the  trial,  which
ended  about  half-past  four  o’clock.”

Mr.  Overell  acted  as  the  poor  man’s  attorney,  and  not
only  did  his  duty  without  fee  or  reward,  but  immediately  after
the  trial  forwarded  a  memorial  to  Sir  George  Grey,  pointing
out  the  principal  features  of  the  case,  and  proving  most  clearly
and  satisfactorily  that  the  man  was  subject  to  attacks  of
insanity.

We  make  the  following  extracts  from  this  memorial.  After
describing  the  nature  of  the  case  and  quoting  the  opinions  of
medical  authorities,  Mr.  Overell  says, —

“To  the  above  extracts,  which  well  describe  the  nature  of  the
unfortunate  prisoner’s  case,  permit  me  to  make  reference  to  the  evi¬
dence  on  the  trial,  which  elicited  the  following  facts  : — that  his  friends
and  neighbours  (many  of  whom  were  examined  as  witnesses)  proved
that  he  was  always  regarded  as  not  being  right  in  his  head ;  that  he


340


Capital  Punishment ;  or,


went  by  the  name  of  *  Mad  Davies/  and  one  witness  was  so  convinced
of  his  being  insane,  that  he  made  a  memorandum  of  some  insane
act,  expecting  to  be  called  to  prove  it  at  a  future  day ;  that  on  many
occasions  he  acted  in  the  strangest  manner ;  that  he  was  subject  to
fits;  that  when  there  was  perfect  stillness  in  the  house,  he  has
started  up,  and  exclaimed,  ‘Hush!  don’t  make  that  noise  ;’  that  he
was  continually  in  the  habit  of  complaining  of  strange  sensations  in
his  head,  and  that  he  feared  he  should  lose  his  senses ;  that  he  has
been  subject  to  fall  into  a  state  of  comatose  sleep  for  hours  at  a
time  ;  that  on  more  than  one  occasion  he  has  been  extremely  violent,
threatening  to  set  fire  to  the  house,  to  break  in  the  ale  and  beer  bar¬
rels,  and  otherwise  behave  so  outrageously  that  it  was  found  necessary
to  put  him  under  restraint  and  confine  him  to  his  room,  where  he
paced  up  and  down  the  whole  night,  and  would  have  leapt  from  the
window  had  he  not  been  prevented;  that  he  broke  his  watch  to
pieces,  and  afterwards  could  not  be  persuaded  that  he  had  done  so.
These  acts  of  violence,  which  might  be  greatly  multiplied,  but  which
is  deemed  unnecessary,  were  most  positively  proved  by  the  witnesses
not  to  have  been  the  effects  of  intoxication.  His  appearance  too  was
evidently  that  of  a  man  of  weak  mind,  crying  like  a  child,  being
treated  by  his  wife,  children,  and  neighbours  as  a  child.  He  mani¬
fested  other  personal  peculiarities  usually  concomitant  with  insanity,
such  as  restlessness  of  the  eye,  spasmodic  twitching  of  the  nerves,
gnashing  and  grinding  of  the  teeth.  At  times  he  was  incoherent  in
his  talk,  and,  as  is  not  unusual  in  such  cases,  when  he  was  severely
injured,  manifested  almost  total  insensibility  to  pain.  Further,  that
he  had  sustained  an  injury  from  a  heavy  blow  on  the  head,  which
acted  as  an  irritant  to  a  mind  already  visited  by  the  dire  affliction  of
lunacy  by  the  dispensation  of  Almighty  God.

“It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  case  mainly  rested  upon  the
evidence  of  Elizabeth  Yarnold,  who,  your  memorialist  is  ready  to  prove,
if  necessary,  by  the  evidence  of  two  credible  witnesses,  had  stated  her
determination  to  do  all  that  she  could,  and  would  go  barefoot,  with¬
out  bit  or  drop  in  her  mouth,  to  get  Davies  hung,  and  that  she
hoped  they  would  give  him  a  good  swing  when  they  did  it.  Not¬
withstanding  this  animus  against  the  prisoner,  she  distinctly  swore
that  there  was  not  the  slightest  appearance  of  excitement  about  him
previous  to  or  after  the  act ;  and  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Birt  deduced
from  this  fact,  as  stated  above,  cannot  but  have  the  greatest  weight
in  determining  and  deciding  the  question.

“  From  these  and  other  extenuating  facts,  it  is  confidently  hoped
you  will  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  this  miserable  man  acted  under
a  sudden  and  uncontrollable  impulse,  not  of  moral  insanity  alone,
(which  the  law  justly  does  not  recognize  as  a  palliative  of  crime,)
but  from  the  more  irresponsible  cause  of  intellectual  aberration.  And
in  visiting  with  an  extreme  penalty  crimes  committed  without  full
and  undoubted  responsibility,  justice  becomes  vindictive,  and  firm¬
ness  merges  into  cruelty.

“Though  fully  aware  that  you,  honoured  Sir,  (as  testified  by
your  public  acts,)  can  act  no  otherwise  than  on  the  high  ground


341


Killing  according  to  Law .

which  public  duty  demands,  your  memorialist  cannot  refrain  from
suggesting  that  it  is  a  fearful  responsibility  to  be  entrusted  with  the
life  of  a  fellow-creature ;  one  little  word  between  life  and  death,  and
that  word  of  recommendation  to  Her  Majesty’s  mercy  optional  for
you  to  speak.

“Your  memorialist  in  conclusion  desires  to  disclaim  being  misled
by  any  undue  feeling  of  sentimentality  or  hostility  to  the  principle  of
capital  punishments,  but  begs  strongly  as  a  matter  of  right  to  bring
under  your  notice  that  this  is  a  case  in  which  the  law  does  not  discri¬
minate  those  nicer  shades,  for  giving  value  to  which,  it  has  placed
in  the  hands  of  Her  Majesty  the  blessed  prerogative  of  mercy.

“  May  it  therefore  please  you,  honoured  Sir,  to  recommend  to
our  most  gracious  Sovereign  to  extend  her  royal  clemency  to  this  un¬
fortunate  man.

“William  Overell.”

Mr.  Overell  sent  a  copy  of  the  memorial  to  Dr.  Elliotson,
who  immediately  communicated  with  Mr.  Ewart.  The  fol¬
lowing  are  Mr.  Ewart's  notes  to  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  6,  Cambridge  Square,
“April  13.

“  My  dear  Sir, — I  am  obliged  to  you  for  the  enclosed.  The  evi¬
dence  makes  out  a  strong  case  of  insanity.  As  you  wish  for  the
papers  soon,  I  return  them  at  once.  Otherwise  I  should  have  taken
them  with  me  to  the  House  of  Commons.

“  I  have  spoken  twice  to  Sir  George  Grey  on  this  case.  I  will
not  fail  to  take  further  measures.

“  Yours  truly,

“Wm.  Ewart.

“  Dr.  Elliotson.”

“  House  of  Commons,

“  Thursday  evening.

“  My  dear  Sir, — I  have  appealed  in  vain  to  Sir  George  Grey,
publicly  and  privately.  He  says  the  judge  has  been  again  referred
to  ;  that  he  answers  that  the  jury  found  that  the  prisoner  was  compos
mentis  ;  and  that  he  cannot  (after  this)  recall  the  decision  of  the  jury
and  the  sentence  of  the  judge.  I  am  very  sorry  indeed.  But  I  can
do  no  more.

“  Yours  truly,

“  Wm.  Ewart.

“  Dr.  Elliotson.”

“  My  dear  Sir, — I  casually  omitted  to  return  this  letter  with  the
others.  I  suppose  it  is  now  all  over  with  the  object  of  your  humane
interposition:  the  ‘law  must  take  its  course.’  Why  could  not  the
Crown  interpose  ?

“  Yours  truly,

“Wm.  Ewart.


“Dr.  Elliotson.”


342


Capital  Punishment ;  or,


The  following  is  Sir  George  Grey’s  reply  to  Dr.  Elliotson’s
application  to  him  : —

“  Home  Office,
“April  12,  1849.

“  Sir, — I  am  directed  by  Sir  George  Grey  to  inform  you  with
reference  to  your  letter  of  the  5th  inst.,  on  behalf  of  M.  Davies,  a
prisoner  under  sentence  of  death  for  murder,  that  Sir  George  Grey
lias  delayed  his  reply  until  he  had  received  the  report  of  the  judge,
which  only  reached  him  this  morning ;  and  after  an  attentive  con¬
sideration  of  the  case,  he  feels  it  his  painful  duty  to  allow  the  law
to  take  its  course.

“  I  have  the  honour  to  be.  Sir,

“  Yours  most  obediently,

“Denis  Le  Marchant.

“  Dr.  Elliotson.’,

Notwithstanding  the  enlightened  exertions  of  Mr.  Overell,
Dr.  Elliotson,  and  Mr.  Ewart, — Sir  G.  Grey,  knowing  nothing
of  the  physiology  of  the  brain,  referred  to  the  judge,  Mr.
Justice  Maule,  who  appears  to  have  been  quite  as  ignorant,
and  because  he  could  throw  no  light  on  the  matter,  and  could
only  refer  to  the  verdict  returned  by  the  twelve  jurymen,  the
poor  man,  the  victim  of  an  insane  impulse,  was  publicly
strangled.  How  long  is  this  state  of  matters  to  continue  ?
How  long  is  the  voice  of  science  to  be  disregarded,  and  the
verdict  of  the  unenlightened  to  seal  the  doom  of  an  individual
suffering  from  disease  of  the  brain  ?

The  following  account  of  the  execution  is  from  a  local
paper : —

“EXECUTION  OF  DAVIES,  FOR  THE  MURDER  OF  HIS  WIFE.

“  Yesterday  (Friday),  being  the  day  appointed  for  the  execution
of  Matthew  Davies,  convicted  at  the  last  Assizes,  of  having  murdered
his  wife,  Mary  Davies,  at  Birmingham,  on  the  13th  of  October  last,
the  town  at  an  early  hour  began  to  present  a  bustling  appearance,
caused  by  the  arrival  of  numerous  parties  from  the  towns  and  villages
in  the  neighbourhood.  It  will  be  in  the  recollection  of  our  readers
that  a  plea  of  insanity  was  set  up,  and  strongly  supported  by  a
number  of  witnesses.  The  jury,  however,  considered  that  the  pri¬
soner  knew  perfectly  well  what  he  was  about  at  the  time  he  com¬
mitted  the  alleged  crime,  and  therefore  returned  a  verdict  of  guilty.
In  this  verdict  the  learned  judge  (Baron  Maule)  fully  concurred,  and,
in  passing  sentence,  held  out  not  the  slightest  hope  of  mercy  towards
the  prisoner.  Subsequently  a  memorial  was  got  up  at  Birmingham,
and  another  at  Leamington,  addressed  to  the  Home  Secretary,  pray¬
ing  for  a  commutation  of  the  sentence.  Sir  George  Grey,  however,
saw  nothing  in  the  argument  urged  by  the  memorialists  to  justify
him  in  recommending  Her  Majesty  to  extend  the  prerogative  the


343


Killing  according  to  Law.

Crown  possesses  to  the  prisoner ;  the  unhappy  man  was  consequently
subjected  to  the  extreme  penalty  of  the  law.  From  the  time  of  his
committal  to  the  period  of  his  being  escorted  to  the  scaffold,  he  dis¬
played  the  same  apathy  and  apparent  want  of  consciousness  at  the
awful  position  in  which  he  was  placed,  as  that  which  followed  imme¬
diately  after  the  deed  he  had  committed,  excepting  on  Thursday
afternoon,  when  his  three  children  were  brought  up  by  Mr.  Silk,
victualler,  of  Birmingham.  The  age  of  the  eldest  is  19,  the  second
9,  and  the  third  about  7*  The  first  displayed  a  great  want  of  feeling,
whilst  the  two  younger  ones,  from  the  tenderness  of  their  age,  were
hardly  conscious  of  the  position  in  which  their  unhappy  parent  stood.
On  the  part  of  the  latter  the  interview  was  affecting  in  the  extreme,
and  it  was  thought  advisable  in  less  than  ten  minutes  to  separate  the
parties. — As  the  hour  fixed  for  the  execution  approached,  the  front
and  precincts  of  the  gaol  became  crowded  to  excess,  and  amongst  the
assemblage  we  regretted  to  see  a  great  number  of  young  females,
apparently  holding  a  respectable  station  in  life — all  anxiously  press¬
ing  forward  to  see  the  degrading  spectacle  of  a  human  being  sus¬
pended  in  the  air  like  a  dog.  By  the  law,  as  it  at  present  stands,
the  very  object  the  Legislature  have  in  view  is  entirely  defeated,  for
instead  of  operating  upon  the  spectators  as  a  warning  against  crime,
we  find,  at  execution  after  execution,  incitements  to  its  committal,
which,  were  it  not  for  the  thousands  who  assemble  to  witness  such
disgusting  spectacles,  would  not  exist.  Such  was  the  case  on  the
present  occasion.  A  number  of  people  of  both  sexes ,  and  the  most
degraded  of  the  human  race,  indulged  in  conduct  the  most  obscene
and  offensive  ;  others  passed  jokes,  and  another  body  amused  them¬
selves  by  playing  at  ‘  leap-frog ,’  and  other  gymnastic  sports ,  until
the  time  arrived  for  the  man  to  ascend  the  scaffold  !*  About  five
minutes  before  twelve  the  bell  commenced  tolling,  and  a  few  minutes
after  that  hour  struck  by  the  clock  of  St.  Mary’s,  the  melancholy

*  We  have  detailed  scenes  of  this  kind  in  former  numbers.  “  A  large  num¬
ber,  ”  says  Dr.  Elliotson,  “of  those  who  read  of,  and  still  more  of  those  who
witness,  an  execution,  feel  more  or  less  of  a  savage  pleasure,  and  are  injured  in
their  moral  feelings.  The  scene  of  an  execution  is  one  of  disgust  and  dismay.
Jokes,  ribaldry,  obscenity,  drunkenness,  and  thefts  go  on ;  and  the  female  por¬
tion  are  equally  bad  with  the  other  sex.  This  is  not  peculiar  to  England.  Two
men  convicted  of  arson,  robbery,  and  murder,  were  executed  not  long  ago  at  a
small  town  in  France  called  Berus.  From  twelve  thousand  to  fifteen  thousand
persons  collected.  Booths  were  erected,  tables  spread,  tuns  of  cider  broached,
and  games  set  up  ;  and  the  magistrates  with  gens  d’armes  and  troops  had  difficulty
in  preventing  still  more  scandalous  proceedings.  The  young  priest  *  with  much
force,  but  mildness,  endeavoured  to  bring  the  crowd  to  a  state  more  suited  to  the
scene.’  ” — No.  I.,  p.  50.

“  The  London  police  could  enumerate  a  few  of  the  disgusting  scenes  which
take  place  in  the  front  of  Newgate, — not  confined,  be  it  remembered,  to  the  low,
vulgar,  and  unrefined,  but  indulged  in  by  those  who  pride  themselves  on  their
birth,  station,  and  power.  Seats  at  windows  and  on  roofs  are  hired  for  the  oc¬
casion, — thousands  assemble  at  day-light  to  secure  ‘  a  good  sight,’ — the  juvenile
and  the  aged  pickpocket  are  busied  at  their  avocations, — the  ribald  jests  and  the
low  and  vulgar  slang  of  the  uneducated  are  heard  throughout  the  crowd,  and  even
the  reporters  for  the  press  ask  for  the  last  word,  gaze  to  catch  the  last  look,  and
lament  their  ill-luck  if  deprived  of  the  opportunity  to  ascertain  whether  the  poor


344


Capital  Punishment ;  or,


procession  made  its  appearance,  attended  by  Mr.  Whately,  the  under¬
sheriff  ;  the  Rev.  Mr.  Langharne,  chaplain  to  the  gaol ;  Mr.  Harry

wretch  struggled  much.*  Others,  who  would  be  unable  to  witness  the  execution,
obtain  a  private  interview — visit  the  condemned  cell — listen  to  the  condemned
sermon — and  to  render  the  sight  more  interesting  and  attractive,  the  prisoner
upon  a  late  occasion  was  dressed  in  his  own  apparel !  Need  we  enumerate  other
instances  of  this  depraved  appetite  ?  At  Kirkdale,  in  the  month  of  May  last,
there  were  two  executions.  A  local  paper  thus  describes  the  scene  : — *  The  roads
to  and  from  the  place  of  execution  were  densely  crowded,  and  from  the  number
of  persons  in  vehicles  of  every  description,  it  resembled  a  visit  to  the  race  course
on  some  attractive  occasion.  The  number  present  we  have  heard  variously  esti¬
mated  at  from  20  to  30,000.’  Some  years  ago  our  morbid  curiosity  prompted
us  to  witness  the  execution  of  a  young  soldier  for  the  murder  of  his  superior  officer.
There  were  some  extenuating  circumstances,  but  into  these  it  is  not  necessary  to
enter,  we  merely  wish  to  direct  attention  to  the  proceedings  at  the  moment.
When  the  poor  creature  appeared  upon  the  scaffold,  the  immense  crowd,  which
had  exhibited  signs  of  considerable  irritation,  was  instantly  stilled, — the  silence
lasted  during  the  whole  of  the  sad  preparations,  and  even  when  the  drop  fell
nothing  was  heard  but  the  suppressed  shudder ;  and  which,  emanating  from  the
assembled  thousands,  was  very  distinctly  and  impressively  audible.  The  removal
of  the  body  was  the  signal  for  the  concluding  scene.  The  moment  the  hangman
made  his  appearance  he  was  assailed  with  the  most  terrific  yells ;  hundreds  of
stones  were  thrown  at  him,  and  he  was  obliged  to  retreat  as  expeditiously  as
possible,  protected  by  the  officers,  but  assaulted  with  every  missile  which  an
enraged  and  disgusted  mob  could  obtain.  What  then  was  gained  by  this  pro¬
cedure  ?  In  the  cant  of  the  day,  ‘  offended  justice  was  satisfied,  and  an  example
was  afforded  to  evil  doers  and  those  who  allow  !  their  passions  to  gain  an  ascen¬
dancy!’  Our  belief  is  that  the  executioner  would  have  been  seriously  injured
and  perhaps  murdered,  if  he  had  not  been  protected  by  the  judicial  officers.
Here  then  were  passions  running  riot  at  the  foot  of  the  scaffold,  and  on  the  spot
where  but  one  hour  had  elapsed  since  a  fellow-creature  had  been  sacrificed  for  the
self-same  crime,  only  differing  in  degree.  Here  not  one  or  two,  but  hundreds,
contended  for  the  opportunity  to  inflict  an  injury  and  to  allow  their  passions  to
gain  an  ascendancy.  And  yet  we  are  told  that  it  is  necessary  to  continue  the
punishment  of  death  for  the  sake  of  example, — that  it  is  a  warning  and  terror  to
all  men,  and  that  without  it  society  could  not  be  efficiently  protected  !” — No.  II.,
p.  105.

“  Judges  and  juries  assemble  at  stated  intervals,  and  pass  through  the  usual
monotonous  routine,  commencing  their  proceedings  with  prayer  and  thanksgiving,
and  terminating  them  by  hanging  one  or  more  of  their  brethren.  Senators  and
moralists  sanction  the  course  pursued,  and  the  people  still  rush  in  thousands  to
witness  the  display  of  legalized  destructiveness,  with  as  much,  if  not  more,  avi¬
dity,  than  they  formerly  manifested  to  behold  a  bull-fight,  or  the  struggles  of  the
boxing-ring.

“  ‘  The  crowd  at  the  execution  was  immense ;  it  was  wonderful  to  see  what
countless  thousands  were  packed  on  the  pavement,  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,
nothing  but  the  heads  of  men  and  women  could  be  seen.  Occasionally  a  cry  was
made  that  a  man,  woman,  or  child  was  fainting,  or  being  crushed  to  death ;  and
if  the  individual  was  fortunate  enough  to  have  strength  left,  he  or  she  was  lifted
up  and  allowed  to  walk  to  the  extremities  of  the  crowd  on  the  shoulders  of  the
people.  At  a  very  early  hour,  before  five  o’clock,  persons  began  to  take  up  a
position  in  front  of  the  drop,  and  before  seven  the  crushing  became  excessive.
It  was  grievous  to  hear  the  language  used  by  the  spectators ,  and  to  observe  the
little  effect  the  awful  spectacle  had  on  their  minds.  Many  hats  were  thrown  about
the  heads  of  the  mob,  which  were  destroyed,  and  great  numbers  had  their  clothes

*  “  *  Owing  to  the  pressure  of  a  number  of  persons  on  the  wooden  bridge  leading  to  the  scaf¬
fold,  we  were  unable  to  ascertain  whether  they  struggled  much,  but  we  were  subsequently  in¬
formed  that  the  struggles  of  the  female  were  soon  over,  while  those  of  the  male  were  much
more  severe.’ — Liverpool  Chronicle.  What  important  and  instructive  information]


345


Killing  according  to  Law.

Adkins,  the  governor,  and  other  officials.  The  unhappy  man  was
placed  underneath  the  beam,  when  the  halter  was  adjusted  round  his
neck,  without  his  displaying  the  slightest  emotion.  The  cap  was
then  drawn  over  his  face,  and  in  two  minutes  after  his  coming  on
to  the  platform,  the  bolt  was  withdrawn,  and  the  culprit  was  plunged
into  eternity.  After  hanging  the  usual  time,  the  body  was  taken
down  and  removed  into  the  gaol,  within  the  precincts  of  which  it
was  interred  the  same  evening.”

A  few  years  ago  the  writer  of  these  remarks  was  con¬
sulted  by  a  man  occupying  a  respectable  station  in  society,
under  the  following  circumstances.  He  stated  that  he  enjoyed
comparatively  good  health,  but  that  he  was  very  unhappy
because  he  was  prompted  to  destroy  one  of  his  children.
This  impulse  to  destroy  generally  seized  him  while  sitting  at

stripped  off  and  were  left  almost  naked.  The  coarsest  language  was  freely  used,
the  ribald  jest ,  followed  by  brutal  language  and  rude  laughter,  might  be  heard
on  every  side  during  the  whole  of  the  morning.  Soon  after  the  criminal  had
dropped,  the  immense  crowd  burst  in  the  middle.  The  greater  portion  having
been  standing  for  hours  packed  like  herrings  in  a  barrel,  they  were  anxious  to
escape  from  their  uncomfortable  position,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  fresh  air,
and  a  great  rush  was  made  from  the  centre,  opposite  the  drop  ;  like  a  gun  heavily
charged  and  closely  rammed,  the  explosion  was  tremendous  and  deadly.  The
greater  portion  of  the  doors  of  the  houses  were  closed,  and  those  who  were
crushed  by  the  flow  of  the  immense  tide  of  human  beings  had  no  means  of
escape.  The  effect  of  the  crush  was  the  most  fatal  near  Malin  Hill,  down  which
hundreds  were  hurled  one  on  the  top  of  the  other.  The  consequence  of  this  was
that  twelve  human  beings  were  killed  and  more  than  one  hundred  received  serious
injuries.’  A  scene  at  an  execution  at  Nottingham ,  August ,  1844. — The  York-
shireman.

“  Mark  Sherwood  was  executed  at  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  on  the  23rd  day  of
August,  1844.  ‘  On  arriving  at  the  drop,  he  for  a  moment  looked  down  on  the

mass  that  were  assembled,  there  being  upwards  of  20,000  persons  present.’

“  At  the  execution  of  three  men  at  Derby,  a  short  time  ago,  there  were
35,000  or  40,000  persons  present.  ‘We  were  exceedingly  sorry  to  observe  pla¬
cards  in  various  parts  of  the  town,  announcing  that  the  theatre  would  be  opened
at  two  o’clock,  to  accommodate  the  country  people.’ — Derby  Mercury.

“At  the  execution  of  Crouch,  a  few  months  since,  for  the  murder  of  his
wife,  we  are  informed  by  an  eye-witness,  that  the  game  of  pitch  and  toss  was
very  general  in  the  outskirts  of  the  crowd.  When  the  poor  wretch  appeared  on
the  scaffold,  a  voice  exclaimed,  ‘  Keep  up  your  pluck,  my  kiddy  !’  ” — No.  VII.,
p.  299.

“  ‘  From  Sunday  afternoon  until  within  an  hour  of  the  execution  [of  Ellison,]
people  were  arriving  at  Bodmin  from  almost  every  quarter  within  60  miles, —
Helston,  Penzance,  Paul,  and  places  near  the  land’s  end,  and  every  vehicle  that
could  be  mustered  seemed  to  have  been  in  requisition  to  witness  the  death-
struggles  of  a  fellow -creature.  Before  and  after  the  execution  the  main  sti'eet  of
Bodmin  was  filled  by  one  dense  mass  of  human  beings.  Twenty-five  thousand
persons  witnessed  the  execution.  We  were  sorry  to  observe  that  perhaps  one-
half  or  more  of  the  spectators  were  females.  The  majority  of  the  vast  multitude
remained  for  the  purpose  of  an  afternoon’s  carousal  or  holiday  pleasure.  The
public-houses  were  filled  from  the  basement  to  the  upper  story,  and  in  the  streets,
which  were  rendered  almost  impassible  for  hours,  coarse  jests  and  ribaldry  were
frequently  heard  proceeding  from  the  crowd.  Considerable  numbers  of  standings
were  erected,  with  various  juvenile  amusements,  and  the  town  presented  the  ap¬
pearance  of  a  gay  fair  day.’  ” — No.  XI.,  p.  275.


346


Capital  Punishment ;  or,


the  head  of  his  table  at  dinner,  and  it  was  so  overpowering
that  he  was  accustomed  to  rush  from  the  table  and  walk
several  miles  into  the  country,  returning  after  the  lapse  of
two  or  three  hours  perfectly  well.  He  could  give  no  reason
for  the  attacks.  His  health  was  not  impaired — the  attacks
were  not  periodical,  and  there  was  no  warning.  Apparently
the  sight  of  the  knife  with  which  he  was  about  to  carve  the
joint  of  meat,  was  the  stimulus  which  excited  a  portion  of
his  brain  to  abnormal  action.  Here  then  we  have  an  instance
of  an  insane  impulse  produced  without  the  slightest  provo¬
cation.

A  few  weeks  ago  we  were  consulted  by  a  female  about
45  years  of  age,  residing  in  a  family  in  the  capacity  of  nurse¬
maid.  Without  any  very  apparent  cause  she  had  suddenly
become  melancholic.  She  stated  that  she  did  not  dare  enter
the  dining  room,  if  the  preparations  for  dinner  were  made ;
for  if  she  did,  she  heard  a  voice  whispering  in  her  ear,  “Now
is  your  time.”  She  said  that  she  felt  “as  if  she  must  cut
her  own  throat  and  also  the  throat  of  the  child  she  was
nursing.”  Here  is  an  instance  of  an  insane  impulse,  but,
unlike  the  preceding  case,  prompting  to  self-destruction,  as
well  as  the  destruction  of  another.  No  member  of  the  family
in  which  she  resided  had  been  made  aware  of  these  symptoms,
but  of  course  we  took  immediate  steps  to  obtain  her  removal
from  her  responsible  situation.

Now,  in  the  first  case  let  us  suppose  an  altercation  (as  in
the  case  of  M.  Davies  and  his  wife)  taking  place  between  the
parent  and  the  child  at  the  dinner  table,  and  the  insane
impulse  seizing  the  individual  at  the  moment ;  is  it  not  pro¬
bable  that  under  the  increased  excitement  he  would  be  un¬
able  to  rush  from  the  table,  and  that  consequently  he  would
sacrifice  the  life  of  his  child  ?  And,  now,  knowing  the  facts
of  the  case,  would  any  rational  being  say  that  this  afflicted
parent  should  be  subjected  to  the  penalties  of  a  sentence  pro¬
nounced  in  consequence  of  the  verdict  of  twelve  jurymen
profoundly  ignorant  of  human  nature  in  a  state  of  disease ;
and  because  they  cannot  understand  the  possibility  of  the
occurrence,  or  the  nature,  of  an  insane  impulse,  that  the
judge  and  the  Home  Secretary  are  to  take  shelter  under  their
verdict,  and  the  diseased  man  be  forthwith  cast  for  execution  ?
It  is  by  reflecting  over  these  extreme  cases  that  we  see  the
injustice  and  cruelty  of  the  execution  of  M.  Davies.  The
case  which  we  have  used  as  an  illustration  of  a  most  distress¬
ing  form  of  disease,  is  peculiar  because  it  presents  an  example
of  a  controllable  insane  impulse ;  but  who  can  point  out  the
limits  of  the  restraining  power?  When  the  whole  question


Killing  according  to  Law.


S17


rests  probably  upon  tlie  amount  of  blood  contained  in,  or  the
rapidity  of  circulation  of  blood  through,  a  portion  of  cerebral
matter,  who  shall  say,  according  to  law ,  where  crime  or  in¬
sanity  begins  and  ends?  Who  shall  dare  to  say  whether  there
was  time  for  reflection?*  And  if  there  was,  who  shall  say
whether  the  impulse  was  not  too  powerful  for  the  reasoning
powers  to  control?  We  ask  whether  twelve  jurymen  are  to
be  the  judges  upon  such  an  intricate  physiological  question  ?
Are  the  facts  of  science  to  be  cast  aside,  and  a  judge's  inter¬
pretation  of  our  criminal  law  to  be  the  sole  arbiter  of  life
and  death?  Mr.  Justice  Maule  stated  that  at  the  time
M.  Davies  committed  the  act  “he  was  well  aware  what  he
was  about."  And  suppose  we  grant  this  for  the  sake  of  ar¬
gument — what  then  ?  Is  not  the  fact  well  known  to  all  those
who  devote  their  attention  to  the  study  of  insanity,  that  an
insane  impulse  may  be  perfectly  uncontrollable,  as  transitory
as  it  is  sudden ,  and  that  during  this  period,  “  an  act  may  be
committed  without  one  moment's  reflection  or  premeditation,
the  individual  being  sometimes  perfectly  conscious  of  what  he
is  doing,  and  sometimes  apparently  not  at  all  so?"

But  we  do  not  rest  the  case  of  M.  Davies  on  this  line  of
argument  alone.  The  brain  of  M.  Davies  was  never  in  a
healthy  state.  It  appears  from  medical  evidence  that  he  had
received  a  blow  on  his  head.  “  He  appeared  to  have  had  a
severe  blow  on  the  left  side  of  the  back  part  of  it."  It  was
given  in  evidence  that  he  had  frequently  fallen  into  a  heavy
sleep  which  lasted  for  hours, — that  in  the  neighbourhood  he
was  called  “  Mad  Davies," — that  he  had  suffered  from  fits —
that  he  had  attempted  to  set  fire  to  his  house  and  to  leap  out
of  window.  These  acts  wrere  proved  not  to  have  been  the
effect  of  intoxication.  His  appearance  was  that  of  a  man  of
weak  mind.  He  was  treated  by  his  wife,  children,  and  neigh¬
bours  as  a  child ;  in  fact,  he  was  the  butt  of  the  neighbour¬
hood.  All  these  facts  were  given  in  evidence  at  the  trial,  and
the  view  we  take  of  his  case  was  placed  strongly  before  the
judge  and  jury  by  respectable  medical  evidence.  Is  it  not,
therefore,  manifest  that  M.  Davies  never  exhibited  the  func¬
tion  of  a  healthy  brain  ?  From  the  evidence  of  Dr.  Hanson
it  appears  that  the  configuration  was  such  as  to  lead  him  to
conclude  that  there  was  a  predisposition  to  insanity.  How¬
ever,  apart  from  original  conformation  there  were  the  marks
of  external  violence.  How  frequently  does  insanity  originate
from  an  injury  to  the  brain  !  If  positive  insanity  is  not  pro¬
duced,  how  frequently  the  character  is  changed,  and  the

*  Dr.  Elliotson  has  published  in  this  journal,  No.  VIII.,  pp.  443-4,  a  strik¬
ing  case  where  there  was  not  time,  and  yet  the  poor  wretch  was  hanged.

VOL.  VII.  D  D


348


Capital  Punishment ;  or,


individual  rendered  wayward  and  imbecile !  In  every  large
community  there  are  many  such  unfortunate  persons,  and  in
every  lunatic  asylum  there  are  cases  where  the  attack  of
insanity  may  be  clearly  traced  to  an  injury,  and  that  injury
probably  inflicted  a  long  time  previous  to  the  manifestation  of
the  disease.  Medical  men  know  that  patients  will  complain
of  pain  in  a  particular  spot  of  the  head,  and  that  on  careful
investigation  they  discover  the  marks  of  previous  violence,
which,  till  the  patients5  attention  is  directed  to  it,  had  com¬
pletely  escaped  their  recollection.  Years  may  have  elapsed,
but  diseased  action  commences  in  those  predisposed  thereto
in  the  spot  originally  injured.  Chronic  inflammation  may
exist  for  some  time  as  a  result  of  the  original  injury,  and
some  peculiarity  of  character  become  inordinately  developed
during  this  period,  and  then  cease  altogether  under  proper
medical  treatment.  This  is  what  we  might  expect  a  priori
in  the  brain,  even  if  we  were  not  prepared  with  facts  to  bear
us  out  in  the  statement,  for  it  is  exactly  what  we  observe  in
other  organs  of  the  body.

In  No.  VIII.,  p.  450,  there  are  some  remarks  by  Dr.
Elliotson  on  the  case  of  Wm.  Crouch,  who  was  hanged  for  the
murder  of  his  wife.  This  unfortunate  man  was  proved  to
have  received  two  injuries  in  the  head,  and  both  of  such  a
character  as  to  lead  his  medical  attendants  to  prognosticate
that  he  would  become  the  subject  of  mental  derangement.
After  the  first  accident  he  became  so  altered  as  to  be  nick¬
named  “  the  half -cracked  man  and  ultimately  was  regarded
by  all  as  “of  weak  intellecf’  and  “incapable  of  understanding.”*

*  “  A  brain/'  says  Dr.  Elliotson,  “  so  injured  would  be  upset  in  its  functions
by  a  quantity  of  fermented  or  distilled  liquids  which  in  health  might  have  been
taken  with  no  obvious  detriment.  I  have  had  many  patients  who  were  furiously
delirious  on  taking  a  single  glass  of  gin,  one  furiously  delirious  from  common
rheumatism  of  the  side  of  the  head,  because  they  had  years  before  sustained  a
severe  injury  of  the  head.  If  the  man  was  at  all  irresponsible  before,  he  cer¬
tainly  must  have  been  completely  so  immediately  after  alcoholic  drink  :  and,  if  it
is  contended  that  he  was  not  irresponsible  before,  no  medical  man  could  doubt
his  irresponsibility  then.  The  judge,  one  of  the  soundest  lawyers,  I  hear,  and
most  humane  man,  of  the  many  sound  lawyers  and  humane  men  now  upon  the
bench,  Baron  Alderson,  1  summed  up  the  evidence,  premising  that,  when  a  plea
of  insanity  was  set  up  in  defence  of  a  crime,  it  was  necessary  to  shew  that  the
insanity  was  produced  by  a  form  of  disease  contained  involuntarily  within  the
afflicted  person,  and  not  produced  by  the  voluntary  act  of  the  individual.  If  a
person  by  drinking  deprived  himself  of  his  senses,  and  whilst  in  that  state  com¬
mitted  a  crime,  he  could  not  plead  the  insanity  of  drunkenness  in  justification,
because  he  voluntarily  deprived  himself  of  the  power  over  his  own  actions.  In
the  present  case,  the  jury  should  consider  whether  it  had  been  proved  that  the
prisoner  committed  the  act  with  which  he  was  charged,  whilst  under  the  influence
of  excitement  produced  by  disease  of  his  brain,  and  not  voluntarily  from  other
causes.  His  lordship  then  read  over  the  entire  of  the  evidence,  commenting
upon  such  parts  as  tended  to  shew  an  aberration  of  the  prisoner's  mind,  and  ob¬
serving  that  there  was  no  proof  of  his  having  drank  anything  more  than  a  pint  of


Killing  according  to  Law.


349


When  he  committed  the  crime  for  which  he  was  executed  lie
was  evidently  labouring  under  disease  of  the  brain.  Six
years  ago  the  following  case  came  under  our  notice  : —

“‘G.  W.,  12  years  old,  received  a  blow  on  the  temple  from  a
cricket-ball,  on  the  5th  day  of  April  last.  He  was  knocked  down
and  remained  insensible  for  several  hours,  but,  from  the  poverty  of
his  parents,  medical  advice  was  not  requested.  Three  weeks  after
the  receipt  of  the  injury  he  was  brought  to  me,  and  his  mother  re¬
lated  the  following  history.  For  several  days  after  the  injury,  he
remained  dull  and  stupid,  manifesting  a  great  disinclination  to  exert
himself,  or  even  to  join  in  the  usual  games  of  play  with  his  brothers.
Slight  spasmodic  twitchings  of  the  leg  and  arm  were  noticed  on  the
opposite  side  to  that  injured,  and  at  the  same  period  a  daily  and  in¬
creasing  change  of  character.  Before  the  accident  he  was  kind  and
affectionate  in  his  manner,  and  particularly  attentive  to  the  commands
and  wishes  of  his  parents,  but  now  he  is  spiteful,  revengeful,  and
perfectly  reckless.  He  is  now  constantly  quarrelling  with  his  brothers
and  sisters,  and  does  not  attend  to  the  orders  of  his  parents.  If  he
is  requested  to  perform  a  duty,  he  is  impertinent,  and  if  checked  in
the  least,  he  swears  and  uses  the  grossest  language.  He  was  never
known  to  swear  before  the  accident,  but  now,  his  mother  says  that

beer  on  the  day  of  the  murder.  He  also  remarked  that  it  was  proved  by  the
evidence  for  the  prosecution  that  the  prisoner  was  in  a  state  of  stupor  both  before
and  immediately  after  the  commission  of  the  deed.'

“How  contrary  to  all  medical  science  are  these  observations  !  The  diseased
condition  of  the  man’s  brain  prevented  him  from  possessing,  or  putting  into
practice,  the  wisdom  of  abstinence,  so  necessary  to  his  welfare.  His  drinking
was  as  venial  as  the  murder.

“  Instead  of  hanging  this  unfortunate  fellow-creature,  the  Government  should
have  him  treated  for  chronic  inflammation  of  his  brain.  He  should  be  kept  in
repose  and  upon  low  diet,  and  leeches  and  other  anti-inflammatory  measures  be
steadily  employed  according  to  circumstances,  till  he  is  well :  and  then  he  should
always  be  more  or  less  looked  after,  because  the  morbid  excitability  once  induced
in  the  brain  by  a  mechanical  injury  often  lasts  in  some  degree  or  other  through  a
long  life.  I  have  known  mischief  take  place  at  the  very  spot  of  an  injury  above
thirty  years  after  the  accident.  Persons,  after  an  injury  of  the  head,  are  seldom
perfectly  safe  afterwards,  unless  they  become  rigid  water-drinkers.

“  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  suppose  that  this  patient  will  be  executed  for  a  deed
resulting  from  the  chronic  inflammation  of  his  brain.  The  punishment  would  be
as  unjustifiable  as  to  hang  a  patient  labouring  under  acute  inflammation  of  his
brain  in  fever  for  any  fatal  violence  he  may  have  committed  upon  his  attendant :
as  irrational  and  cruel  as  to  punish  a  courtier  for  tumbling  over  the  queen  in  a  fit
of  giddiness  occasioned  by  a  previous  injury  of  his  skull,  or  a  boy  whose  stomach
is  diseased  from  a  blow  for  vomiting  over  his  mother.”

“***  For  some  years  past  the  surgeon  has  examined  the  brains  of  those  exe¬
cuted  at  Newgate,  and  casts  have  been  taken  of  their  heads  ;  but  neither  cast  nor
anatomical  examination  was  allowed  in  the  present  instance.  Posterity  will
remark  that  all  this  was  so  late  as  1844. — Zoist .”

Was  examination  of  the  brain  forbidden  by  Government  lest  the  disease  of  it
should  have  been  proved  ? — Zoist.

For  instances  of  insane  murderous  impulse,  see  No.  I.,  pp.  44-5,  with  Baron
Parke’s  remarkable  address  ;  No.  III.,  pp.  246,  247,  256  ;  No.  VIII.,  p.  443. —
Zoist.


D  D  2


350


Capital  Punishment ;  or,


his  language  is  very  bad,  and  that  he  uses  words  which,  till  now,
she  supposed  he  had  never  heard.  He  is  extremely  mischievous.
He  destroys  the  furniture  whenever  he  has  the  opportunity,  and
does  not  confine  himself  to  these  actions,  but  annoys  his  younger
brothers  and  sisters  by  spitting  at  them,  throwing  water  at  them,
and  breaking  their  playthings.  He  was  detected  in  an  attempt  to
fire  a  quantity  of  chips  in  the  cellar  of  his  father’s  house.  He  has
attempted  self-destruction  by  tying  a  piece  of  rope  round  his  neck
and  fastening  it  to  a  nail  in  the  wall  of  the  garden.  He  speaks  of
butchering  the  whole  of  his  family  with  a  mallet  as  soon  as  he  can
obtain  the  opportunity,  and  seems  to  enjoy  the  terror  of  his  mother
and  his  relations,  when  they  become  alarmed  at  the  destructive  na¬
ture  of  his  actions.

“  He  complains  of  no  pain  in  his  head,  and  states  that  he  is
quite  well.  He  answers  questions  during  his  interviews  with  me  with
the  greatest  composure  and  intelligence,  but  the  moment  he  returns
to  his  own  house,  and  is  left  uncontrolled,  his  actions  become  vio¬
lent  in  the  extreme.”*

We  had  lately  an  opportunity  of  ascertaining  the  state  of
this  patient.  He  was  working  as  a  carpenter,  and  to  a  cer¬
tain  extent  obtaining  his  own  livelihood,  but  he  was  subject
to  fits  of  ungovernable  passion,  during  which  he  threatened
all  those  about  him.  His  mother  expressed  her  fears  that
some  day  she  should  hear  that  he  had  committed  murder.
Now,  suppose  this  individual,  ten  or  fifteen  years  hence,
under  some  great  provocation,  or  even  without  it,  commits
murder,  can  it  be  contended  that  he  should  be  made  respon¬
sible  for  his  actions,  and  made  to  suffer  the  penalty  of  public
strangulation?  Nay  more,  suppose  that  under  such  circum¬
stances  it  should  be  proved  that,  for  the  previous  ten  or  fifteen
years,  his  actions  should  have  been  of  such  a  character  as  to
lead  his  neighbours  to  consider  him  a  sane  man,  will  it  be
contended,  in  spite  of  the  most  positive  medical  testimony  to
the  contrary,  that  the  blow  he  received  originally  had  not
some  effect  in  at  last  altering  his  character  and  giving  rise  to
the  abnormal  irritation  of  brain  ?

From  the  attention  bestowed  by  the  judge  and  jury  to  the
medical  evidence  in  the  cases  of  Crouch  and  Davies,  it  is
manifest  that  medical  opinions  are  not  considered  important,
and  any  attempt  to  throw  light  on  the  causes  which  produce
abnormal  action  of  the  brain,  and  thus  frequently  render  the
unfortunate  patient  for  the  time  no  longer  capable  of  con¬
trolling  his  own  actions,  is  considered  a  scientific  intrusion,
but  of  no  value  in  the  legal  discussion  which  decides  on  the
question  of  insanity.  The  parallel  case  of  G.  W.,  with  the
necessary  medical  observations  to  shew  that  Crouch  was  not

*  See  No.  VIII.,  p.  454.


Killing  according  to  Law.


351


a  subject  for  hanging,  was  forwarded  by  Dr.  Elliotson  to  Sir
James  Graham,  then  Home  Secretary,  previously  to  the  exe¬
cution  of  Crouch.  The  receipt  of  it  was  simply  acknow¬
ledged,  and  the  man  was  hanged  immediately  afterwards.
Of  the  30,000  medical  men  in  England  we  feel  quite  sure
that  it  would  be  impossible  to  find  two  who  would  have
sanctioned  the  execution.

In  the  cases  we  have  been  discussing,  the  Judge  usually
tells  the  jury  that,  “  with  regard  to  the  plea  of  insanity,  it  is
necessary  to  prove  that  the  mind  of  the  prisoner  was  in  a
diseased  state  at  the  time  of  committing  the  act.”  But  how
does  this  enlighten  the  jury  in  cases  of  insane  impulse  ?  How
does  this  charge  bear  upon  those  cases  where  the  act  is  com¬
mitted  without  one  moment's  reflection  or  premeditation  ?
The  existence  of  such  cases  and  the  attendant  history  do
not  necessarily  come  within  the  province  of  the  lawyer,  but
to  the  medical  man  they  are  of  daily  occurrence;  and  yet
when  such  cases  are  appealed  to,  and  the  most  positive  and
respectable  testimony  is  brought  to  bear  on  the  particular  case
under  decision,  the  opinion  is  considered  of  no  weight, — the
Home  Secretary  refers  to  the  Judge,  and  the  Judge  refers  to
the  verdict  of  the  Jury;  this  verdict  being  returned,  in  nine
cases  out  of  ten,  in  accordance  with  the  charge  of  the  Judge
himself,  and  by  men  who  have  never  bestowed  one  thought
on  the  subject  previously  to  sitting  in  judgment  on  the  case
before  them,  and  who  most  probably  never  heard  of  such  a
form  of  insanity  as  that  which  we  know  by  the  designation —
insane  impulse.  LEGE

***  This  paper  was  received  in  June,  but  the  press  of  mesmeric  matter
caused  the  postponement  of  its  publication  till  now. — Zoist.


NOTE  BY  DR.  ELLIOTSON.

In  The  Times  of  Nov.  14,  Mr.  Charles  Dickens  gave  his
testimony  to  the  scene  at  the  execution  of  the  Mannings
being  the  same  as  those  above  recorded.  To  prevent  these
disgusting  and  melancholy  occurrences,  it  has  been  proposed
to  hang  within  the  prison.  But  I  hope  this  will  never  be
endured  by  Englishmen.  There  is  something  too  dark,  too
much  like  assassination,*  too  similar  to  the  judicial  murders
by  tyrants  of  past  ages,  whatever  the  number  of  witnesses
present  according  to  law,  for  Englishmen  not  to  recoil  from
it.  The  trial  is  in  open  day,  and  the  horrid  punishment  of
killing  should  be  performed  in  open  day.  We  must  have  no
killing  within  prison  walls.  Rather  than  this  we  should  sub-

*  In  No.  XI.,  p.  276,  I  said,  “  Private  killing  makes  one  think  of  assassi¬
nation,  and,  leading  to  many  feelings,  would  be  intolerable. '*  1845.


3o2


Capital  Punishment ,  fyc.


mit  to  the  brutal  conduct  of  the  crowds  at  executions.  The
argument  that  the  humbler  class  would  not  believe  that  a  con¬
demned  wealthy  or  great  person  had  really  been  executed,  I
pass  over.*  To  argue  for  private  strangling  because  impri¬
sonment  and  transportation  are  not  witnessed  by  the  public
and  yet  are  perfectly  tolerated,  is  fruitless.  Prisoners  at
home  can  be  readily  seen  at  all  times  by  those  who  give  a
sufficient  reason  for  the  wish ;  we  have  the  habeas  corpus  :
and  convicts  in  the  colonies  are  actually  in  public  there,
known  to  all,  and  known  of  by  all  here  who  choose  to  enquire
about  them.  After  all  the  conduct  of  the  populace  is  shewn
to  have  no  lasting  effect.  For  the  second  day  after  the  execu¬
tion  of  the  Mannings, —  the  Thursday,  was  the  day  appointed
for  a  national  thanksgiving  to  God  for  ceasing  to  send  us
the  cholera  for  our  sins  :  and  not  only  were  the  places  of
worship  crowded  by  all  ranks,  but  the  rogues  and  vaga¬
bonds,  who  must  have  formed  the  bulk  of  the  vicious  multi¬
tude  at  the  execution,  desisted,  and  spontaneously  too,  from
their  courses — actually  in  forty-eight  hours  after  their  levity
and  brutality .  ,

“MANSION  HOUSE.

“  Observance  of  the  Day  of  Thanksgiving  in  the  City.
— Yesterday,  several  females  were  brought  before  the  Lord  Mayor
and  Alderman  Carden,  charged,  some  of  them,  with  having  prowled
at  late  hours  about  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Mansion-house,  and
refused  to  move  on,  and  others  with  having  threatened  to  break
lamps  and  windows  if  they  were  not  accommodated  with  places  of
repose.  The  poor  houseless  creatures  having  been  severally  disposed

°f,

“  Alderman  Carden  observed,  upon  looking  over  the  list  of
charges,  that  not  any  of  them  had  been  entered  on  the  police  sheets
as  having  occurred  on  the  day  of  thanksgiving .

“  Mr.  Hodgson,  the  superintendent  of  the  City  police,  said  he
had  to  state  a  circumstance  unparalleled  in  the  history  of  the  force.
From  nine  o’clock  on  Thursday  morning  until  nine  at  night  there  had
not  taken  place  in  the  streets  a  single  case  which  called  for  the  inter¬
ference  of  the  police.  There  did  not  appear  within  the  whole  com¬
pass  of  their  jurisdiction  a  solitary  instance  of  disorder  or  intem¬
perance  of  any  kind,  and  even  in  Petticoat  Lane  and  its  neighbour¬
hood,  which  certainly  comprehended  the  most  riotous  and  troublesome
persons  in  the  City,  there  was  not  the  slightest  disposition  to  break
through  the  solemn  engagement  to  pay  due  observance  to  the  day  of
thanksgiving.  With  respect  to  the  Jews,  the  occasion  was  as  strictly
observed  by  them  as  by  the  most  rigid  Christians,  so  that  the  whole
of  the  City  police  force  might  be  said  to  have  had  a  holiday.

*  See  Mr.  Douglas  Jerrold’s  exquisite  use  of  this  argument  in  No.  XI.,
pp.  275-6.


Report  of  the  Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


353


“  Alderman  Carden  said  the  account  given  by  the  superintendent
exactly  corresponded  with  what  he  had  observed  himself.  Even
Sunday  in  the  City  was  not  to  be  found  so  free  from  interruptions
and  irregularities  as  the  day  of  thanksgiving  had  proved  to  be.

“  The  Lord  Mayor  said  it  was  most  remarkable  that  in  the  six
divisions  of  the  City  police  no  case  of  complaint  upon  any  subject
had  occurred,  although  the  area  was  so  extensive,  and  he  considered
it  to  be  ominous  of  a  tranquil  and  serviceable  mayoralty.

“  Michael  Haydon  and  others  of  the  most  active  officers  of  the
force  assured  his  lordship  that  they  had  been  all  taken  by  surprise
at  so  sudden  a  change.” — Daily  News,  Nov.  17.

But  we  must  have  done  with  killing  according  to  law,  whe¬
ther  within  prison  walls,  or  before  a  vicious  populace.

“  Iliacos  intra  muros  peccatur,  et  extra.”

Horat.,  Ep.  i.,  2,  16.

Capital  punishment  must  be  abolished  A  Christian,
though  he  be  an  inexorable  Dean  of  Exeter,  ought  to  shudder
at  the  thought  of  abbreviating  the  term  for  a  sinner's  repent¬
ance  one  single  moment.  The  longest  life  he  ought  to  think
not  too  long  for  repentance.  Mrs.  Manning  was  only  just
beginning  to  shew  signs  of  softening  when  she  was  “inex¬
orably”  strangled,  and,  to  use  the  language  of  the  day,  sud¬
denly  sent  into  the  presence  of  her  God.


II.  “  Second  half-yearly  Report  of  the  Calcutta  Mesmeric
Hospital.  From  Is/  March  to  1st  September ,  1849.”  With
a  Letter  published  in  the  Calcutta  Star  from  a  Visitor  to
the  Hospital ;  and  a  private  letter  from  Dr.  Esdaile  to
Dr.  Elliotson.  Communicated  by  Dr.  Elliotson.

“  To  Sir  H.  M.  Elliot,  James  Hume,  Esq.,  the  Rev.  Mr.
La  Croix,  Dr.  Martin,  Rajah  Kali  Krishna,  Rajah
Sutt  Churn  Ghosal,  Rajah  Pertaub  Chunder  Sing,
Baboo  Ramapersaud  Roy,  Members  of  the  Mesmeric
Hospital  Committee.

“  Gentlemen, — I  have  the  honor  to  present  you  with  a
summary  of  our  proceedings  during  the  last  six  months,
which,  it  is  hoped,  will  be  sufficiently  satisfactory  to  you  and
the  subscribers  to  the  hospital.

In  the  last  six  months  have  been  performed.  Previous  half  year.

Severe  operations  .  32  32

Mesmeric  .  31  31

Deaths  .  2  1

Miscellaneous  minor  operations. .  362  278

Dispensary  patients  prescribed  for  1068  455


354


Second  half-yearly  Report  of  the


Average  monthly  expense  includ-  ditto  ditto  without

ing  20  Rs.  a  month  to  the  Lu-  allowance  to  Asy-

natic  Asylum .  3/7  lum.  . .  Rs.  285

“  The  two  deaths  ivere  caused  by  cholera  and  lock-jaw.
Among  these  operations  are  : —

One  Scrotal  Tumor,  weighing.  .  96  lb.  patient’s  age  50

One  ditto .  85  lb .  60

One  ditto .  60  lb .  50

One  ditto  .  64  lb .  ...  30

One  ditto .  45  lb .  58

One  ditto . 40  lb .  28

“  All  of  these  cases  have  been  discharged  cured.

“  Regarding  the  important  point  of  ultimate  mortality,
our  results  are  surely  very  striking  and  satisfactory,  and  well
deserve  the  attention  of  the  practical  surgeons.  In  one
hundred  consecutive  operations  for  scrotal  tumors,  from  the
size  of  a  man’s  head,  to  100  and  odd  lbs.,  there  have  been
only  five  deaths ;  but  in  no  instance  has  death  been  caused
directly  by  the  operation,  or  followed  soon  afterwards,  but  at
the  distance  of  many  days  or  weeks,  in  consequence  of  lock¬
jaw,  fever,  cholera,  and  exhaustion  of  the  system;  from  what
may  be  called  hospital  diseases  and  accidents.  I  very  much
doubt  whether  an  equal  number  of  consecutive  amputations
of  a  joint  of  the  fingers  and  toes  (in  all  states  of  the  constitu¬
tion)  could  be  performed  in  any  hospital  with  a  smaller  mor¬
tality  than  five  per  cent,  arising  from  accidents  in  the  course
of  the  cure.

“  This  has  been  going  on  here  for  a  period  of  four  years ,

WITH  ALL  THE  REGULARITY  OE  A  LAW  OF  NATURE,  and  yet

the  medical  profession  are  kept  in  total  ignorance  of  it  by
their  journals,  which  dare  not  let  the  facts  be  known,  because
the  editors  had  long  ago,  in  presumptuous  ignorance,  declared
the  thing  to  be  impossible.  But  Calcutta  is  not  Timbuctoo  :
public  opinion  will  soon  compel  them  to  let  the  truth  be
heard,  and,  in  the  mean  time,  men  will  know  what  to  think
of  a  cause  that  can  only  be  propped  up  by  concealment  and
the  suppression  of  evidence.

“  If  any  persons  in  Calcutta  still  affect  to  disbelieve  in  the
reality  of  painless  mesmeric  operations,  it  must  be  because
they  prefer  doubt  to  certainty,  ignorance  to  knowledge,  and
are  afraid  of  having  their  infallible  judgments  corrected  by
the  evidence  of  their  senses.  They  have  been  publicly  invited
to  come  and  see  for  themselves,  if  they  cannot  or  will  not
believe  the  testimony  of  others,  and,  if  they  do  not  choose  to
accept  this  invitation,  they  must  excuse  my  taking  any  far¬
ther  trouble  about  them.  Our  success  in  rendering  persons


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital .


355


insensible  to  the  severest  torture  seems  to  increase  with  prac¬
tice,  and  I  have  still  the  satisfaction  to  report,  that  no  one
has  ever  seen  an  injurious  symptom  to  attend  or  follow  the
induction  of  the  mesmeric  trance  for  surgical  purposes.  Hun¬
dreds  of  spectators  in  this  town  can  testify  to  this,  and  I
might  cite  a  score  of  medical  men  by  name  who  have  wit¬
nessed  my  operations,  and  call  upon  them  to  say  whether
anything  could  be,  in  general,  more  satisfactory  than  what
they  saw,  and  whether  they  would  not  always  infinitely  pre¬
fer  gaining  their  object  by  mesmerism,  rather  than  by  any
known  means,  if  they  had  their  choice.  This  I  generally
have,  (and  so  may  all  who  will  use  the  same  means) ;  and  I
trust,  that  you,  gentlemen,  and  the  public,  will  not  think  me
obstinate  and  hobby-horsical  in  holding  to  that  which  has
been  proved  to  be  the  best,  and  in  resorting  only  to  inferior
and  hazardous  agents ,  when  the  higher  and  always  safe  power
has  disappointed  me.  I  should  despise  myself,  if,  out  of  mere
pertinacity  and  wrong-headedness,  I  continued  to  induce  the
public  to  spend  their  money  in  support  of  an  antiquated  worn
out  system;  once  of  some  utility  but  now  only  a  hobby  of  a
few  unpractical  speculators.  But  unless  I  greatly  deceive
myself,  I  am  nothing ,  if  not  practical ;  and,  if  any  doubt  exists
among  the  public  and  medical  profession  in  India  of  the

SUPERIORITY  OF  MESMERISM  OYER  ALL  DRUGS  WHATEVER,  AS
A  MEANS  OF  INDUCING  INSENSIBILITY  TO  PAIN,  I  shall  be

glad  to  demonstrate  the  fact  by  comparative  operations  to  any
extent  that  may  be  deemed  conclusive.  But,  even  if  mesmerism
were  superseded  by  some  perfectly  innocent  drug  for  surgical
purposes,  it  would  still  be  of  great  service  to  the  surgeons  in
the  medical  treatment  of  surgical  diseases.  For,  by  its  aid,  he
will  often  be  able  to  save  his  patients  much  pain  and  distress
during  their  cure,  and  will  frequently  even  be  spared  the
painful  necessity  of  lopping  off  the  limbs  and  organs  of  his
patients  to  save  their  lives.  Although  many  persons  have
little  or  even  no  pain  after  the  operation,  others  suffer
severely  after  an  interval :  but  it  is  often  in  our  power  to
extinguish  the  pain  in  a  few  minutes  by  throwing  them  back
into  the  trance,  and,  on  waking  the  second  time,  they  have
usually  forgotten  their  first  waking,  and  subsequent  suffering,
as  two  members  of  the  committee,  Hr.  Martin  and  the  Bev.
Mr.  La  Croix,  witnessed  in  the  course  of  last  month.

“  It  not  unfrequently  happens  also  that  a  second  opera¬
tion  is  required  for  the  removal  of  mortifying  parts :  in  these
cases,  the  patients  are  very  readily  again  entranced,  and  are
quite  callous  to  the  breaking  up  of  new  adhesions,  and  the
cutting  through  of  granulating  flesh.  Or  extensive  wounds


356


Second  half-yearly  Report  of  the


take  on  a  tendency  to  slough  or  mortify,  and  under  these
circumstances  spunging  the  surface  of  the  sore  with  undiluted
nitric  acid  is  very  effectual  in  stopping  the  disease.  But  the
pain  from  this  is  so  horrible  when  the  sore  is  extensive,  that
one  resorts  to  it  with  the  greatest  reluctance.  Patients  in
this  state,  although  in  great  pain,  are  usually  very  sensitive
to  the  mesmeric  influence,  and  in  a  few  minutes  the  most
extensive  sore  may  be  covered  with  the  acid  without  a  sign
of  irritation  in  the  whole  body ,  and,  strange  to  say,  the
patient  on  waking  is  not  only  free  from  any  feeling  of  burn¬
ing  in  the  part,  but  is  relieved  of  the  pain  he  was  suffering
from  when  he  went  to  sleep.  This  singular  result  arises,  I
presume,  from  the  complaining  nerves  of  the  surface  having
been  effectually  killed  in  the  absence  of  consciousness,  and,  as
dead  nerves  cannot  tell  tales,  any  more  than  dead  men,  the
patient  is  as  effectually  relieved  as  a  person  who  has  had  the
nerve  of  his  tooth  burned  with  a  red  hot  wire  or  nitric  acid.
Thence  it  occurred  to  me, — ‘  would  not  this  be  an  effectual
mode  of  preventing  all  re-action  and  pain  in  a  wound  after
operation  ?’  I  have  had  only  one  opportunity  of  making  the
experiment  since  the  idea  occurred,  but  that  was  most  con¬
clusive.  A  man  who  had  a  circle  of  troublesome  excrescences,
circum  anum,  had  them  leisurely  pared  off  with  a  knife  and
snipped  out  with  crooked  scissors,  and  then  nitric  acid  was
applied  to  the  bleeding  circumference.  The  man  did  not
awake  till  half  an  hour  afterwards,  and  had  no  pain  or  burn¬
ing  in  the  part,  nor  had  he  during  his  stay  in  the  hospital.
The  frequenters  of  our  hospital  are  aware  that  mesmerism
is  often  extemporaneously  prescribed  as  the  surest  and
speediest  means  of  giving  relief  in  many  painful  affections.
The  objection  to  the  time  it  takes  to  affect  the  constitution  at
first,  is  altogether  futile  in  the  subsequent  treatment.  The
debility  of  convalescence  increases  the  susceptibility  of  the
system,  and,  when  mesmerism  is  resorted  to  for  any  disagree¬
able  symptoms  that  may  arise,  it  will  usually  be  found  that
it  becomes  daily  easier,  till  the  mere  regard  of  the  mesmeriser
is  sufficient  without  moving  a  finger.  The  following  are
instances  of  the  irresistible  power  we  wield  over  the  system
when  it  has  been  once  subdued.  Being  desirous  to  show  a
gentleman  one  day  the  invasion  and  progress  of  mesmeric
sleep,  I  ordered  one  of  the  convalescent  patients  to  be
brought  to  us.  He  entered  the  room  doubled  up  and  pressing
his  hands  upon  his  belly,  complaining  of  severe  colic,  and,  on
being  desired  to  sit  in  a  chair,  he  begged  to  be  excused,  as
he  could  not  bear  the  sitting  posture.  Having  persuaded
him  to  sit  down,  he  was  entranced  in  two  or  three  minutes ;


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  357

and,  being  soon  after  demesmerised,  he  awoke  quite  well  and
free  from  pain.

“  On  going  to  the  hospital  another  day,  I  was  informed  that
a  patient  who  had  been  operated  upon  eight  days  ago  had
that  morning  been  attacked  with  lock-jaw.  I  found  him  suf¬
fering  also  from  general  rigidity  of  the  body,  with  severe  con¬
vulsions  occurring  every  few  seconds,  and  his  body  was  bent
backwards  into  an  arch.  He  was  ordered  to  be  mesmerised,
and  in  ten  minutes  I  pared  off  the  unhealthy  parts  of  the
wound,  and  steeped  the  entire  surface  in  nitric  acid  with  the
hope  of  extinguishing  all  local  irritation.  To  all  this  he  was
quite  insensible,  and  the  jaw  became  relaxed ;  but  the  con¬
vulsions  and  rigidity  were  only  moderated.  Next  day,  the
spasms  had  increased  and  chloroform  was  given  to  him,  but
only  with  the  effect  of  making  him  delirious,  and  he  died  in
the  evening.

“  The  first  dressing  of  extensive  wounds  is  sometimes  as
painful  as  the  original  operation,  and  it  is  superfluous  to  say
that  we  can  generally,  with  little  trouble,  save  the  patient  all
the  pain  and  irritation  arising  from  this  process.

“  It  has  been  said  that  the  curative  poivers  of  mesmerism
ivill  occasionally  save  the  surgeon  the  painful  necessity  of  per¬
forming  dangerous  operations  upon  his  patients ,  of  which  accept
the  following  illustrations.  When  going  round  the  lunatic
asylum  with  Dr.  Strong  one  day,  I  saw  one  of  the  patients
with  his  hand  in  a  shocking  state  of  disease ;  it  was  thrice  the
natural  size,  undermined  with  ulcers  all  over,  and  the  fingers
were  contracted  and  as  immoveable  as  the  claws  of  a  dead
bird :  the  disease  was  of  a  year’s  standing.  It  appeared  to
me  that  amputation  would  be  necessary,  and,  Dr.  Strong
agreeing,  the  man  was  sent  to  my  hospital  to  be  entranced
and  operated  upon.  Dr.  Webb  also  saw  him,  and  was  of
the  same  opinion.  But,  luckily  for  the  man,  he  was  not
easily  subdued,  and  after  a  few  days  I  remarked  such  an  im¬
provement  in  his  general  appearance ,  that  I  resolved  to  attempt
to  save  his  hand  with  the  help  of  mesmerism.  The  sinuses
were  laid  upon,  and  he  was  mesmerised  both  locally  and
generally  for  an  hour  daily.  The  hand  rapidly  improved,
and  at  the  end  of  six  weeks  he  was  sent  back  to  Dr.  Strong’s
hospital  with  his  hand  of  its  natural  size,  possessing  some
power  of  moving  the  fingers,  and  perfectly  sane.  He  was  im¬
mediately  discharged  as  cured  by  Dr.  Strong.

“  On  the  3rd  of  August,  a  Brahmin  came  to  the  hospital
with  a  strangulated  rupture,  attended  with  the  usual  pain,
constipation,  and  vomiting  :  the  gut  had  been  down  for  twenty-
four  hours.  I  exhausted  myself  in  vain  endeavours  to  make


358


Second  half-yearly  Report  of  the

it  return,  and  then,  desiring  him  to  be  entranced,  if  possible,
I  left  the  hospital,  bidding  them  send  for  me  if  they  succeeded.
Hearing  nothing  more  of  him  that  day,  I  went  next  day  to
the  hospital,  fearing  to  be  obliged  to  operate  upon  him,  but
was  relieved  by  being  told  that  he  had  been  entranced  within
an  hour,  that  the  bowel  then  went  up  of  itself  without  awaking
him ,  and  that,  having  slept  for  an  hour  afterwards,  he  then
got  up,  relieved  himself,  and  went  home  quite  well.

“  This  is  the  third  case  of  the  kind  that  has  occurred,  and
is  readily  explained  by  the  complete  relaxation  of  the  abdominal
muscles  in  the  trance,  by  which  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen  is
restored  to  its  natural  dimensions,  and  room  made  for  the
protruded  bowel  to  return.

“  It  must  be  evident  to  every  one  whose  mind  is  not  cast
in  the  most  contracted  mould  or  petrified  by  routine,  that  so
powerful  and  benignant  an  agent  in  the  treatment  of  surgical
diseases  must  be  equally  efficacious  in  curing  or  relieving
many  diseases  within  the  province  of  the  physician,  unless
we  suppose  mankind  to  have  a  distinct  surgical  and  medical
constitution.  The  power  of  modifying  with  safety  the  human
system,  and  of  introducing  new  movements  into  it  opposed  to
the  continuance  of  diseased  action,  is  the  essential  requisite
in  every  remedy ;  and  where  shall  we  find  an  agent  capable
of  modifying  innocuously  the  nervous  system  (the  main-spring
of  life)  to  the  same  extent  as  is  done  by  mesmerism?  If
asked, — Svhat  single  power  do  you  covet  most  for  the  cure  of
disease  V  I  should  reply, — f  enable  me  to  extinguish  pain
and  to  put  people  to  sleep  as  long  as  is  desirable,  without  any
of  the  subsequent  bad  effects  of  narcotic  drugs,  and  I  will
engage  to  cure  a  great  variety  of  complaints  by  this  agency
alone?

“  It  must  be  evident,  that,  if  the  restorative  powers  of  life
are  not  exhausted,  they  will  act  with  vigour  in  the  absence  of
all  pain  and  irritation,  and  that  the  diseased  influence  under
such  a  state  of  things  would  be  often  thrown  off  by  the
unaided  conservative  efforts  of  nature.  Wonderful  to  say,
this  greatly  desiderated  and  almost  unhoped  for  curative  agent,
not  only  exists  in  nature,  but  is  an  essential  element  of  the  human
constitution  ( varying  in  different  persons,  of  course ,  like  all
other  bodily  and  mental  gifts,)  and  most  persons  possess  the
power  of  curing  others,  or  of  being  themselves  cured  occa¬
sionally  by  an  inherent  sanative  influence  propagable  between
different  individuals ;  for  health  is  transmissible  as  well  as
disease,  it  appears.  So  remarkable  is  the  susceptibility  of
the  natives  of  this  country  to  the  mesmeric  influence,  that  I
could  with  considerable  confidence  undertake  to  bring  ninety


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


359


out  of  a  hundred  patients  in  any  hospital  in  Calcutta  under
our  control,  in  the  course  of  15  or  20  days,  and  a  new  source
of  health  and  comfort  might  thus  be  afforded  to  the  inmates  of
our  general  hospitals.  Hereupon  certain  persons  will  raise  a
cry  that — f  He  wishes  to  throw  the  accumulated  experience  of
ages,  as  well  as  physic,  to  the  dogs,  and  to  rely  upon  mes¬
merism  exclusively  as  the  Universal  Medicine.3  Yet  these
reckless  misrepresented  well  know  that  they  are  the  advocates
of  an  exclusive  system  of  medicine,  and  pretenders  to  final
knowledge,  while  my  sole  object  has  been  to  unite  and  not  to
dissociate  mesmerism  from  medicine,  and  that  my  constant
aim  has  been  to  add  this  new  healing  knowledge  to  wrhat  we
already  possess,  being  painfully  oppressed  with  a  sense  of  the
miserable  impotency  of  our  present  resources  in  combating  the
host  of  evils  that  human  flesh  is  heir  to.

“  The  following  are  a  few  examples  of  the  unaided  power
of  mesmerism  in  subduing  or  relieving  diseases  which  often
baffle  the  skill  of  the  most  experienced  physician.

“  Sreenath  Sen,  aged  30,  looks  50 ;  came  to  the  hospital
crawling  along  with  the  help  of  a  pole :  his  feet  were  per¬
manently  turned  out  at  right  angles,  and  could  not  be  moved
inwards :  all  his  joints  were  stiff  and  ached,  and  he  looked
more  like  a  decrepid  ourang  outang  than  a  man.  He  had
suffered  from  rheumatism  for  the  last  six  years,  and  for  two
years  had  been  in  his  present  state.  After  fifteen  days*  mes¬
merising,  he  began  to  improve,  and  at  the  end  of  two  months
his  feet  had  resumed  their  natural  position  and  freedom  of
motion ;  all  his  other  aches  had  disappeared  and  he  left  the
hospital  walking  freely  and  alertly.

“  Lunkoo,  aged  35,  has  had  the  shaking  palsy  for  a  year,
being  the  sequel  of  a  severe  fever.  He  cannot  stand  without
support  on  both  sides ;  his  body  shakes  continually ;  the  hands
are  half  closed  and  cannot  be  shut  or  opened  farther;  he  can
only  raise  his  hands  half  way  to  his  head,  and  his  speech  is
nearly  inarticulate.  He  can  now,  at  the  end  of  two  months,
walk  after  a  fashion  with  the  help  of  a  stick,  shut  and  open
his  hands  forcibly,  and  raise  his  arms  to  the  natural  extent
above  his  head ;  he  speaks  much  better  and  the  shaking  of  his
body  is  much  diminished.

“I  do  not  expect  to  cure  this  man,  but  I  am  confident
physic  would  have  done  him  no  good.  Palsy  arising  from  old
age  or  organic  disease  is  of  course  as  incurable  by  mesmerism
as  by  every  thing  else,  but  there  seems  to  be  some  excitability
left  in  this  man’s  nervous  system,  and  it  may  be  still  farther
roused  by  the  mesmeric  stimulus.

“  Sheik  Bucksh,  aged  40,  complaining  of  pain  in  the  head


360


Second  Half-yearly  Report  of  the


(neuralgia  or  tic  douloureux )  for  two  months,  was  dismissed
cured  after  twenty  days  mesmerising.

“  Chucker  Singh,  afflicted  with  pain  and  stiffness  in  his
back  for  ten  months,  was  discharged  cured  after  a  month.

“  Allup  Khan,  aged  26,  with  a  stiff  and  painful  leg  (sci¬
atica)  for  eight  months  and  also  cured  in  a  month.

“  But  much  of  our  labour  in  medical  cases  is  thrown  away
from  the  patients  not  being  in  the  hospital,  as  they  come  and
leave  off  when  they  please.  It  is  in  large  General  Hospitals,
where  the  patients  are  under  our  command,  that  the  extensive
utility  of  mesmerism  in  the  treatment  of  numerous  medical
diseases  may  be  satisfactorily  demonstrated  on  a  great  scale.

“  Having  expressed  my  desire  to  you,  gentlemen,  to  avail
myself  of  Dr.  Strong's  liberal  offer  to  try  the  effect  of  mes¬
merism  upon  the  inmates  of  the  Insane  Hospital  here,  you
were  kind  enough  to  sanction  a  monthly  expenditure  of
20  Us.  for  this  purpose,  which  has  been  spent  in  paying  ten
of  the  guards  2  Bs.  a  month  each  to  act  as  mesmerisers.
Being  familiar  with  the  soothing  and  strengthening  effects  of
mesmerism  upon  the  debilitated  and  irritable  nervous  systems
of  the  sane,  and  believing  that  insanity,  in  general,  originates
in  debility  or  functional  derangement  of  the  brain,  I  expected
to  find  mesmerism  of  service  in  the  treatment  of  madness,
like  every  thing  else  that  restores  tone  and  regularity  to  the
system.  But  functional  derangement  of  the  brain,  if  long
neglected,  becomes  as  inveterate  as  other  chronic  diseases  of
function,  and  success  under  any  treatment  will  mainly  depend
upon  early  attention  being  paid  to  the  case.  The  Asylum
here  only  contains  the  most  unfavourable  and  disheartening
subjects  to  work  upon;  the  inmates  being  generally  poor
friendless  wretches,  picked  up  by  the  Police  in  highways,  or
confined  by  order  of  the  magistrate  for  offences  committed  in
paroxysms  of  madness.  We  have  seldom  any  previous  history
of  the  individual  to  enable  us  to  guess  whether  the  disease  is
one  of  organic  lesion  or  functional  derangement  only  of  the
brain,  and  possibly  the  persons  may  never  have  been  sane  in
their  lives ;  under  these  circumstances,  any  success  whatever
from  a  new  mode  of  treatment  would  surely  be  very  satisfac¬
tory  and  encouraging.  By  habitually  expecting  little,  and
being  thankful  for  the  smallest  favor  from  nature,  I  have
generally  had  my  expectations  more  than  realized.

“  The  patients  were  taken  in  the  order  of  their  names  in
the  Begister,  and  none  were  rejected,  except  for  old  age  or
self-evident  idiotcy :  care  being  also  taken  that  the  persons
were  then  perfectly  mad,  lest  a  lucid  interval  might  be
the  commencement  of  a  permanent  cure.  During  the  last


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.


3G1


six  months,  thirty-seven  persons  have  been  mesmerised,  and
the  results  are  : —

8  cured.

1  cured  and  relapsed.

18  no  change.

1  died.

9  under  treatment — 5  much  improved.

37

“  As  I  mentioned,  we  found  the  insane  as  readily  affected
as  the  sane ;  many  of  the  patients  being  thrown  into  the
trance,  although  it  was  not  desired  to  do  so,  it  not  being
thought  necessary.  One  morning  I  found  a  new  man  being
mesmerised,  without  orders ;  the  native  doctor  said  that  he
had  come  to  the  hospital  that  morning,  and,  as  his  throat  was
cut,  he  had  desired  him  to  be  entranced,  if  possible,  to  have
it  sewn  up.  On  examining  the  man  I  found  him  intensely
entranced  (after  half  an  hour),  and  fit  to  bear  any  operation,
but,  I  not  having  the  necessary  instruments  at  hand,  it  was  put
off.  Next  day,  he  was  again  found  entranced,  and,  the  edges
of  the  wound  having  become  callous,  they  were  pared  raw
with  a  knife,  and  the  wound  was  then  brought  together  with
stitches  and  plaster.  He  was  in  no  way  disturbed  by  this,
and  on  waking  was  surprised  to  find  himself  no  longer
breathing  through  the  hole  in  his  neck.  Several  of  the  men
dated  their  recovery  from  a  certain  day,  saying  that  after
awaking  on  such  a  day  they  had  felt  their  f  heads  lightened /
or  their  (  hearts  opened and  their  conduct  and  appearance
agreed  with  this  statement.  The  rapid  change  effected  in
one  man,  named  Beekoram,  was  very  striking.  When  brought
before  us,  he  was  the  very  picture  of  a  moping  madman,  his
mind  and  body  being  equally  listless  and  apathetic ;  his  coun¬
tenance  was  void  of  expression,  and  no  rational  answers  to
questions  could  be  got  from  him.  This  was  one  of  the  men
who  passed  into  the  trance,  and  at  the  end  of  ten  days  he
was  absolutely  a  new  being ,  and  had  become  as  active  and  in¬
telligent  as  he  had  formerly  been  torpid  and  stupid.

“  Dr.  Strong  one  day  asked  me  in  conversation  if  there
was  any  reason  to  suppose  that  the  natives  of  this  country
knew  mesmerism  before  we  introduced  it  among  them.  I
replied  that  it  could  not  be  reasonably  doubted,  and  that
their  medical  conjurers  are  often  genuine  mesmerisers,  as  I
have  described  in  my  Mesmerism  in  India.  This  has  been
confirmed  from  different  quarters,  and  especially  by  Dr.
Davidson,  late  resident  at  Jeyepore.  This  gentleman,  visit¬
ing  our  hospital  and  seeing  the  mesmerisers  stroking  and


362


Second  Half-yearly  Report  of  the


breathing  upon  the  patients,  said,  f  I  now  understand  what
the  ‘ jar-phoonk’  of  Upper  India  means;  it  is  nothing  but
mesmerism/  Being  requested  to  explain  himself,  he  con¬
tinued  : — f  Many  of  my  people,  after  I  had  tried  in  vain  to
cure  them  of  different  severe  complaints,  used  to  ask  leave
for  several  weeks  to  be  treated  by  the  Jadoo-wallah,  or  con¬
jurer;  and,  to  my  great  surprise,  they  often  returned  quite
well,  and,  in  reply  to  my  enquiries,  they  always  said  that
they  had  undergone  a  process  called  ‘jar-phoonk.’  I  could
never  understand  what  this  was,  but  I  now  see  it  before  me;
it  is  the  combination  of  stroking  and  breathing  ;  jama ,  being
to  stroke ,  and  ‘  phoonka,’  to  breathe;  which  very  correctly
describes  the  mesmeric  process/

“  This  conversation  with  Dr.  Strong  took  place  in  the  pre¬
sence  of  the  mesmerisers  and  patients;  and,  turning  to  the
former,  I  asked  if  any  of  them  knew  what  the  jar-phoonk
was  in  Upper  India,  but  they  were  chiefly  Bengalees,  and
had  not  heard  of  it.  Beekoram,  who  had  been  listening,  said,
‘  Jar-phoonk  ?  Oh  yes,  I  know  it, — I  am  an  up-countryman,
and  will  tell  you  all  about  it ;  this  is  the  way  the  Jadoo-wallahs
do;'1  and  he  went  through  the  process  with  great  precision,
pretty  much  as  I  have  described  it  as  practised  in  Bengal.
This  man,  and  three  other  recovered  patients,  were  taught  to
mesmerise ,  and  in  a  few  trials  subdued  their  subjects  as  well
as  could  be  desired,  and,  as  a  moral  discipline,  they  were
required  to  report  upon  the  conduct  of  their  patients  during
the  day,  which  they  did  very  satisfactorily  every  morning.
These  men,  being  criminals,  have  not  been  discharged,  and
may  be  conversed  with  in  the  hospital  now.

“  Dr.  Kean,  of  Berhampore,  writes  to  me  that  he  has
had  much  more  striking  success  in  his  Lunatic  Asylum,  pro¬
bably  owing  to  more  regular  superintendence,  which  is  indis¬
pensable  ;  for  if  not  done  with  a  will,  it  need  not  be  done
at  all.

“  Dr.  Kean  says  : — f  Taking  a  hasty  glance  over  the  years
1847  and  1848,  I  see  that  about  74  patients  were  mesmer¬
ised,  and  that  of  these,  64  were  discharged  cured  to  all  ap¬
pearance,  and  I  think  it  has  been  successful  in  every  case  of
epilepsy/

“  It  thus  appears  that  mesmerism  is  likely  to  be  as  ser¬
viceable  in  the  treatment  of  insanity  as  it  is  in  general  me¬
dicine  and  the  practice  of  surgery,  and  I  should  like  extremely
to  prosecute  the  subject  to  the  extent  it  deserves,  both  for  its
physical  and  metaphysical  interest ;  for  the  physical  effects  of
mesmerism  comprise  only  one-half  of  the  subject,  and  we
must  be  familiar  with  both  the  bodily  and  mental  phenomena


I


Calcutta  Mesmeric  Hospital.  363

before  we  can  attempt  to  reason  with  any  success  upon  the
nature  and  laws  which  govern  this  wonderful  vital  agent.

“  It  would  fill  a  book  if  I  now  related  all  the  marvellous
bodily  and  mental  phenomena  we  have  witnessed ;  but,  as
those  reports  are  meant  to  be  purely  utilitarian,  this  will  be
better  done  at  another  time  and  place.

“  If  it  is  true, — f  That  the  proper  study  of  mankind  is
man/  there  can  be  no  branch  of  human  knowledge  more
deserving  the  attention  of  all  practical  and  reflecting  minds
than  mesmerism ;  for  it  contains  an  inexhaustible  fund  of
usefulness  and  instructive  speculation.  This  double  and  per¬
manent  interest  which  mesmerism  has  for  the  human  race,
must  soon  attract  the  notice  of  the  workers  and  thinkers  in
England  ;  and  Calcutta  will  receive  due  honor  for  having  been
the  first  city  in  the  British  dominions  to  support  an  institution
for  the  cultivation  of  this  important  branch  of  human  know¬
ledge.  But  as  long  as  the  exclusion  of  mesmerism  from  the
public  Hospitals  of  Calcutta  renders  a  separate  establishment
necessary,  I  should  wish  to  tax  the  liberality  of  the  public  as
lightly  as  possible.  If  the  native  community  of  Calcutta
values  the  Mesmeric  Hospital,  and  thinks  the  subject  is  of
national  importance,  it  is  necessary  for  it  to  make  some
slight  exertions  to  preserve  a  useful  establishment  till  the
progress  of  time  and  public  opinion  compel  the  Government
Hospital  to  attend  to  the  wants  and  wishes  of  the  people.  I
do  not  grudge  my  gratuitous  labours ;  provided  the  public
show  that  some  value  is  attached  to  them,  and  surely  there
ought  to  be  no  difficulty  in  raising  a  monthly  income  of
Us.  350  among  the  thousands  of  rich  natives  here,  many  of
whom  could  afford  the  whole  sum  without  feeling  it.

“A  few  gentlemen,  paying  largely  and  liberally,  chiefly
support  the  Hospital  at  present ;  but  I  hope  to  be  able  to  re¬
lieve  them  soon  by  the  native  community  coming  forward
more  generally  to  share  the  expense.  I  should  like  to  see
the  Hospital  supported  by  numerous  small  subscriptions,  say
of  Us.  3  each,  and  thus  be  enabled  to  do  much  good  without
the  slightest  inconvenience  to  any  one.

“  Fifty-four  persons,  who  were  miserable  burdens  to  them¬
selves  and  others,  have  been  restored  to  comfort  and  useful¬
ness  during  the  last  year;  many  of  them  Brahmins  and
persons  in  good  circumstances  who  would  not  have  gone  to
any  other  Hospital;  and  I  put  it  to  the  native  society  to  say
whether  the  support  of  such  an  institution  is  not  as  good  a
deed  as  anv  recommended  in  the  Shasters.

"James  Esdaile,  M.D.,

“  Marine  Surgeon  ”

E  E


VOL.  VII.


A  Visit  to  the  Mesmeric  Hospital.


364.


“  A  Visit  to  the  Mesmeric  Hospital.

“  Nihil  a  me  alienum  puto,  &c.

<(  TO  TIIE  EDITOR  OF  THE  CALCUTTxY  STAR.

“  Dear  Sir, — Although  a  strong  believer  in  the  reality  and
utility  of  mesmerism  without  having  seen  it  in  any  way  made
use  of,  I  went  the  other  day  to  the  native  hospital  and
through  the  kind  attention  of  Dr.  Esdaile  saw  sufficient  to
convert  the  most  sceptical,  always  supposing  him  to  be  open
to  conviction  as  a  man  of  honour  and  a  gentleman.  I  congra¬
tulated  myself  on  the  occasion  that  I  had  taken  the  trouble
to  make  myself  acquainted  with  the  subject  before  proceeding
to  doubt  its  existence  or  declare  it  to  be  humbug ,  and  had  the
satisfaction  to  find  that  what  I  believed  in  theory  was  com¬
pletely  borne  out  in  practice.

“  After  my  inspecting  several  patients  who  had  been  ope¬
rated  on  for  painful  scrotal  tumors  of  various  kinds,  Dr.  Esdaile
kindly  proceeded  to  mesmerise  a  man  of  a  strong  and  healthy
appearance,  a  convalescent  who  had  had  a  tumor  weighing
some  60  pounds  removed  from  him,  and  was  very  sensitive  to
the  mesmeric  influence.  Dr.  Esdaile  made  him  sit  down  on
a  chair,  and,  placing  himself  opposite,  willed  that  he  should  go
to  sleep ;  and  in  four  or  five  minutes,  in  spite  of  the  man’s
obvious  efforts  to  keep  himself  awake,  he  was  in  a  state  of  pro¬
found  coma.  He  answered  several  questions  put  to  him  by
Dr.  Esdaile,  but  in  the  curt  and  indisposed  style  to  answer
of  a  man  who  felt  compelled  to  sleep,  and  the  curious  phase
was,  that  the  man  who  in  his  waking  state  was  most  obse¬
quious  in  his  salaams  gave  all  his  responses  in  the  shortest
manner  and  used  no  terms  of  courtesy  or  even  common  civility.
On  being  desired  to  get  up  and  walk,  he  did  so  with  great
reluctance,  and  proceeded  in  the  same  manner  as  a  benighted
traveller,  with  great  caution,  until  he  was  brought  up  by  the
wall ;  he  then  just  felt  it  with  his  hands,  let  them  drop,  and
continued  in  a  passive  state  and  would  have  remained  so  until
relieved  from  his  mesmeric  trance  by  his  mesmerise!’,  or  by
time;  on  being  desired  to  return,  he  did  so  in  the  same
manner.  He  was  shewn  to  be  highly  cataleptic;  on  his  arm
being  thrown  up  in  the  air,  it  remained  so,  and  any  part  of
his  body  retained  its  position,  although  some  positions  were
painful  and  inconvenient ;  upon  one  side  of  the  body  being
mesmerised  it  was  beautiful  to  see  the  separation  of  the  nervous
system  so  plainly  and  unconsciously  developed  by  this  poor  ig¬
norant  coolie  of  Bengal.  On  pricking  his  right  arm,  leg,  hand,
right  side  of  the  head  or  trunk,  no  motion  ensued ;  but  prick
him  one  eighth  of  an  inch  on  the  left  side  of  the  middle  of  the


A  Visit  to  the  Mesmeric  Hospital.


3G5


spine,  no  matter  where,  and  the  patient  winced  instantly.  A
line  could  not  have  been  drawn  more  correctly,  or  even  so
much  so  by  the  most  experienced  demonstrator  of  anatomy  in
the  world, — the  division  that  intervened  between  the  highly
sensitive  and  totally  deadened  part  of  the  system  being  per¬
fectly  imperceptible ;  on  being  asked  whether  he  was  asleep,
his  answer  was,  f  Yes.’

“  How  do  you  know  whether  you  are  asleep  ?

“  Because  my  eyes  are  shut.

“  How  then  is  it  that  you  hear  ?

“  With  my  ears.

“  But  being  asleep,  how  can  you  hear  ?

“  Because  my  ears  are  awake.

“  Some  salt  was  put  in  this  man's  mouth,  and  upon  Dr.
Esdaile's  desiring  him  to  swallow  he  did  so,  and  upon  being
asked  whether  he  tasted  anything  he  said,  ‘No/

“  He  was  then  demesmerised,  and  upon  being  questioned
said,  ‘  there  is  salt  in  my  mouth,  sahib/  went  to  the  window
and  spat  out  what  remained ;  his  courteous  and  kotowing
manner  in  his  natural  state  formed  a  remarkable  contrast  to
the  curt  and  brusque  answers  made  by  him  during  the  coma.*

“  On  moving  into  another  apartment,  we  selected,  at
random,  a  patient  who  had  been  operated  upon  for  hyper¬
trophied  scrotum.  He  seated  himself  on  a  bed  opposite  to
the  Doctor,  who  was  separated  from  him  by  a  space  of  three
yards  or  so;  then,  taking  a  sheet  of  paper,  the  latter  pre¬
tended  to  sketch  the  diseased  part  so  as  to  prevent  the  man
from  imagining  that  he  was  to  be  mesmerised.  In  two
minutes  he  was  fast  asleep:  the  sloughing  sore  was  sponged
with  concentrated  nitric  acid.  I  held  the  man's  pulse  during
the  application,  the  torment  of  which  to  a  man  awake  would
have  made  him  frantic,  (as  we  shall  have  occasion  to  show,)
but  it  was  not  accelerated  a  single  beat,  not  a  muscle  moved  in
the  man's  body,  a  calm  and  placid  expression  was  on  his
countenance  and  remained  on  it.  On  the  patient  awaking  he
was  asked  whether  he  felt  any  pain ;  he  answered  no ;  nor
heat  ?  no ;  had  not  the  slightest  idea  that  anything  had  been
done  to  him.

“  After  this  we  went  into  another  room  where  was  a  man
suffering  horrible  torments  from  sloughing  of  the  scrotum;  he
rolled  over  on  the  bed  and  continually  groaned  and  cried.  A
native  mesmeriser  had  been  for  some  time  trying  to  throw
him  into  a  trance  but  without  success ;  the  pain  being  so
acute  as  to  baffle  all  his  efforts.  Dr.  Esdaile  then  tried  for
some  time  without  success ;  at  last  he  succeeded  in  throwing

*  For  the  same  in  a  black  slave  at  Damascus,  see  No.  IX.  p.  65. — 7oist.

E  E  2


366


j Latter  from  Dr.  Esdaile.


him  into  a  sleep,  whereby  he  was  rendered  perfectly  insen¬
sible  to  pricking,  but  yet  he  involuntarily  threw  his  arms
about  in  the  same  manner  as  when  awake,  hut  uttered  no
sound  that  would  lead  any  one  to  believe  him  in  pain.  The
pangs  were,  however,  too  acute,  and  succeeded  in  awaking
him  in  spite  of  all  attempts  to  prevent  such  an  occurrence.

“The  nitric  acid  was  eventually  applied  in  his  waking
state,  and  I  shall  not,  in  a  hurry,  forget  the  scene  ;  the  poor
wretch  rolled  and  screamed  with  the  pain,  and  was  left  an
hour  afterwards  in  the  same  state  of  torment.  Nothing  could
have  better  demonstrated  the  value  of  the  practice  of  mes¬
merism  as  an  anaesthetic  than  this  failure  to  produce  coma,
for  it  showed  the  amount  of  pain  that  could  be  and  has  been
saved  by  its  means.

“  One  of  the  most  wonderful  effects  produced  by  mes¬
merism  was  visible  in  the  case  of  an  old  man  of  about  50
(allowing  alwrays  for  the  premature  appearance  of  age  in  the
native).  He  was  admitted  into  the  hospital  about  two  months
ago  with  palsy  of  long  standing  ;  he  had  lost  all  power  of
speech,  his  limbs  were  never  quiet,  he  could  not  shut  his  hands
or  raise  his  arm  above  the  elbow,  nor  could  he  walk — in  the
short  space  of  two  months  he  could  speak  well  and  intelligibly,
could  shut  and  open  his  hands  freely,  could  lift  his  arm  up
above  his  head  with  ease,  and  managed  to  walk  with  a  stick
quite  well  enough  to  serve  his  purposes.

“  No  medicinal  or  surgical  aid  could  have  been  of  use  in
a  parallel  case  :  Cases  of  rheumatism  of  long  standing  have
yielded  to  mesmeric  treatment,  when  all  other  has  been  of
no  avail.  In  conclusion,  I  have  only  this  to  say  on  the  sub¬
ject,  and  that  is — if  mesmerism  be  humbug  then,  ‘  Yive  la
Bagatelle/

“  Yours,

“  Le  Medecin  malgre  luiY


“  My  dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — The  bistoury  and  the  pamphlets
arrived  safely,  for  which  accept  my  best  thanks.  The  books
I  distributed  to  advantage,  and  I  have  no  doubt  they  will
do  their  work  effectually  in  various  quarters.  Weiss  has  not
made  the  knife  powerful  enough  in  the  handle,  or  according
to  the  drawing ;  but  it  is  an  improvement  on  his  former  tool ;
and  I  used  it  the  other  day  in  stealing  a  ninety -pounder  from
its  owmer  without  his  knowledge.  The  colis  was  dissected  out,
and  the  disgusting  mass  lying  on  the  floor  in  three  minutes :
the  man  had  no  difficulty  in  recovering  from  the  shock,  and  is
doing  perfectly  ivell.

“  A  curious  case  happened  the  other  day.  A  young


Letter  from  Dr.  Esdaile.


367


Hindoo*  a  rich  man,  and  who  had  received  an  English  edu¬
cation*  begged  me  to  operate  upon  him  without  the  know¬
ledge  of  his  friends*  from  whom  he  had  concealed  his  com¬
plaint.  If  eating  beef  and  drinking  brandy  are  genuine  tests
of  Christianity,  *  young  Bengal'  is  a  most  zealous  and  devoted
convert ;  the  importation  of  brandy  having  been  doubled  in
amount  of  late  years  in  consequence  of  his  pious  libations.
My  patient  confessed  to  drinking  two  bottles  of  brandy  in
the  twenty-four  hours*  and  this  was  doubtless  not  the  limit
of  his  capacity  for  alcohol.

“  He  was  desired  to  go  to  the  hospital  daily  to  be  mes¬
merised  for  one  hour,  and  on  the  first  day  he  was  effectually
subdued.  On  the  third  day,  I  operated  upon  him*  and  he
lay  like  a  dead  fish*  with  his  eyes  open  and  turned  up,  for
an  hour  and  a  half*  and  then  awoke  gloriously  drunk,  declar¬
ing  that  f  he  cared  for  no  man,5  &c.,  with  true  drunken
independence.  He  had  intrusted  his  secret  only  to  one
‘  antient*  trusty,  drouthy  crony,'  who  accompanied  him*  and
from  whom  I  learned  that  he  drank  six  glasses  of  raw  brandy
before  coming  to  the  hospital  at  11  o'clock.  The  loss  of
blood*  about  2  lbs.*  also  aided  the  brandy,  no  doubt*  in  dis¬
turbing  the  equilibrium  of  his  brain ;  but  he  fell  asleep  at
two  o'clock,  slept  till  five  o'clock*  and  then  awoke  in  the  full
possession  of  his  senses*  without  any  pain,  and  unconscious
of  the  operation  and  his  subsequent  delirium.

“  Now  if  he  had  been  kept  under  the  mesmeric  influence
till  five  o'clock,  giving  him  the  necessary  time  to  exhale  the
alcohol  from  his  blood*  would  he  not  have  awoke  in  all  likeli¬
hood  in  the  possession  of  his  senses  ?  The  anti  mesmeric
philosophers  will  get  rid  of  all  such  speculations  by  declaring
it  to  have  been  a  brandy  operation  from  first  to  last ;  and  I
hope  Professor  Millar  will  try  to  repeat  it  in  the  Edinburgh
Infirmary — the  dose  is  six  glasses  of  f  Castellan  Brandy'  before
11  o'clock.*

“  By  this  mail*  I  have  the  pleasure  to  send  you  ten  copies
of  my  last  Report*  to  be  sent  to  the  newspapers  and  journals.
I  have  again  twitted  the  medical  journals  with  their  cowardice,
and  you  might  try  whether  any  of  them  dare  yet  let  the  truth
appear  in  their  pages.  If  they  still  continue  the  burking
system*  it  will  be  heaping  coals  of  fire  upon  their  heads  for
their  final  judgment  by  the  public.  It  is  nearly  impossible
to  get  John  Bull  to  think  for  himself*  but  he  hates  a  coward,
and  may  be  worked  on  this  tack.  I  run  a  risk  of  turning
tyrant  myself,  for  I  now  meet  with  no  opposition.

“  Believe  me*  very  truly  yours*

“ 4th  October*  181*9.  “  James  Esdaile.

*  See  No.  XXV.,  p.  103.— Zoist.


368


On  Medical  Anti- Mesmerists,


“  P.S.  I  now  rejoice  under  the  name  of  f  Marine  Surgeon?
having  lately  been  promoted  to  the  post  amidst  a  chorus  of,
1  Served  him  right  V  from  my  allies  the  newspapers.  The
last  Report  has  been  printed  in  them  all.”


III.  On  the  conduct  of  the  British  Medical  Journalists y  and
nearly  the  whole  of  the  Medical  Profession,  in  reference
to  the  greatest  of  medical  blessings :  with  some  hints  to
the  Public  on  Mesmerisers.  By  Dr.  Elliotson.

u  If  disgrace  be  our  destiny,  you,  Sir,  will  have  the  satisfaction  to  reflect
upon  a  manly  protest  against  foolery  or  fraud— -foolery,  if  these  puerile  doings
he  indeed  adjudged  as  worthy — -fraud,  if  their  performers  concur  in  the  contempt
with  which  they  are  viewed  by  the  most  eminent  and  wisest  members  of  the  Royal
College  of  Physicians.” — Dedication  to  Dr.  Francis  Hawkins*  by  Dr.  Robert
Hallf  of  a  book  entitled,  “  A  few  suggestions  on  Consumption ,”  1849.

The  preceding  article  from  India  suggests  very  serious  re¬
flections.

The  editors  of  the  medical  journals  preserve  a  dead  silence
upon  all  the  mighty  mesmeric  facts,  medical  and  surgical,
which  occur  and  are  reported  in  The  Zoist :  the  mightiest
facts,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  declare,  which  medicine  or  surgery
ever  furnished ;  and  in  numbers  which,  as  the  seven  volumes
of  The  Zoist  demonstrate,  ought  to  astonish.  But  their  hearts
are  hardened ;  and  they  care  not  for  the  welfare  of  their  fellow-
creatures  ;  madly  believing  that  they  will  long  be  able,  even
while  their  own  time  lasts,  to  conceal  from  the  medical  pro¬
fession  what  they  well  know  to  be  truths,  and  truths  sur¬
passing  all  other  natural  truths  in  both  philosophical  and  prac¬
tical  importance, — truths  concerned  with  life,  nay,  with  sen¬
tient,  moral  and  intellectual  nature,  with  the  cure  of  disease,
even  the  most  afflicting,  and  with  the  alleviation,  removal,
and  prevention  of  pain.

I  feel  shame  that  I  belong  to  the  medical  profession,  I
feci  shame  that  I  am  a  human  being,  when,  forgetting  for  a
moment  those  noble  and  beautiful  unworldly  characters  who
are  the  salt  of  the  earth,  and  before  whom  I  count  myself
as  nothing,  I  behold  human  nature  capable  of  such  inhu¬
manity,  such  absence  of  moral  principle,  and  such  weak
short-sightedness;  I  involuntarily  think  of  the  rabid  Jews  of

*  See  Zoist,  Nos.  XNIII.  and  XXIV.

•f*  The  writer  is,  we  believe,  an  aspirant  for  practice  in  Norwich.  When
Miss  Martineau’s  case  was  published,  he  sent  a  letter  to  the  Norwich  paper,
saying  that  more  tumors  in  the  abdomen  have  been  created  than  removed  by
mesmerism.  As  Dr.  Hawkins  announced  to  the  College  of  Physicians  that  mes¬
merists  are  lewd  quacks  and  impostors,  these  two  gentlemen  are  calculated  to
admire  each  other.


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


369


old,  who  spurned  what  fell  from  the  lips  of  him  whose  aim
was  to  be  the  Saviour  of  mankind,  and  cried  out,  not  know¬
ing  what  they  did,  “Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas.”

The  announcement  of  the  blessed  power  of  ether  to  pre¬
vent  the  agony  of  surgical  operations  was  not  scowled  upon
nor  spoken  disparagingly  of  by  us  :  though  our  adversaries,
editors  of  medical  journals  and  professors  indulged  in  gross  ex¬
ultation  at  mesmerism  having  met  with  a  heavy  blow  and  had
one  of  its  limbs  cut  away  and  being  superseded  :* * * §  on  the  con¬
trary,  we  rejoiced  and  immediately  assisted  in  spreading  the
news.f  We  did  not  act  the  unworthy,  the  miserable  part,
acted  by  the  opponents  of  mesmerism  when  the  ansesthetic,
and  invariably  safe,  power  of  mesmerism  was  proclaimed  in
the  Boyal  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society  of  London.  J

Ether  gave  way  to  chloroform,  and  the  enthusiasm  for
preventing  surgical  pain  became  general.  Patients  were  killed
continually  with  the  poisonous  drugs,  but  this  was  ascribed  to
anything  but  the  drug — to  its  impurity,  to  want  of  air,  and
nobody  knows  what.  The  destruction  of  life  by  chloroform
has  gone  on  increasing,  but  still  our  safe  method  without
drugs  or  anything  injurious  is  despised ;  nay,  more  than  safe,
most  beneficial,  so  as  sometimes  to  cause  an  operation  to  be
dispensed  with,  but  not  thought  worthy  of  trial  by  these  philo¬
sophers.  It  is  something,  however,  to  see  them  ashamed  of
saying  any  longer  that  pain  is  not  worth  a  thought  on  the
part  of  a  surgeon,  is  a  useful  thing,  a  downright  blessing  to
the  patient,  and  that  operations  cannot  be  performed  without
pain ;  and  to  see  Sir  Benjamin  Brodie  attend  painless  ope¬
rations  after  saying  what  while  his  name  is  remembered  will
be  remembered  too.§

There  are  recorded  in  the  seven  volumes  of  The  Zoist,  and
my  pamphlet,  AT  LEAST  TWO  HUNDRED  AND  FIFTY
PAINLESS  SURGICAL  OPERATIONS ;  many  of  the  se¬
verest  kind.

Nearly  one  hundred  were  the  removal  of  tumors,  varying
from  a  few  pounds  to  above  a  hundred.

Nineteen  were  amputations.

There  was  lithotomy,  extirpation  of  the  eye-ball  with  the
subsequent  application  of  strong  nitric  acid.

*  Medical  Gazette,  April  12,  1845  ;  Lancet,  January,  1847,  p.  16  ;  North
British  Review,  May,  1847  ;  Zoist ,  Nos.  XXII.  and  XXV.

f  See  Zoist,  Nos.  XVI.,  p,  576.  For  a  contrast  of  the  conduct  of  the  medi¬
cal  profession  on  these  two  occasions,  see  Zoist,  No.  XVII.,  p.  44.

X  The  wild  conduct  of  the  Society  on  that  occasion  is  detailed  in  my  Nu-~
meroas  Cases  of  Surgical  Operations  without  Pain  in  the  Mesmeric  State,  and
my  account  cannot  be  equalled  in  interest  by  any  medical  adventures  or  history.

§  See  my  pamphlet  on  Painless  Operations,  p.  36,  and  Zoist,  No.  XVI.,  p.  596.


370


On  Medical  Anti-Mesmerists ,

Removals  of  the  breast.

Cuttings  out  of  nails :  besides  painless  applications  of  the
strongest  caustics.

And  the  medical  profession  are  no  more  cognizant  of  these
stupendous  and  all  important  facts  than  the  horses  in  Athens
are  of  the  exquisite  figures  on  the  pediment  of  the  Parthenon.
They  can  now  give  no  conscientious  reason  for  their  conduct,
although  originally  they  declared  the  patients  were  impostors,
shamming  the  absence  of  all  signs  of  pain  and  all  signs  of
effort  to  repress  the  expression  of  pain,  and  declared  pain
was  too  good  a  thing  to  be  dispensed  with.  They  have  com¬
pelled  themselves  to  silence  in  these  particulars,  because  they
are  indefatigable  in  using  chloroform.*  The  figure  the  pre¬
sent  age  must  cut  in  the  sight  of  posterity  will  be  rendered
still  more  hideous  by  the  reflection,  that,  whereas  mesmerism
is  perfectly  safe  and  conducive  to  recovery,  chloroform  is  de¬
stroying  life  more  and  more.

How  many  persons  have  been  destroyed,  we  have  no  means
of  knowing :  but  I  have  met  with  the  following  accounts.

Killed  with  Ether  or  Chloroform ,  given  previously  to  surgical
operations :  not  to  spealc  of  deaths  from  their  administration
for  other  purposes.

With  Ether. — A  man  with  stone.  Mr.  Nunn,  of  Colchester.
Medical  Gazette,  March  5,  1847.

Woman  with  tumor  of  the  thigh.  Mr.  Robbs,  of
Grantham.  Ditto,  April  2,  1847.

Boy — amputation  of  thigh.  Mr.  Eastment,  Win-
canton,  Somerset.  Ditto,  April  9,  1847.

Woman — amputation  of  thigh.  Paris.  Medical
Times,  Feb.  27,  1847.

Two  women,  in  the  wards  of  M.  Jobert :  one  for
amputation  of  thigh.  Paris.  Ditto ,  March  20,
1847.


*  “The  discovery  and  application  of  ether  and  chloroform  as  anaesthetic
agents,”  says  Mr.  Wakley,  in  his  Lancet  for  April  8,  1848,  five  years  after  the
first  appearance  of  The  Zoist — with  its  mass  of  painless  operations,  and  the  pub¬
lication  of  the  celebrated  painless  case  of  amputation  in  Nottinghamshire,  “  will
probably  distinguish  the  present  era  in  the  future  history  of  mankind!”  Great
indeed  will  be  the  distinction  of  the  mesmerists,  who  were  five  years  in  advance  of
the  profession,  and  endeavoured  wisely  to  charm  the  deaf  adder  !  “  The  avidity

with  which  these  agents  have  been  received,  seems  to  imply  that  a  need  of  them
must  have  been  long  felt !”  “Yet  their  reception  has  not  been  more  ready  than
might  have  il  priori  been  supposed,  considering  how  much  they  may  affect  not  only
our  practice  but  our  opinions!”  This  is  charming.  And  mesmerism,  which
showed  its  power  of  affecting  our  practice  and  our  opinions  far  more  strongly
than  mere  narcotic  drugs,  years  before  these  were  seized  upon,  can  be  hidden  and
repressed  !


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


371


With  Ether. — Woman — cancer  of  breast.  Auxerre.  Medical
Gazette,  March  10,  1848.

Lady — extraction  of  tooth.  Berlin.  Correspondent
of  Times,  letter  dated  Nov.  13,  1849.

“  A  young  lady  was  killed  here  yesterday  by  a  dentist
administering  ether  in  order  to  draw  a  tooth  without  pain.
Every  effort  to  restore  animation  failed ;  the  punishment
for  the  use  of  such  dangerous  means  by  an  unqualified
person  is  very  severe.”

With  Chloroform. — Girl — removal  of  toe-nail.  Newcastle.
Lancet,  Feb.  8,  1848.

Woman — extraction  of  tooth.  Cincinnati.  Ditto ,
April  15,  ditto.

Ditto — opening  a  tumor.  Boulogne.  Ditto,  June
10,  ditto.

Man — extraction  of  tooth.  London.  Ditto,  July  8,
ditto.

Woman — amputation  of  finger.  India.  Ditto,  July
15,  ditto.

Ditto — extraction  of  teeth.  Birkenhead.  Ditto,
ditto.

Man — amputation.  Paris.  Ditto,  July  29,  ditto.
Ditto — removal  of  toe-nail.  Govan.  Ditto ,  Jan.
6,  1849.

Ditto — amputation  of  toe.  Westminster.  Ditto,
Feb.  17,  ditto.

Ditto— ditto  finger.  Lyons.  Ditto,  Feb.  24,  ditto.
Girl — removal  of  eye.  India.  Zoist,  April,  ditto.*
Man — the  surgeon,  inhaling  it  first  himself,  for  trial,
perished.  Glasgow.  Med.  Gaz.,  Sept.  14,  ditto.
Woman — extraction  of  tooth.  Langres.  Ditto,  ditto,
ditto.

Boy — amputation  of  leg.  Spain.  Lancet,  Oct.  13,
ditto.

Man — removal  of  scrotal  tumor.  India.  Zoist,  Oct.
ditto,  f

Ditto — removal  of  toe-nail.  London.  Lancet,  Nov.  3,
ditto  .J

*  Contrast  this  death  by  Mr.  0‘Shaughnessy,  a  despiser  of  mesmerism,  with
the  successful  case  under  mesmerism  by  Dr.  Martin,  Zoist ,  July,  1849.

f  Contrast  this  with  all  the  successful  cases  under  mesmerism  by  Dr.  Esdaile.
Neither  of  these  two  Indian  deaths  by  chloroform  is  mentioned  in  the  London
medical  journals.

X  To  shew  how  chloroform  kills,  I  will  extract  the  account  in  the  words  of  Mr.
Solly,  the  unlucky  obstinate  operator  — “  On  Wednesday,  October  10,  at  a  quarter
to  two  p.m.,  he  began  to  inhale  the  chloroform,  with  one  drachm  in  the  inhaler.
It  had  no  visible  effect  for  about  two  minutes  j  it  then  excited  him,  and  the  in-


372


On  Medical  Anti- Mesmerists,

Lady — extraction  of  tooth.  Paris.  Medical  Gazette,
Nov.  30.,  ditto.

“  Madame  Labrune,  33  years  of  age,  in  good  health,
applied  to  M.  de  Confevron  with  the  request  that  he  would
administer  chloroform  to  her  previously  to  the  extraction
of  a  tooth,  which  the  dentist  stated  would  be  effected  with
some  difficulty.

“  Having  determined  to  produce  only  the  slightest
degree  of  insensibility,  about  fifteen  grains  (one  gramme)
of  chloroform  were  poured  upon  a  fold  of  lint  the  size  of  a
filbert,  enclosed  in  a  handkerchief.  This  was  held  at  a  dis¬
tance  from  the  nostrils  by  the  patient  herself.

“  Its  effects  were  manifested  in  eight  seconds,  and

strument  was  removed  from  his  mouth,  and  about  ten  drops  more  were  added.
He  then  almost  immediately  became  insensible,  the  chloroform  was  taken  away
from  his  mouth,  and  the  nail  removed.  He  continued  insensible ;  and  his  face
becoming  dark,  the  pulse  small,  quick,  but  regular,  respiration  laborious,  his
neck -kerchief  was  removed,  and  the  chest  exposed  to  fresh  air  from  a  window
close  to  the  bed;  cold  water  was  dashed  on  his  face,  the  chest  rubbed,  and  am¬
monia  applied  to  the  nose.  After  struggling  for  about  a  minute,  he  became  still,
the  skin  cold,  pulse  scarcely  perceptible,  and  soon  ceased  to  be  felt  at  the  wrist ;
respiration  became  slow  and  at  intervals,  but  continued  a  few  seconds  after  the
cessation  of  the  pulse.  Immediately  on  the  appearance  of  these  symptoms  arti¬
ficial  respiration  was  commenced,  by  depressing  the  ribs  with  the  hands,  and  then
allowing  them  to  rise  again,  until  the  proper  apparatus  was  brought,  when  respir¬
ation  was  kept  up  by  means  of  the  trachea-tube  and  bellows,  and  oxygen  gas
was  introduced  into  the  lungs  by  the  same  means.  Galvanism  was  also  applied
through  the  heart  and  diaphragm ;  but  all  signs  of  life  ceased  in  about  six  or
seven  minutes  after  the  commencement  of  inhalation.  These  means  were  per¬
sisted  in  until  a  quarter-past  three,  but  to  no  purpose.  On  removing  the  inhaler,
the  sponge,  which  only  contains  one  drachm,  fell  on  to  the  floor,  and  the  chlo¬
roform  splashed  about,  thus  showing  that  considerable  part  of  the  chloroform
remained  unused,  so  that  he  could  not  have  inhaled  more  than  a  drachm.”

I  must  recall  to  the  memory  of  my  readers  Mr.  Solly’s  conduct  in  reference
to  mesmerism,  recorded  in  the  present  volume.*  He  refused  to  remove  a  woman’s
breast  under  mesmerism,  because  the  effect  of  mesmerism  was  entirely  mental !
and  therefore  bad  !  !  The  poor  woman  suffered  dreadfully  from  the  operation  and
the  chloroform,  and  soon  she  required  another  operation,  and  preferred  the  pain
of  it  to  the  misery  from  the  chloroform  :  and  now  her  breast  is  bad  again.  Whe¬
ther  after  thus  destroying  a  man’s  life  with  chloroform,  Mr.  Solly  will  still  con¬
sider  the  innocent  and  salutary  anaesthesia  of  mesmerism  bad,  I  know  not.
Let  him  reflect  upon  Dr.  Esdaile’s  successful  and  painless  operations  upon  toe¬
nails  belonging  to  feet  still  used  by  their  possessors.

“  Sona,  a  Hindoo  woman,  aged  25.  Both  nails  of  the  great  toes  are  decayed
to  the  roots ;  their  place  being  filled  by  fungoid  ulcers,  the  effects  of  syphilis  and
mercury.

“  She  was  mesmerised  at  12  o’clock,  and  at  half-past  one  I  dissected  out  the
entire  root  of  one  nail,  without  awaking  her.  The  left  arm  and  hand  trembled
only,  and  this  I  subdued  by  placing  her  hand  between  mine  for  some  minutes  ;
and  I  left  her  sleeping.

“  August  5th.  Repeated  the  operation  to-day  with  precisely  the  same  effects.  On
neither  occasion  did  she  feel  any  increase  of  pain  on  waking.” — No.  XIII.,  p.  40.

“  Goluck  Seit,  a  prisoner,  has  got  a  hydrocele  on  each  side.  A  young  Hin¬
doo  subdued  him  to-day  in  ten  minutes,  on  the  first  trial.  When  about  to  ope-


*  No.  XXV.,  p.  38.


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


373


the  reporter  remarked  constant  winking  of  the  eyelids.
The  patient  repulsed  the  dentist’s  hand,  making  signs  that
the  effect  was  not  complete.  She  then  made  four  or  five
fuller  inspirations.  At  that  instant,  M.  de  Confevron
removed  the  handkerchief,  and  only  took  his  eyes  off  her
for  the  instant  occupied  by  placing  it  on  the  nearest  piece
of  furniture;  but  in  this  brief  interval  he  found  the  pa¬
tient’s  face  turned  pale,  the  lips  discoloured,  her  features
altered,  the  eyes  turned  upwards,  the  pupils  horribly  di¬
lated,  the  jaw  closed,  the  head  drawn  backwards,  the
pulse  could  not  be  felt,  the  limbs  were  all  relaxed,  and  a
few  inspirations,  at  long  intervals,  were  the  only  remain¬
ing  indications  of  life.

“Every  means  of  restoration  were  employed  for  two
hours  :  stimulation  of  the  nostrils  by  ammonia  ;  frictions
of  the  surface;  actual  cauterization  of  the  prsecordial
region  ;  artificial  respiration,  and  galvanism, — all  were  had
recourse  to,  but  without  success:  the  patient  was  too
surely  dead.”

Poor  Welsh  girl — removal  of  eye-ball.  Shrewsbury.
Quoted  by  Daily  Neivs  from  the  Hereford  Jour¬
nal  Dec.,  1849.

“  Mr.  W.  J.  Clement,  the  surgeon  under  whose  care
she  was,  administered  about  one-third  of  the  quantity
which  he  has  given  other  patients.  It  had,  however,  such
an  effect  upon  her  that  she  was  seized  with  apoplexy,  and,
speaking  in  Welsh  at  the  time,  expired  instantaneously,
as  if  she  had  swallowed  prussic  acid.”

I  have  no  doubt  that  a  more  extensive  search  would  dis¬
cover  more  such  medical  deaths ;  and  in  fact  other  instances
have  occurred  which  have  been  hushed  up.  They  are  easily
hushed  up,  and  an  inquest  avoided,  if  death  does  not  occur
immediately.  For  inhaled  ether  and  chloroform,  like  all  other
poisons,  may  kill  instantly  or  not  for  some  time  ;  and  may
indeed  cause  no  ill  effect  or  any  effect  immediately.  Because
the  death  of  a  Bight  Hon.  M.P.,  mentioned  in  No.  XXV.,

rate,  I  saw  that  he  possessed  a  consecrated  nail,  on  one  of  his  little  fingers ;  and
knowing  the  value  attached  to  this,  I  resolved  to  get  possession  of  it,  if  possible,
as  a  moral  test  of  his  being  insensible,  for  he  would  as  soon  have  cut  a  cow’s
throat  and  eaten  a  beef-steak  as  allowed  me  to  cut  off  his  nail,  while  in  possession
of  his  senses.  It  is  a  common  practice  with  the  Hindoos  to  vow  their  hair,
beards,  or  nails  to  Shiva,  the  Destroyer,  in  the  hope  of  averting  his  anger  ;  and
this  man  had  consecrated  his  little  finger-nail  to  Shiva  Forakissore, — Forakissore,
in  this  district,  being  a  famous  shrine  of  the  god.  I  transferred  the  sacred  ex¬
crescence  to  my  pocket,  without  any  remonstrance  being  made,  and  then  per¬
formed  the  less  formidable  operation  of  withdrawing  the  water,  and  throwing  in
the  injection,  of  which  he  knew  nothing  on  awaking  two  hours  after.  His  only
distress  was  the  loss  of  his  nail,  and  he  spent  hours  in  hunting  for  it,  supposing
that  it  had  been  broken  off  by  accident.” — No.  XV.,  p.  315.


374


On  Medical  Anti-Mesmerists,


p.  37,  did  not  take  place  for  some  days, — as  in  Mr.  Travers's
case  of  death  from  ether,  mentioned  in  No.  XXV.,  p.  37,  but
where  no  secrecy  was  observed, — he  never  rallying  after  the
administration  of  chloroform,  though  the  surgical  operation  was
a  trifle,  the  death  was  said  to  have  arisen  from  typhus  fever  or
from  absorption  of  pus ;  though  these  were  mere  inventions.
Women,  after  passing  through  parturition  well  without  pain,
have  gradually  sunk  at  the  end  of  a  few  days,  or  have  begun
to  feel  the  effects  of  the  inhalation  after  a  certain  number  of
hours  and  fallen  into  convulsions  and  apoplexy  and  died ;
the  administration  of  chloroform  having  been  kept  a  secret  to
as  great  an  extent  as  possible.  I  could  relate  many  facts  of
this  kind.

Where  females  are  killed  by  chloroform  in  childbirth,  there
is  no  inquest,  because  the  death  is  ascribed  to  the  childbirth ;
just  as  in  most  cases  where  it  is  caused  by  the  clumsiness  or
impatience  of  the  man-midwife.

In  No.  XXV.,  p.  38,  I  mentioned  ill  effects  from  chloro¬
form  of  longer  or  shorter  duration,  not  amounting  to  death :
and  I  hear  of  more  such  results  every  day.  I  know  that  Dr.
Webster  really  made  the  following  statement,  which  I  extract
from  the  Literary  Gazette  of  the  24th  of  last  November.

“  Insanity  from  Chloroform .

“  At  a  recent  meeting  of  the  Westminster  Medical  Society,  Dr.
John  Webster  related  the  histories  of  three  cases  of  insanity  after
the  use  of  chloroform,  during  labour,  which  had  come  under  his
cognizance.  In  the  first  case,  the  patient  continued  three  days  after
her  delivery  in  an  incoherent,  rambling  condition,  and  then  became
perfectly  maniacal,  and  so  furious  as  to  require  coercion.  She  was
removed  some  time  after  to  a  lunatic  asylum,  where  she  remained
twelve  months,  and  she  has  now  recovered  her  reason.  The  second
patient  never  recovered  from  the  effects  of  the  chloroform  adminis¬
tered,  and  soon  became  completely  insane,  in  which  state  she  con¬
tinued  many  months,  but  ultimately  recovered.  In  the  third  in¬
stance,  the  cerebral  disturbance  never  ceased  entirely  after  the
exhibition  of  the  chloroform.  She  could  not  sleep  at  night  for  a
long  time  ;  and  often  said  she  felt  as  if  in  the  presence  of  a  madman
who  was  going  to  murder  her.  Three  weeks  subsequently,  she
seemed  almost  completely  maniacal,  exhibiting  much  mental  excite¬
ment,  laughing  frequently,  and  expressed  strong  desire  to  sing,  and
other  extraordinary  feelings  ;  conducted  herself  like  an  idiot,  and  lost
her  memory ;  in  which  state  she  continued  five  months,  when  she
recovered.  Instantaneous  death  and  loss  of  reason  are  two  of  the
consequences  now  ascertained  to  result,  in  some  cases,  from  the  im¬
mediate  noxious  influence  of  this  potent  agent.”

It  is  ludicrous  to  read  the  attempts  of  the  partizans  of  ether


by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


375


and  chloroform,  especially  of  those  who  gain  money  by  going
about  administering  them,  or  have  fully  committed  themselves
in  the  matter  and  have  thus  what  an  intellectual  man  would
regard  as  a  trumpery  kind  of  professional  reputation,  to  ex¬
plain  these  mischievous  results  without  reference  to  chloro¬
form — to  ascribe  them  to  want  of  air,  impurity  of  the  drug,  &c.
though  all  the  marks  of  narcotic  poisoning  were  observed  be¬
fore  and  after  death.*  The  Medical  Gazette  is  honest  on  this
subject :  for,  after  detailing  the  last  case  which  occurred  at
Paris,  it  says  : —

“  Facts  of  this  kind  have  become  so  multiplied  that  it  is  no
longer  possible  to  attribute  them  to  any  other  cause  than  chloro-
formization.  Omitting  all  the  cases  of  which  we  have  not  the  exact
details,  and  confining  our  attention  to  those  already  referred  to,  it  is
clearly  impossible  to  arrive  at  any  other  conclusion.  In  all  these,
the  symptoms  which  preceded  death,  compared  with  the  necroscopic
results,  prove  the  extinction  of  life  to  have  been  owing  to  a  real
asphyxia,  the  direct  effect  of  the  special  deleterious  influence  of
chloroform  on  the  brain.

“  In  the  present  instance  the  patient  died  as  if  struck  by  light¬
ning,  despite  the  small  quantity  of  vapour  inhaled,  and  the  precau¬
tions  observed.  There  was  no  warning,  as  in  M.  Gorre’s  case,  no

*  As  Mr.  Wakley  was  seized  in  1847  with  a  fit  of  more  than  his  ordinary
piety  when  mesmerism  was  superseded  by  ether  and  lost  one  of  its  limbs,  and
proposed  a  public  national  thanksgiving  to  the  Almighty  for  putting  it  in  our
power  to  operate  wuthout  pain  (Zoist,  No.  XVII.,  p.  47),  though  he  has  not
thanked  God  at  all  for  enabling  us  to  operate  painlessly  and  safely  under  mes¬
merism.  He  will  probably  now  propose  a  public  national  fast  and  humiliation  on
account  of  the  havoc  which  inhalation  has  made  among  us,  and  advise  those  who
have  killed  their  patients  to  put  on  sackcloth  and  throw  ashes  on  their  heads.

He  thus  writes  in  that  year  : — “  A  distinguished  physician*  of  one  of  the  great
metropolitan  hospitals  addresses  us  as  follows  : —

“  ‘The  greatest  blessing  vouchsafed,  in  these  latter  days,  to  those  who  live
on  earth,  is,  for  the  present,  in  the  keeping  of  one  class  of  men,  and  of  that  alone.
The  prevention  of  pain  by  the  inhalation  of  ether  vapour  has  been  hitherto  practised
only  by  those  whose  business  is  with  the  healing  art.  As  yet,  this  gift  from  hea¬
ven  to  all  is  held  by  us  of  the  medical  profession  in  sole  and  exclusive  trust.  It
is  time  that  we  acknowledge  the  Giver.  Let  not  this  warrant  of  mercy  pass  from
us  to  the  world  at  large,  without  the  stamp  of  worship  and  thanksgiving.  It  has
been  often  said  by  the  pharisee,  that,  as  a  class  of  men,  physicians  and  surgeons
are  wanting  in  the  sentiments  of  love  and  reverence  to  Him  whose  sentence  is  for
life  or  death.  Let  us  refute  this  idle  and  petulant  slander  now,  while  occasion
serves,  at  once  and  for  ever.  Let  the  chaplain  of  every  hospital  in  which  these
wonders  have  been  witnessed,  be  invited  by  the  Medical  Officers  of  the  esta¬
blishment  to  offer  up  their  humble  and  hearty  thanks  for  the  late  mercies  vouch¬
safed  to  the  patients  under  their  charge.  Let  every  student  in  every  class-room
humble  himself,  with  his  teacher,  in  the  presence  of  an  agency  which  renews  in
suffering  man  the  healing  miracles  of  old.  There  should  be  public  acts  of  thanks¬
giving  throughout  the  land,  for  this  signal  favour  to  man  present  and  to  come.
Let  young  and  old  be  earnest  for  this  privilege,  with  their  clergy,  and  let  phy¬
sicians  and  surgeons  be  the  first  to  bow  the  knee.’  ”

*  Probably  Dr.  J.  A.  Wilson,  whose  virulence  against  mesmerism  is  recorded  in  No.
XXIII.,  p.  231.


376


On  Medical  Anti-Mesmerists,

complaint  of  sense  of  suffocation ;  on  the  contrary,  the  patient,  at
the  moment  of  dying,  indicated  that  the  anaesthesia  was  not  com¬
plete,  and  this  was  shown  by  her  still  tightly  holding  the  handker¬
chief  when  taken  from  her.

“  M.  Sedillot  has  pointed  out  that  the  supervention  of  muscular
relaxation  is  the  period  at  which  the  administration  of  the  agent
should  cease;  but  the  preceding  case  shows  that  this  indication  is
fallacious.  The  pulse  does  not  furnish  a  more  certain  indication,
since,  in  M.  Berrier’s  case,  life  and  the  pulse  ceased  simultane¬
ously.”*

But,  though  the  editor’s  heart  was  so  overjoyed  that  he
announced  ether  with  the  words — “  Mesmerism  Superseded,”
he  makes  no  reflection  upon  his  former  hastiness  of  joy.

I  record  these  facts  with  real  sorrow  :  because,  in  common
with  every  mesmerist,  I  should  have  rejoiced  to  see  inhala¬
tions  always  successful  and  innocent.  That  I  speak  the  truth,
is  proved  by  the  conduct  of  us  all  from  the  first  announce¬
ment  of  ether  and  chloroform,  and  during  all  the  indecent
exultation  and  insults  of  our  adversaries. f

*  It  is  remarkable  that  the  poor  woman  had  been  successfully  etherized  before
for  slight  surgical  operations.

t  One  of  the  bitterest  revilers  of  mesmerism  is  Mr.  Lawrence  :  (See  Zoist,
No.  XXIII.,  p.  286,)  and  for  no  reason  I  am  certain  beyond  unworthy  feelings.
The  painless  Nottinghamshire  amputation  made  no  impression  upon  him  :  the
prevention  of  pain  was  then  no  object  to  him  ;  and  the  poor  man  was  an  impostor.
Ether  and  chloroform,  now  superseding  mesmerism,  made  him  value  painless
operations,  and  the  subjects  of  them  clearly  were  not  impostors  and  suffered  no
pain.  I  heard  the  Prince  Consort  quietly  ask  him  at  a  party  what  his  proof
of  absence  of  pain  in  etherized  patients  was:  “  Oh  !”  said  he,  raising  his  shoul¬
ders  and  screwing  his  mouth,  “they  lie  quite  motionless  and  express  no  pain.”
The  poor  Nottinghamshire  mesmerised  man  was  not  let  off  thus  easily,  as  my
Pamphlet  records.  Mr.  Lawrence  thus  writes  in  the  Medical  Gazette,  Jan.
22,  1847:—

“  I  had  occasion  last  week  to  perform  one  of  the  most  painful  surgical  opera¬
tions  ;  and  I  gladly  embraced  the  opportunity  of  submitting  to  what  will,  I  think,
be  deemed  a  complete  test,  the  recently  introduced  practice  of  inhaling  the  vapour
of  sulphuric  ether.  The  great  interest  excited  throughout  the  medical  profession,
and  in  the  public  generally,  on  a  matter  of  which  the  importance  can  hardly  be
overrated  in  reference  to  operative  surgery,  induces  me  to  communicate  to  you
the  particulars  without  delay ;  the  result  having  been  perfectly  satisfactory.”

“  To  inquiries  respecting  what  he  had  felt,  the  patient  said  that  it  was  like
drowning — a  sense  of  water  rushing  and  overwhelming  him :  then  came  a  snap,
and  he  felt  nothing  further.  It  was  clear  at  the  time  that  he  did  not  know  that
the  operation  had  been  performed,  and  this  subsequent  statement  clearly  shows
that  he  must  have  been  entirely  unconscious.”

“  Considering  the  nature  of  the  ether  vapour,  and  the  mode  in  which  it  influ¬
ences  the  sentient  and  moving  power,  we  may  infer  that  its  influence  on  the  sen-
sorium  is  analogous  to  that  of  intoxicating  liquors  introduced  into  the  stomach.
Many  years  ago,  a  middle-aged  woman  was  brought  into  St.  Bartholomew’s,
drunk,  with  a  compound  fracture  and  other  serious  injury  of  the  leg  requiring
amputation.  Having  reflected  on  the  circumstances,  I  could  see  no  reason  why
the  state  of  intoxication  should  prevent  the  performance  of  an  operation  abso¬
lutely  necessary,  and  I  accordingly  removed  the  limb  at  once  above  the  knee  in
the  ward.  The  gentlemen  present  and  myself  were  perfectly  satisfied  that  the


by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


3  77


If  the  conduct  of  the  medical  journalists  and  teachers
and  so  many  others  of  the  medical  profession  is  reprehensible
in  regard  to  the  powers  of  mesmerism  in  safely  preventing
surgical  pain,  it  is  not  less  reprehensible  in  regard  to  the
powers  of  mesmerism  in  the  treatment  of  diseases.

We  can  proudly  point  to  the  stately  pile  of  cures  amassed
in  The  Zoist : — cures  surpassing  those  by  ordinary  medicine,
because  effected  with  no  disgusting,  harshly  or  uncomforta¬
bly  acting  drugs,  exhausting  measures,  or  torturing  external
applications ;  because  effected  in  many  instances,  after  all
ordinary  means  had  been  long  employed  in  vain;  and  because
such  cures  in  many  cases  were  never  before  effected  by  art.
I  boldly  challenge  our  opponents  to  produce  such  an  array  of
cures.  Among  them  stand  out  prominently  the  cure,  by  the
wife  of  the  Archbishop  of  Dublin,  of  perfect  blindness  of
twenty-six  years  standing ;  and  the  cure  of  genuine  cancer.
The  former  astonishing  cure  has  never  been  even  alluded  to
by  any  English  medical  journal.  The  latter  has  been  spoken
of  in  a  way  which  must,  like  their  dead  silence  upon  the  cure
of  blindness,  lower  the  medical  profession  in  the  opinion  of
the  world.  Mr.  Wakley  wrote  thus  in  his  Lancet  of  Nov.
11th,  1848,—

“  The  pretended  cure  of  a  cancer  by  mesmerism,  as  announced
in  a  pamphlet,  is  one  of  the  grossest  puffs  we  have  ever  seen.  It
cannot  deceive  any  medical  practitioner  who  is  acquainted  with  his
profession.  It  appears  that  the  treatment  commenced  in  1843,  and
the  tumor  did  not  disappear  until  1848.  Hundreds,  and  even  thou¬
sands  of  similar  tumors,  supposed  to  have  been  cancers,  disappear
from  the  breasts  of  females  in  half  those  years,  and  under  every
variety  of  treatment  that  can  be  made.  Under  the  system  of  pres¬
sure,  as  practised  by  the  late  Mr.  Young,  tumors  of  double  the  size
were  completely  absorbed  in  less  than  six  months  ;  some  in  two  or
three  months.  Mr.  Young  published  scores  of  such  cases,  and  the
attestations  to  his  accuracy  were  respectable  and  conclusive.  Many
tumors,  apparently  of  a  true  scirrhous  nature,  have  been  promptly
absorbed  under  the  admirable  system  of  pressure  first  adopted  and
recommended  by  Dr.  Neil  Arnott.  In  a  few  weeks  beneficial  effects
have  been  produced,  the  patients  have  been  relieved,  both  from  their
sufferings  and  their  swellings.  It  is  time  that  the  obscenities  of
mesmerism  should  engage  the  attention  of  the  heads  of  families,  and
all  persons  who  uphold  the  character  of  English  society  for  its  purity
and  morality.  The  statements  which  are  occasionally  sent  to  us  are
descriptive  of  scenes  which  are  highly  disgusting.  Why  do  not  its
medical  advocates  transfer  the  practice  to  the  hands  of  females,  since

patient  was  unconscious  of  the  proceeding,  though,  being  subsequently  jeered  on
the  subject  by  some  of  her  fellow  patients,  she  contended  that  she  knew  what  was
done  at  the  time,  but  did  not  feel  pain.”  See  also  Zoist,  No.  XXIII.,  p.  286  :
for  the  advantage  of  chloroform,  see  XXV.,  p.  40.


378


On  Medical  Anti- Mesmerists,


in  nineteen  cases  out  of  twenty,  the  patient,  alias  the  victim,  alias  the
particeps  criminis,  is  a  female.  This  of  course  would  not  suit  the
object  of  the  benevolent  masculine  mesmeriser.  Whatever  may
become  of  the  delusion  called  mesmerism,  we  are  resolved,  provided
we  are  duly  aided  by  our  professional  brethren,  that  the  obscenities
of  mesmerism  shall  be  no  longer  practised  with  impunity.”

The  public  ought  to  know  that  surgeons  are  obliged  to  cut
away  cancerous  and  other  tumors  as  often  as  before  the  time
of  Messrs.  Young  and  Arnott,  and  never  employ  their  methods,
because  pressure  has  proved  a  complete  failure.  Dr.  Heath,
who  was  resident  medical  officer  of  the  Middlesex  Hospital
when  Mr.  Young  was  allowed  to  make  his  trials  there  for  a
year,  and  witnessed  them  all,  is  now  in  London,  at  the  York
Hotel,  York  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  and  assures  me  that
the  plan  was  worse  than  a  failure.  It  caused  great  pain ;  ad¬
herence  of  the  tumors  to  the  subjacent  parts ;  effusion  into
the  chest ;  difficulty  of  breathing,  &c. ;  and  not  one  patient
was  cured.  I  have  been  applied  to  respecting  Dr.  Arnott's
patients  on  account  of  the  extreme  suffering,  mischief,  and
failure  of  his  mode  of  applying  pressure  by  bags  of  air  or
water.  The  friends  of  one  lady  told  me,  a  few  days  ago,  that,
after  dreadful  suffering,  suppuration  occurred  and  death  from
exhaustion,  after  he  had  tried  his  plan  upon  her.

On  reading  Mr.  Wakley's  bold  assertions,  I  wrote  to  one
of  the  surgeons  of  St.  Thomas's  Hospital,  Mr.  South,  who  is
translating  a  celebrated  modern  German  work  on  all  surgery,
and  adding  notes  to  perfect  it  with  the  recent  English  facts.
He  answered  me  that  he  had  found  the  pressure  plan  a  com¬
plete  failure,  and  had  long  ceased  to  trouble  himself  about  it ;
but  that  he  would  enquire  in  the  profession  if  anything  had
turned  up  in  its  favour,  and  let  me  know.  His  letter  was
dated  Dec.  20th,  1848,  and  I  have  not  heard  from  Mr.  South
since.  The  world  who  fancied  that  Mr.  Wakley  had  detected
imposition  in  my  experiments  may  learn  from  this  alone  how
much  confidence  is  to  be  placed  in  what  he  unhesitatingly  says.

The  Provincial  Journal,  conducted  by  Drs.  Streeten  and
Ranking,  thus  speaks  of  it, —

“  The  only  surgical  opinion  of  repute  which  he  quotes,  (that  of
the  late  Mr.  Samuel  Cooper,)  calls  it  ‘  a  painful  tumor,  which  was
believed  to  be  of  a  cancerous  nature,’  thus  throwing  doubt  as  to  its
cancerous  nature  at  all.  The  evidence,  then,  amounts  to  this  : — A
woman  has  a  painful  tumor  of  the  breast,  very  like  cancer,  which,
in  five  years  of  that  very  critical  period  of  her  life — between  42  and
47  years,  is  absorbed,  her  general  health  having  greatly  improved,
and  during  this  period  she  was  mesmerised,  with  some  intervals.
Valeat  quantum  valere  jpotest.  If  this  is  to  be  considered  as  medical


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


379


evidence,  such  as  medical  men  will  believe,  so-  as  to  induce  them  to
recommend  or  try  a  new  plan,  open  to  the  gravest  objections,  we
should  feel  ashamed  of  our  profession.  But  that  national  common
sense  and  judgment  which  the  practice  of  medicine  (especially  in  the
provinces,  where  responsibility  is  not  much  divided)  fosters,  is  a
guarantee  against  the  propagation  of  such  *  mental  fevers/  ”

“That  mesmerism  occasionally  produces  the  phenomena  of  som¬
nambulism,  catalepsy,  and  hysteria,  every  one  who  has  studied  the
evidence  must  believe  ;  but  the  whole  process  is  so  repulsive  to  men
of  clear,  clean  minds,  and  is  so  open  to  the  vilest  abuse,  that  any
benefits  which  may  accrue  from  it  are  thought  to  be  too  dearly  pur¬
chased.  We  thank  Dr.  F.  Hawkins  for  openly  and  boldly  stating
the  general  opinion.  Dr.  Elliotson  considers  it  a  stigma  that  the
medical  profession  neglected  the  facts  of  insensibility  produced  by
mesmerism,  but  at  once  employed  ether  and  chloroform.  Nothing,
in  our  minds,  proves  more  the  real  soundness  of  the  morals  of  the
medical  body.  Bodily  health  is  a  good  thing,  but  there  is  some¬
thing  better.  It  is  the  pure  in  heart  who  see  God.”

One  of  these  editors,  Dr.  Banking,*  has  ignored  all  our  pain¬
less  surgical  operations,  called  us  mischievous  practitioners,
taking  up  mesmerism,  homoeopathy,  and  such  like  vagaries ;
and  yet  in  the  same  article  gives  an  account  of  a  healthy
female  who  had  a  string  tied  round  her  breast  to  remove  a
tumor  of  it.  “  She  bore  the  initiatory  steps  of  the  operation
without  a  murmur,  without  failure  of  pulse,  and  without
change  of  countenance.  The  instant  the  ligature  was  tight¬
ened,  which  it  was  with  the  full  force  of  two  surgeons,  she  gave
a  yell  of  agony,  the  pulse  became  imperceptible,  the  counte¬
nance  became  ghastly  pale,  and  in  eighteen  hours  she  was  a
corpse ! !”

Mr.  S.  Cooper,  who  was  always  a  very  timid,  reserved
man,  unacquainted  with  mesmerism,  and  at  the  moment  in
his  death -bed,  full  of  grief  at  his  treatment  by  University
College,  so  that  he  seemed  uneasy  at  writing  anything  which
he  was  told  by  me  I  should  publish,  had  never  doubted  for  a
moment  that  it  was  cancer,  but  advised  its  excision  without
delay.  After  I  left  him  he  told  Mr.  Broxholm  of  Chertsey  that  it
really  had  been  a  true  cancer,  and  that  it  really  now  was  en¬
tirely  gone.  Surely  the  various  surgeons  who  saw  it  were  as  ca¬
pable  as  any  others  of  forming  an  opinion.  Dr.  Ashburner  and
myself,  from  having  been  attached  to  hospitals  all  our  lives,
have  had  ample  experience  to  judge  of  cancer :  and  I  ask  the
Provincial  Journal,  if  the  description  of  this  hereditary  case
were  given  to  a  candidate  at  his  examination  at  the  College  of
either  Physicians  or  Surgeons,  and  he  did  not  answer  that  it
was  a  cancer,  he  ought  not  to  be  turned  back  as  unfit  to  prac-

*  He  publishes  half-yearly  abstracts  of  medical  novelties.  See  Zoist,  XIX.,  291.

VOL.  VII.  r  F


380


On  Medical  Anti-Mesmerists,


tise  ?  The  case  admitted  of  no  doubt,  so  distinctly  was  it
marked.  Whether  the  cancerous  disposition  in  the  frame
would  have  been  eradicated  by  mesmerism,  I  dare  not  say.

Such  splendid  facts  in  the  alleviation  and  cure  of  human
suffering  may  have  no  attraction  to  men  of  clear  and  clean
minds, — men  pure  in  heart  and  who  see  God!  These  are
noble,  candid  Englishmen,  who  write  thus;  high  minded,  high
bred  gentlemen ;  humble,  meek,  and  brother-loving  Christians,
asked  by  the  beloved  disciple  of  him  whose  followers  they  are
always  proclaiming  themselves,  “  He  that  loveth  not  his  bro¬
ther  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath
not  seen  ?”*  This  is  pre-eminently  the  day  of  cant.

I  lately  had  a  letter  from  Miss  Aglionby,  of  whomDr.  Thomas
May  of  wrote  in  so  discreditable  a  manner,  after  a  conversa¬
tion  with  the  Rev.  Dr.  Maitland,  as  I  happen  to  know.  That
injured  lady  writes,  “  I  have  to  thank  you  for  your  kind  defence
of  me  against  Dr.  Mayo’s  aspersions,  which,  however,  did
not  trouble  me  much.  Mesmerism  has  done  me  much  more
good  than  he  can  ever  do  me  harm.  If  the  good  doctor  had
deigned  to  read  over  my  case  attentively  before  he  attacked
me,  he  might  have  seen  that  though  I  was  possessed,’  as  he
calls  it,  by  Mr.  Nixon,  I  was  still  more  strongly  influenced  by
a  crystal ;  but  that,  perhaps,  might  be  equally  horrifying  to
an  antimesmerist.  As  to  ‘  husbands,  fathers,  and  brothers
objecting/  my  brother-in-law  (a  clergyman)  kindly  continued
the  mesmeric  treatment  six  weeks  after  Mr.  Nixon  ceased  to
attend  me.  But  enough  of  this  subject :  we  mesmerists, —
whether  insignificant  like  myself,  or  the  leader  and  apostle  of
the  cause  like  you,- — must  all  make  up  our  minds  to  be  reviled
and  slandered.”

But  although  these  editors,  in  their  shallow  course  of  tem¬
porary  expediency,  not  thinking  that  they  must  soon  come
aground,  ignore  all  the  facts  of  The  Zoist,  they  publish  what¬
ever  they  fancy  to  make  against  mesmerism.  The  editor  of
the  Medical  Gazette  published  the  report  of  the  Calcutta
committee  without  reference  to  The  Zoist,  which  report  I
published  in  No.  XVII.  It  was  drawn  up  by  men  quite  ig¬
norant  of  mesmerism,  and  violently  prejudiced  against  the
subject,  and  thus  unfit,  intellectually  and  morally,  for  the
task.  I  exposed  the  report  in  the  same  number,  and  pub¬
lished  the  exposure  of  it  made  by  the  honest,  manly  editors
of  all  the  India  newspapers,  who  set  a  noble  example  to  cer¬
tain  cowardly  English  editors  of  newspapers  who  have  wit¬
nessed  mesmerism  a  hundred  times  in  private  houses,  profess
their  belief  in  private,  and  receive  The  Zoist,  promise  great

*  1  John  iv.,  20.  f  Zoist,  No.  XXIV.,  p  378.


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


381


assistance  to  the  cause  continually,  and  yet  allude  to  it  about
once  in  two  years,  and  then  take  great  care  not  to  commit
themselves.*  Dr.  Esdaile  demolished  all  the  sayings  and
doings  of  his  weak  official  visitors,  as  may  be  seen  in  No.
XXII.,  p.  158.  But  not  a  word  of  all  this  did  Dr.  A.  Taylor
insert  in  his  Gazette ,  and  I  wonder  that  his  employers,
Messrs.  Longman,  allow  such  conduct,  as  if  they  had  the  feel¬
ings  of  mere  tradesmen.  Though  they  publish  none  of  the
benefits  of  mesmerism,  the  editor  of  the  Medical  Gazette f  pub¬
lished  an  account  by  a  Dr.  Sharkey,  of  Jersey,  of  the  alleged
ill  effects  of  mesmerism  in  two  cases.  A  boy  was  said  to  have
become  epileptic,  and  a  girl  to  have  been  convulsed.  And
no  wonder ;  for  the  ignorant  person  who  mesmerised  the  boy,
not  being  able  to  wake  him  (mesmerism  being,  of  course,  all
imposition),  various  persons  attempted,  and  frightened  the
poor  child  into  fits :  the  same  was  probably  the  cause  in  the
girl.  Epilepsy  often  arises  from  fright :  in  the  mesmeric  state
there  is  always  sensitiveness ;  and  violent  means  and  the  inter¬
ference  of  strangers  may,  of  course,  frighten  the  subject  into
fits.  The  girl  is  said  only  to  have  suffered  some  inconveni¬
ence  afterwards.  Nothing  more  likely,  if  ignorant  persons
play  with  mesmerism.  However,  no  names  or  addresses  are
given.  A  friend  of  mine — Colonel  Davidson,  resident  in
Jersey  now  for  five  years  and  a  half,  and  much  occupied  with
mesmerism,  never  heard  of  these  cases,  and  has  made  every
enquiry  about  them,  but  in  vain,  and  the  Dr.  Sharkey  has  left
the  island.  Dr.  Dickson,  of  Jersey,  who  prohibits  his  patients
from  being  mesmerised,  has  never  appealed  to  these  cases.

To  show  the  feeling  of  the  Medical  Times ,  I  quote  the  fol¬
lowing  passage  from  a  recent  number  : — J

“  The  absence  of  his  Holiness  from  Rome  appears  to  have  offered
a  vacancy  in  the  art  of  miraclemongery,  which  has  been  seized  upon
by  the  mesmerisers  :  but  their  triumph  has  been  of  short  duration,
as  might  have  been  easily  foreseen.  At  Rome  it  is  a  sacrilege  for
any  one,  save  a  priest,  to  work  a  miracle.  This  fact  seems  to  have
escaped  the  sagacity  of  M.  La  Fontaine,  an  authority  among  the
mesmerisers,  who  recently  visited  the  ‘  Holy  City’  and  then  opened
a  shop  on  his  own  account,  at  a  meeting,  attended,  as  we  are  informed,
(in  a  letter  from  Rome,)  by  all  the  medical  men  in  modern  Babylon.
Mr.  La  Fontaine  injected  the  mesmeric  fluid  into  the  ears  of  two
young  deaf  and  dumb  persons,  who  immediately  received  the  faculty
of  hearing.  For  his  pains,  he  received  a  pressing  invitation  to  betake

*  Such  men  dare  not  imitate  the  conduct  of  the  Morning  Herald,  which
boldly  published  my  account  of  Rush  ;  nor  of  the  Family  Herald,  which  sells  to
an  immense  amount,  and  has  no  fear  of  leading  the  public  to  a  knowledge  of  mes¬
merism  and  The  Zoist.

f  March  12th,  1847.  +  November  17th,  1849.

F  F  2


382


On  Medical  Anti- Mesmerists,


himself  elsewhere, — proving  the  truth  of  the  old  adage,  that  two  of
a  trade  can  never  agree.” — Nov.  17th.,  1849.*

The  editor  of  the  Medical  Gazette ,  in  ecstacy  informed  his
readers  last  October  12th,  that  a  book  exists  called  the  Mira¬
culous  Nonconformist,  which  shews  that  a  man  named  Great-
rakes  practised  mesmerism  in  the  seventeenth  century  and
cured  as  well  as  we  do  now.  Medical  editors  either  calculate
upon  a  high  amount  of  ignorance  in  the  profession  or  are
grossly  ignorant  themselves.  In  No.  IX.,  April,  1845,  I
quoted  this  work,  and  published  an  engraving  of  Greatrakes
mesmerising,  and  in  the  first  number  of  The  Zoist  (April,
1843)  had  given  an  account  of  him.  But  his  wonderful  cures
have  always  been  known  to  the  mesmeric  world.  This  learned
editor  tells  his  readers,  as  great  news,  that  “  one  fact  appears
conclusive, — this  mode  of  cure  by  the  hands  was  known  a
century  before  Mesmer  was  born.”  If  Dr.  A.  Taylor  was  as
informed  as  Messrs.  Longman  and  Co.  have  a  right  to  expect
him,  he  would  know  that  The  Zoistf  has  shewn  mesmerism  to
have  been  long  known  in  India  and  Greece,  and  even  in  the
times  of  the  ancient  Jews.J

*  A  gentleman  called  upon  me  lately,  saying  he  was  Dr.  Bushman  and  fo¬
reign  editor  of  the  Medical  Times ,  that  I  had  shewn  him  some  politeness  many
years  ago,  and  that  he  was  quite  ignorant  of  mesmerism,  but  very  anxious  to  see
something  of  it,  and  would  be  obliged  to  me  if  I  would  give  him  an  opportunity.
I  immediately  offered  to  shew  him  some  cases,  and  we  fixed  an  evening  and  hour.
He  then  begged  permission  to  bring  his  son.  To  this  also  I  assented.  I  had  my
patients  ready  ;  and  expected  him  the  whole  evening.  He  never  came,  nor  has
he  ever  sent  an  excuse.  This  anecdote  and  the  quotation  are  in  harmony.

f  Nos.  X.,  p.  156  ;  XI.,  p.  304  ;  XIX.,  p.  273  ;  XXIII.,  p.  250,  263  ;
XXVIII.,  p.  361.

X  Dr.  A.  Taylor  is  as  ignorant  of  phrenology  and  equally  inveterate  against  it.
He  calls  it  a  flimsy  science,  and  inserts  any  trash  which  is  sent  him  against  it  by
persons  equally  ignorant  with  himself,  whereas  he  copies  not  one  of  those  un¬
answerable  confirmations  of  it  which  appear  in  The  Zoist.  Our  adversaries  were
all  mute  respecting  Rush.

I  may  be  excused  for  relating  in  a  foot-note  something  personal,  but  finely
illustrating  the  malevolent  spirit  of  medical  editors  towards  mesmerists  themselves.
In  the  late  Dr.  James  Johnson’s  Medico -Chirurgical  Review,  some  of  the  attacks
in  which  upon  mesmerism  are  too  vulgar  and  obscene  for  quotation  in  The  Zoist,
was,  on  Oct.  1,  1846,  a  review  of  my  Harveian  Oration,  which  is  said  to  be
chiefly  occupied  with  bald  and  profitless  tales  about  Linacre,  Caius,  and  other
old  fellows  of  the  College,  and  with  a  dreary  account  of  the  disputes  about
the  circulation  of  the  blood  in  Harvey’s  time.  For  the  folly  and  untruth  of  all
this,  I  refer  with  pride  to  the  oration.  “  The  narrative,”  however,  is  said  to  be
“  enlivened  with  random  remarks,  some  of  which  are  really  very  amusing.  For
example,  four  of  the  silly  opposers  of  Harvey’s  views  are  thus  summarily  con¬
signed  to  rest :  requiescunt  in  pace.  ‘  Simon  Boullotius  cum  Hugone  Chalesio,
Franciscus  quoque  Bazin  cum  Philippo  Hardouino  suo  ;

‘ - not  a  pinch  of  dust  remains  of  Cheops.’

Sanguis  autem  ilium  suum  e motum  circularem ’  etiam  nunc  improbus  tenet.’
The  classicality  of  the  Latin  (illum  suum  is  surely  Elliotsonian)  is  strangely
set  off  by  the  English  quotation.”  The  unacquaintance  with  Latin  on  the  part
of  the  anonymous  writer  is  equal  to  his  inability  to  perceive  the  truths  and


by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


383


\

If  the  mass  of  practitioners  are  kept  in  the  dark  and  pre¬
judiced  by  the  journalists,  they  are  not  the  less  injured  by
those  to  whom  they  are  in  the  habit  of  looking  up  in  practice,
and  in  many  cases  most  absurdly.  The  treatment  of  insanity
requires  the  greatest  improvement ;  for,  in  our  insane  esta¬
blishments,  with  a  superabundance  of  means,  no  advances  in
the  knowledge  of  the  disease  are  made;  nor  in  the  cure,
beyond  preserving  the  general  health,  making  the  patients
comfortable,  and  doing  them  no  harm,  as  doctors  formerly
always  did.  Those  who  obtain  their  living  by  insanity  know
no  more  about  the  philosophy  of  the  disease  or  its  treatment
than  the  ordinary  practitioners  outside  the  buildings  who
practise  in  every  thing :  and  yet  they  pride  themselves  upon
despising  mesmerism.  Dr.  Conolly  many  years  ago  wrote
what  will  be  found  in  Zoist,  No.  VII.,  pp.  275-7,  and  lately
advertised  his  disbelief  of  mesmerism,*  as  though  he  knows
more  about  it  than  any  of  his  keepers.  The  world  will  not
endure  this  much  longer,  when  they  have  learnt  that  out
of  74  insane  persons  mesmerised  by  Dr.  Kean  in  the  last  two
years,  64  were  discharged  to  all  appearance  cured.  While  a
few  surgeons  of  India,  no  less  than  all  the  newspaper  editors,
show  in  fine  contrast  with  those  of  Great  Britain,  so  do  the


character  of  my  oration.  The  expression — ilium  suum  is  the  union  of  a  de¬
monstrative  with  a  possessive  pronoun,  common  not  only  in  Latin  but  in  all  the
few  other  languages  that  I  understand.  “Do  have  a  little  mercy  upon  me
and  these  my  naughty  brother  editors,”  would  be  good  English  in  a  medical
journal.  In  speaking  of  the  modesty  of  Socrates,  Cicero  says,  “Suum  illud,
nihli  ut  affirmet,  tenet  ad  extremum ,”  (Tusc.  Qucest.,  i.,  42.)  This  writer  also
calculates,  like  Mr.  Wakley,  upon  the  ignorance  of  his  professional  readers  and
the  power  of  boldness,  or,  what  is  more  probable,  knows  no  better.  For  the
editors  of  the  English  medical  journals  and  their  contributors  spell  many  words
usually  wrong,  writing  phymosis,  paraphymosis,  aneunsmus,  &c.  Perhaps  he
may  be  interested  in  the  following  letter  from  a  highly  educated  and  most  distin¬
guished  man  : —

“  My  dear  Dr.  Elliotson, — I  have  had  great  pleasure  in  reading  your  very
admirable  oration,  which  I  have  done  in  both  the  languages  in  which  it  is  written,
and  am  much  charmed  with  the  ingenious  elegance  of  the  Latin,  and  the  simple
boldness  with  which  you  have  surmounted  many  technical  difficulties  in  your  sub¬
ject,  in  that  very  classical  piece  of  scholarship  ;  and  still  more  pleased,  as  well  as
instructed,  by  the  more  important  essentials  in  the  matter  and  argument.

“  I  think  the  manliness  of  your  appeal  one  of  your  finest  efforts  on  behalf  of
the  only  true  mode  of  following  science,  viz.,  experiment  of  what  is  before  the
eyes,  with  that  proper  mixture  of  faith  and  diffidence  which  teaches  us  both  the
illimitable  resources  of  nature  and  the  little  knowledge  we  have  as  yet  acquired  of
her  secrets.

“  Most  obediently  your’s,

“  E.  Bulwer  Lytton.

“James  Street.”

*  Zoist ,  No.  XXIV.,  p.  369.  This  is  worth  referring  to.  He  might  learn
much  of  the  philosophy  of  insanity  from  the  account  of  Miss  Collins’s  case  in

Nos.  XI.,  XII.


384


On  Medical  Anti-Mesmerists,


physicians  concerned  with  the  insane.  Let  Dr.  Conolly  study
the  enlightened  conduct  of  Dr.  Strong  and  Dr.  Kean.

The  immense  majority  of  cures  of  insanity  are  spontane¬
ous  :  and,  if  more  cures  take  place  now  than  formerly,  it  is
because  doctors  do  less  mischief  than  formerly.  All  who  have
friends  insane  should  insist  upon  an  ample  trial  being  made
of  mesmerism,  notwithstanding  Drs.  Conolly,  Munro,  Mor¬
rison,  and  nearly  the  whole  band  of  insanity  doctors,  child¬
ishly  sneer  at  the  mention  of  mesmerism.*

The  mass  of  practitioners  are  encouraged  to  despise  mes¬
merism  equally  by  those  who  happen  to  practise  among  the
higher  orders.  Sir  James  Clark,  though  I  was  once  at  the
trouble  to  shew  him  the  wonders  of  the  Okeys,  was  unable
to  appreciate  them,  and  smiles  with  pity  upon  those  who
believe  in  mesmerism.  Dr.  H.  Holland,  when  Mr.  Chenevix
was  here,  argued  to  me  in  the  words  of  Cuvier  and  La  Place
that  mesmerism  was  highly  probable,  but  now  considers
it  folly  :  for  the  late  Bishop  of  Norwich,  just  before  his  death,
told  a  reverend  friend  of  mine  that  one  of  his  family  had  pro¬
cured  sleep  by  its  means  and  been  wonderfully  benefitted
when  all  other  means  had  failed,  but  that  “when  he  men¬
tioned  it  to  Holland,  Holland  only  laughed  at  him.”  Dr.
Bright  tells  those  patients  who  ask  his  opinion  upon  mes¬
merism,  that  it  is  “  all  chicanery.”  Dr.  Fergusson  continually
discourages  its  use,  though  before  some  persons  he  appears
favourable  to  it :  and  a  lady,  whose  neuralgia  both  he  and
Sir  B.  Brodie  had  failed  to  relieve,  told  me  that  he  one  day
began  to  mesmerise  her  himself,  but  that  Sir  B.  Brodie  en¬
tered  the  room,  and  said,  “  thaPs  all  nonsense ;  it  will  do  no
good;”  and  he  instantly  desisted.  Dr.  Chambers  told  Baron
de  Goldsmid  that  it  was  all  humbug ;  that  he  had  never  seen

*  Would  any  one  believe  that  Dr.  Conolly  lately  made  the  following  observa¬
tions  in  a  lecture  at  the  College  of  Physicians  ?

“  The  yet  unsettled  state  of  many  important  questions  relative  to  the  nervous
system,  and  the  revolutions  even  now  taking  place  in  its  theories,  or  the  mere
rising  up  of  doubts  respecting  that  great  theory  of  sensation  and  movement,
which  it  was  once  supposed  the  labours  of  Sir  Charles  Bell  had  settled  on  some
foundation,  a  subject  ingeniously  alluded  to  by  Dr.  Gull,  Gulstonian  lecturer,
a  week  or  two  ago  from  this  place — tend  at  least  to  enforce  caution,  to  lessen
our  reliance  on  mere  experiments,  and  to  direct  our  attention  more  closely  to
structure  and  to  function  in  health  and  disease.

“  Men  now  of  middle  age  find  the  whole  face  of  physiology  to  have  changed
since  they  were  students,  and  the  most  important  parts  of  the  change  are  quite
recent.  They  cannot  but  learn  from  this  to  abstain  from  the  premature  en¬
deavours  yet  to  construct  imperishable  theories,  and  to  be  content  still  to  observe
and  to  record.  The  veil  which  surrounds  our  senses  is  but  gradually  and  slowly
permitted  to  be  withdrawn,  and  it  is  neither  useful  nor  wise  to  hasten  to  positive
conclusions,  as  if  we  had  already  seen  all  the  glorious  things  that  are  behind  it ;
and  which,  if  ever  fully  to  be  known  by  man,  successive  men  and  ages  will  alone
be  permitted  to  disclose.” — Lancet ,  Oct.  20,  1849.


by  Dr.  Elliot  son.


385


it,  would  not  go  and  see  it;  and,  if  he  did,  he  would  not
believe  it.*  This  is  the  language  always  held  by  Sir  B.  Brodie
and  so  many  physicians  and  general  practitioners  at  the  west
end  of  town  who  aspire  to  fashionable  practice  and  almost  all
model  themselves  upon  him,  though  a  very  limited  person.

The  Colleges  of  Physicians  and  Surgeons  and  the  Boyal
Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society  refuse  their  members  an
opportunity  of  reading  The  Zoist  or  other  mesmeric  works.
The  College  of  Physicians  allows  its  Fellows  to  stigmatize
at  its  meetings  those  Fellows  who  are  mesmerists  as  lewd
quacks  and  impostors,  without  calling  to  account  those  who
utter  such  language  or  those  who  are  thus  accused.  Of
course  I  shall  never  attend  a  meeting  or  take  part  in  the
affairs  of  the  College  again  while  this  impunity  continues.
Mr.  Stanley  was  lately  President  of  the  College  of  Surgeons.
It  was  he  who  introduced  the  account  of  the  Nottinghamshire
mesmeric  amputation  to  the  Society,  and  he  told  me  at  the
time  that  the  case  was  most  satisfactory  :  for  his  words  were,
“  it  is  as  clean  a  case  as  ever  was  published,” — teres  atque
rotundus.  Mr.  Green  is  now  President,  and  he,  having
imbibed  all  the  opinions  of  Coleridge  and  seen  mesmerism
thirty  years  ago  in  Germany,  acknowledges  its  truth  in
private.  For  a  gentleman  informed  me  that,  when  London
was  full  of  the  phenomena  of  the  Okeys,  he  said,  “  Why  I
knew  all  this  years  ago :  but  mind  don't  say  anything  about
it.”  He  will  surely  do  better  than  Mr.  Stanley,  and  order  The
Zoist.  The  Boyal  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society,  being  a
more  open  institution,  will  not  go  on  much  longer  without  it.

The  younger  men  of  the  profession  are  now  beginning  to
see  that  their  seniors  and  leaders  have  played  them  a  bad
trick ;  and  are  daily  expressing  to  me  their  anxiety  to  learn
the  truths  of  mesmerism.  Few  medical  persons  now  longer


*  I  was  out  of  town  and  the  Baron  consulted  Dr.  Chambers,  who  asked  who
had  attended  him.  “  Dr.  Elliotson.”  “Oh,  that  gentleman  who  has  always
some  new  fancy  in  his  head,  and  now  he  has  got  mesmerism.”  “  Why,  don’t  you
believe  its  truth,  Dr.  Chambers  ?”  “  No  ;  and  I  would  not  believe  it  if  I  saw

it,”  &c.  To  all  this  I  am  accustomed.  When  I  established  the  good  effects  of
prussic  acid,  Dr.  Chambers  with  others  succeeded  for  a  long  while  in  keeping  it
out  of  the  Pharmacopoeia  :  when  I  established  the  use  of  quinine,  he  said  across
me  at  the  College  of  Physicians  that  its  name  would  not  be  remembered  in  a
twelvemonth  :  when  I  advocated  the  stethoscope,  he  long  called  it  humbug,  just
the  thing  for  me  to  rave  about,  a  thing  that  he  never  heard  any  sensible  man
speak  in  favour  of.  I  have  now  lived  to  see  him  habitually  prescribe  quinine  and
prussic  acid,  and  habitually  use  the  stethoscope  in  consultation  with  me.  I  re¬
peat  this  now  in  order  to  say  that  it  is  anything  but  highminded  in  gentlemen
not  to  confess  that  formerly  they  were^frong,  and  did  me  injustice.  Dr.  Cham¬
bers  did  me  infinite  harm  for  twenty  years  :  but  I  never  retorted.

For  Dr.  Seymour’s  language  in  regard  to  mesmerism,  see  Zoist ,  No.  XX.,
p.  370.  He  calls  all  stethoscopists  fools, — see  my  Numerous  Cases,  p.  61.


386


On  Medical  Anti-Mesmerists,


dare  to  call  it  humbug  :  but  their  tack  is  to  call  it  dangerous.
They  most  unscrupulously,  and  without  any  reason,  being  al¬
together  ignorant  of  it,  tell  patients  who  wish  for  it  that  it
excites  the  brain  and  causes  insanity.  I  knew  a  royal  phy¬
sician,  a  secret  believer  in  mesmerism,  who  was  attending  a
lady  with  cancer  of  the  uterus,  and  of  course  did  her  no  good.
Her  son,  understanding  mesmerism,  wished  to  mesmerise
her :  but  the  physician  forbad  it :  preferring  that  the  poor
woman  should  be  unrelieved  rather  than  it  be  said  that  he
had  sanctioned  mesmerism.  I  know  another  physician,  for¬
merly  a  fellow  of  a  college  in  Cambridge,  who  had  ceased  to
prescribe  for  a  case  of  consumption,  saying  that  he  could  do
no  good  :  but,  when  asked  if  the  patient's  earnest  wish  to  be
mesmerised  might  be  gratified,  forbad  it,  and,  though  a  rela¬
tion,  said  he  would  never  attend  her  again  if  it  were  done.
It  is  very  common  for  medical  persons  to  oppose  mesmerism
violently  in  cases  where  they  have  long  declared  they  could
neither  cure  nor  benefit  the  sufferer.

I  knew  a  surgeon  who  many  years  ago  cut  off  a  limb  in
mesmeric  insensibility  :  but  now  is  absolutely  enamoured  of
chloroform,  and  declares  mesmerism  never  strengthens  any
one.  He  gave  a  patient  500  drops  of  laudanum  a  day,  abso¬
lutely  refusing  to  mesmerise  her,  when  he  knew  that  she
might  be  sent  to  sleep  in  two  minutes,  and  had  always  re¬
ceived  inexpressible  benefit  from  it :  and  he  added  that  he
knew  I  should  not  think  of  mesmerising  her.  I  did  mesmerise
her  daily  as  soon  as  she  arrived  in  town :  and  at  the  end  of  a
week  she  left  off  her  opium  altogether,  and  went  to  the  opera
twice  a  week,  as  well  as  to  other  places  every  day :  generally
drove  out  twice  in  the  day.  She  had  made  the  journey  to
London  in  two  days,  and  arrived  in  a  state  that  shocked  me,
such  as  I  had  not  seen  her  in  before.  She  returned  home  in
one  day,  and  was  able  to  take  her  usual  walk  and  drive  the
day  after,  notwithstanding  an  attack  of  English  cholera  which
had  thrown  her  back  before  she  left  town.  This  person's  con¬
duct  in  regard  to  mesmerism  is  truly  lamentable,  and  arises,
I  feel  certain,  from  his  desire  not  to  be  thought  a  favourer  of
mesmerism  by  his  rich  patients  who  laugh  at  it,  and  by  the
fashionable  doctors  in  London  with  whom  he  is  often  in  con¬
sultation.  If  he  had  made  but  a  dozen  passes  daily  before
her,  a  sweet  sleep  would  have  been  produced,  and  she  would
have  been  spared  loads  of  opium,  which  only  accelerated  and
aggravated  her  returns  of  agony  and  made  her  wretched,  and
she  would  have  been  spared  m$ny  weeks  of  agony  and  such
exhaustion  that,  whenever  he  saw  a  servant  going  in  the  di¬
rection  from  the  mansion,  he  expected  it  was  to  announce  her


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


387


sinking.  She  grew  worse  and  worse  till  he  was  frightened,
and  anxious  that  she  should  come  to  town.  And  yet  she  gave
him  every  hint  and  silent  entreaty  to  mesmerise  her :  and  he
knew  that  I  had  years  ago  given  as  much  as  1200  drops  of
laudanum  in  a  day,  with  no  alleviation  of  the  pain  but  rather
an  acceleration  of  the  returns,  and  violent  subsequent  vomiting,
and  then  cured  all  rapidly  by  mesmerism  only.  He  said  at
last  that  mesmerism  might  do  good  as  she  had  faith  in  it !  but
for  no  other  reason :  and  yet  he  once  knew  that  a  patient  in
Nottinghamshire,  who  was  mesmerised  before  his  leg  was  cut
off,  got  better  nights  and  was  improved  in  strength  by  the
mesmerism  before  the  operation.  He  knew  that  she  said  the
sleep  from  opium  was  less  refreshing  than  mesmeric  sleep.

“  Oh  !  what  different  sleep  it  is  from  mesmeric  sleep  !”  she  wrote
to  me.  .  .  .  “  I  can  scarcely  understand  his  object  in  not  mesmeris¬
ing  me,  unless  he  wishes  to  be  able  to  say  that  he  has  never  tried
it  in  any  case,  for  I  have  often  told  him  how  susceptible  I  was  ;  and
he  has  often  during  my  illness  remained  with  me  three  or  four  hours
in  the  morning  and  two  at  night,  if  not  more.”

Once  she  wrote, —

“Last  Thursday  I  thought  I  never  could  have  lived  through
the  night :  twenty-four  hours  of  almost  constant  pain  had  reduced
me  to  almost  the  last  stage  of  weakness — pain  which  mesmerism
would  have  saved  me,  but  which  laudanum  failed  in  relieving ;  for
it  would  not  then  remain  on  my  stomach.  If  I  had  wanted  any
further  conviction  of  the  advantages  which  I  have  derived  from  it  in
former  illnesses,  this  present  illness  might  convince  the  most  incre¬
dulous  by  the  difference.  This  time  I  have  hardly  been  above  three
or  four  days  without  some  relapse;  when  I  was  so  ill  in  London  and
you  were  mesmerising  me,  from  the  second,  if  not  quite  the  first
day,  I  began  to  mend  without  a  drawback  :  but  alas  !  I  fear  all  hope
of  my  being  able  to  have  it  done  here  is  in  vain.”

This  was  a  lady  of  high  rank :  and  mesmerism  is  a  thing
which  ought  to  be  accessible  without  a  farthing  of  expense  to
the  poorest  person — for  any  body  in  health  can  mesmerise.
This  was  legitimate  medicine  and  legitimate  suffering.

Some  medical  men  tell  patients  that  mesmerism  can  do
no  good,  as  it  works  solely  on  the  imagination.  To  say  no¬
thing  of  the  untruth  of  this,  why  should  not  a  cure  by  imagi¬
nation  be  as  good  a  cure  as  any  other  ?  A  lady  at  Bristol,
who  could  not  turn  in  her  bed  before  she  was  mesmerised,
astonished  her  friends  one  day  by  walking  into  the  square ;
and  she  had  been  subjected  to  the  annoyance  of  a  medical
friend  making  that  assertion.

Professor  Christison,  of  Edinburgh,  considers  mesmerism
quackery.  A  lady,  whose  father  was  in  a  hopeless  state,  wrote


388


On  Medical  Anti-Mesmerists ,


me  word  that  she  called  upon  him  to  speak  to  him  about
mesmerism :  he  told  her  he  thought  some  one  had  played  a
joke  upon  her  in  giving  her  the  idea  that  he  believed  in  such
quackery ;  that  such  a  person  as  Professor  Gregory  might
believe  in  it,  but  that  he  did  not.  She  heroically  replied
that  Professor  Gregory  was  an  honest  man,  and,  as  such,  had
found  himself  under  the  necessity  of  examining  the  subject
and  announcing  his  conviction  of  its  truth.

The  public  know  the  ridiculous  figure  that  medical  men
at  Bristol  have  cut  in  eagerly  announcing  the  discovery  of
imaginary  organized  bodies  in  the  case  of  cholera,  and  their
contest  for  priority  in  discovering  what  never  existed  and
establishing  the  fungoid  theory.  Yet  these  very  men  refuse
to  examine  obvious  facts,  and  facts  of  the  highest  practical
importance.  A  young  surgeon  read  a  case  of  great  mesmeric
benefit,  at  the  Medical  Meeting  at  Bristol.  Dr.  Budd,*  who
was  so  cruelly  nipped  by  the  further  researches  of  Mr.  Busk
and  other  able  men,  rose  and  protested  against  mesmerism
being  introduced  to  the  notice  of  the  association.  One  sur¬
geon,  now  in  the  council  of  the  association,  told  him,  as  they
were  driving  to  the  meeting,  that  he  ought  to  be  kicked  out
of  the  association  for  introducing  the  subject  to  it.

In  a  dreadful  case  of  cancer,  in  a  west  of  England  city,
when  the  medical  men  procured  no  relief,  her  brother-in-law
procured  her  tranquil  sleep,  but  the  whole  had  to  be  kept  a
secret  from  the  doctors,  who  violently  opposed  the  employ¬
ment  of  mesmerism.f

But  enough  of  all  this.  May  the  rising  generation  of
medical  men  remember  the  words  of  the  late  Bev.  Dr.  Chalmers
respecting  the  first  reception  of  the  Newtonian  Philosophy,

“Authority  scowled  upon  it.  Taste  was  disgusted  by  it,  and
FASHION  was  ashamed  of  it”%

Let  them  think  also  of  the  following  paragraph  in  Sir  E.
Bulwer  Lytton’s  late  powerful  and  elevated  novel  of  The  Cax-
tons, —

“  ‘ Know  thyself,’  said  the  old  philosopher.  'Improve  thyself,’
saith  the  new.  He  (Vivian)  still  fancies  that  all  he  has  to  do  is  to

*  A  physician  among  that  family  of  Budds,  and  resident  at  Plymouth  or  Ex¬
eter,  returned  to  the  late  Mr.  Bulteel,  son-in-law  of  the  late  Earl  Grey,  my
pamphlet  on  Painless  Operations  unopened,  refusing  to  read  it.  Another,  in  Lon¬
don,  loudly  condemned  in  the  College  of  Physicians  my  being  allowed  to  deliver
the  Harveian  Oration,  and  he  has  thus  secured  posthumous  fame.

f  A  retired  physician  wrote  this  to  me  upon  the  affair  : — “  What  a  monstrous
thing  it  is,  that  such  prejudice  and  moral  cowardice  should  stand  between  suffering
humanity  and  a  remedy  designed  by  heaven  to  mitigate  pain  !  ‘  It  is/  as  my

correspondent  justly  remarks,  1  a  great  thing  even  to  ease  a  patient  of  extreme
pain  without  having  recourse  to  medicines. 7  ”

+  See  my  Human  Physiology ,  p.  397.


by  Dr.  Elliotson.


389


get  money  and  power,  and  some  of  those  empty  prizes  in  the  great
lottery,  which  are  often  won  more  easily  by  our  sins  than  our  virtues .”


I  am  anxious  to  make  a  few  observations  to  the  public  on
the  choice  of  mesmerisers.  A  very  large  number  of  those
who  profess  to  mesmerise  do  not  a  hundredth  part  of  the  good
they  might,  and  thus  injure  individual  patients  and  the  pro¬
gress  of  the  subject.  It  is  difficult  to  find  a  professed  mes-
meriser  who  gives  me  satisfaction.  Too  many  are  full  of
whims  of  their  own  and  act  the  quack,  talking  as  if  possessed
of  extraordinary  knowledge,  making  all  sorts  of  displays  in
their  methods,  in  fact,  playing  all  sorts  of  antics,  and  talking
all  sorts  of  nonsense.  Many  of  my  patients  have  been  made
so  nervous  by  these  mesmerisers  as  to  be  unable  to  continue
to  employ  them.  Some  thoughtlessly  talk  all  the  time.  Now
a  good  mesmeriser  works  in  silence,  and  allows  no  talking  in
the  room,  nor  anything  else  that  can  excite  the  patient.  The
passes  should  be  made  very  slowly,  or  they  may  excite  rather
than  calm,  and  may  prevent  sleep.  The  mesmeriser  should
look  earnestly  at  the  patient,  and  be  absorbed  in  the  attempt
to  produce  a  silent  influence.  It  is  in  general  best  to  perse¬
vere  with  one  method,  for  the  diversifying  the  attempt  is  very
likely  to  excite  the  curiosity  and  wonder  of  the  patient  and
prevent  repose.  One  sort  of  passing,  or  mere  pointing,  or
gazing,  may,  for  some  unknown  reason,  suit  one  patient
better  than  another :  but,  when  a  patient,  by  mere  continu¬
ance  of  attempts,  has  become  affected,  the  method  employed
at  the  moment  of  success  is  likely  from  association  to  be  af¬
terwards,  at  least  for  a  long  while,  far  more  effectual,  if
not  even  exclusively  effectual,  than  others.  I  would  not  allow
a  patient  of  mine  to  be  mesmerised  by  one  who,  while  the
process  is  going  on,  talks  at  all,*  or  laughs,  or  makes  quick
passes,  snaps  his  fingers,  makes  flourishes,  or  plays  any
monkey  tricks;  or  is  careless  and  listless.  All  should  be
done  calmly  and  even  solemnly :  for  mesmerism  is  a  seri¬
ous,  holy  thing.  There  is  no  occasion  to  hold  the  hands,
or  sit  with  knees  against  knees ;  or  in  general  to  touch  the
patient  at  all.  And  all  may  be  done  as  well  by  the  operator
standing  to  one  side  of  the  patient  as  opposite.  There  is  no
occasion  for  the  operator  to  vibrate  his  hands  or  head,  or
make  any  muscular  effort.  The  best  mesmerisers  are  those
who  do  all  quietly  and  gently.

Some  persons,  whom  I  have  recommended  as  mesmerisers,

*  When  sleep-waking  is  induced,  a  pleasant,  or  even  lively,  conversation  is
generally  very  useful.


390


On  Mesmerisers.


have  taken  the  liberty  of  passing  an  opinion  upon  the  medical
treatment  which  I  had  prescribed  at  the  same  time ;  or,  where
there  was  no  other  treatment,  of  suggesting  medical  treat¬
ment.  One  person,  quite  ignorant  of  medicines,  took  the
liberty  of  applying  leeches  when  exhaustion  forbad  any  such
measures :  one  introduced  a  foreigner  to  assist  her  in  mes¬
merising,  who  was  a  linendraper  in  Brussels  and  passed  him¬
self  off  as  a  doctor,  and  he  mesmerised  and  prescribed.  Some,
instead  of  simply  mesmerising,  as  I  directed,  introduced  pre¬
tended  clairvoyants,  absolute  impostors.*  I  advise  all  me¬
dical  men  to  allow  nothing  of  this  sort  when  they  employ
mesmerisers.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  they  should  not
interfere  with  the  mesmeriser,  or  take  any  measures  without
conferring  with  him,  provided  they  understand  nothing  of  it
and  he  is  a  fully  informed  and  discreet  mesmeriser.

Some  amateur  mesmerisers  do  injury  to  the  cause  by  their
want  of  perseverance.  If  they  produce  no  benefit,  or  no
sensible  effect,  in  the  first  few  trials,  of  perhaps  only  a  quarter
of  an  hour  each,  they  give  up  the  case.  I  wish  such  persons
would  never  take  a  case  in  hand,  because  their  failures  must
be  very  numerous,  and  the  poor  patient  conceives  that  mes¬
merism,  perhaps  his  last  and  only  hope,  is  no  remedy  for
him,  and  our  adversaries  register  the  more  failures.  In
truth,  mesmerism  cannot  be  said  to  have  failed  under  a  trial
of  a  year  or  more  in  chronic  cases.  Let  no  one  mesmerise
who  is  not  prepared  to  give  a  daily  trial  of  at  least  half  an
hour  for  many  months  or  still  longer.*)*

On  the  other  hand,  I  must  also  entreat  the  afflicted  never
to  begin  mesmerism  unless  firmly  resolved  to  give  it  a  fair
trial ;  and  not  to  give  it  up  because  they  are  not  better  soon,
or  do  not  go  to  sleep.  I  often  foolishly  lose  all  patience  with
people,  to  whom  I  have  explained  the  possibility  of  no  effect

*  I  am  satisfied  that  many  clairvoyants  are  impostors  :  and  many  real  clair¬
voyants  impostors  so  far  as  to  pretend  they  have  the  faculty  in  action  when  they  have
not.  I  place  reliance  on  very  few  of  them  :  so  liable  are  they  to  deceive  them¬
selves,  and  so  strong  is  the  temptation  to  deceive  others,  from  love  of  money  or
even  mere  vanity.  If  persons  choose  to  take  the  chances  of  accuracy  and  error,
they  ought  to  pay  :  but  why  they  should  pay  a  medical  or  other  man  who  keeps
and  lets  out  a  poor  clairvoyant,  as  Italian  men  keep  and  let  out  poor  Italian  boys,
and  pay  him  a  fee,  perhaps  a  sovereign,  as  well  as  five  shillings  to  the  clairvoyant
who  does  the  work,  I  know  not.  To  let  out  clairvoyants  is  no  very  dignified
occupation.

f  I  mesmerised  Miss  Bernal  daily  for  nearly  a  year  without  producing  sleep
or  other  sensible  effect,  and  did  her  no  good  whatever  for  months  :  yet  I  cured
her  triumphantly  after  the  failures  of  a  number  of  royal  and  fashionable  practi¬
tioners  had  done  her  no  good,  but  harm  ( Zoist ,  No.  XVIII.)  Let  them  re¬
member  that  Mrs.  Whately  bestowed  three  years  and  a  half  upon  her  blind
patient  (No.  XXV.)  I  bestowed  above  five  years  upon  my  case  of  cancer  (No.
XXIII.)


Cases  of  Insanity,  severe  Nervous  Affections,  tyc.  391

occurring  for  a  length  of  time,  and  of  benefit  without  sleep,
returning  or  writing  to  me  in  a  few  days  with  a  declaration
that,  as  they  felt  nothing,  they  should  not  continue  it.  Some
go  about  saying  they  cannot  be  sent  to  sleep  because  Mr.
Somebody  tried  one  day  without  effect.  If  a  complaint  is
worth  the  trouble  of  curing,  it  is  worth  the  trouble  of  sub¬
mitting  to  a  remedy  causing  neither  pain  nor  annoyance,  but
requiring  merely  perseverance.  Some  give  up  in  a  few  weeks
or  months.  It  is  surprising  how  many  persons  in  the  world
have  no  force  of  character :  are  only  big  children — holding
silly  opinions  on  various  subjects  of  which  they  know  nothing,
and  acting  without  reason  or  steadiness.


IV.  Cases  of  Insanity,  severe  Nervous  Affections,  Hypochon¬
driasis,  Deafness,  fyc.  By  Henry  Stoker,  M.D.,  Bris¬
tol,  Physician  to  the  Bristol  Mesmeric  Institute.

“  It  is  with  mingled  regret  and  pity  that  we  now  receive  Dr.  Herbert  Mayo’s
admission  of  the  so  called  truth  of  mesmerism.  We  cannot  but  feel  a  degree  of
doubt  of  the  vigour  of  a  mind  once  accustomed  to  the  serious  investigation  of  the
sciences  of  physiology  and  pathology.  We  cannot  but  lament  that  the  author
should  be  content  to  throw  away  a  well-earned  reputation  by  the  advancing  of
the  claims  of  such  things  as  mesmerism  and  hydropathy.” — London  Medical
Gazette ,  Oct.  12,  1849,  p.  63.

Hypochondriasis.

I  was  consulted  in  1847  by  the  friends  of  a  lady  suffering
from  aberration  of  mind.  She  was  predisposed  to  it,  had  been
in  a  private  asylum,  and  was  about  being  placed  there  again.
But  a  friend  of  the  family,  who  had  received  great  benefit
from  mesmerism,  strongly  urged  a  trial  of  it.

At  my  first  interview  I  found  her  in  an  extremely  irrita¬
ble  state,  with  great  depression  of  spirits  and  restlessness  ;
she  could  get  no  sleep  except  by  snatches ;  and  there  was  an
approach  to  imbecility.  She  had  little  idea  of,  and  much  less
faith  in,  mesmerism;  bat,  since  I  had  been  introduced  as  a
friend,  she  was  not  at  all  adverse  to  mv  attendances.  I  mes-
merised  her  at  first  for  a  month  daily,  and,  though  very  little
outward  effect  was  induced,  she,  after  a  few  days,  became  more
geyierally  composed,  and  often  remained  so  for  nearly  an  hour
after  the  sitting,  and  continued  also  more  tranquil  during
the  intervals  of  my  visits.

From  the  second  month  she  was  mesmerised  every  alter¬
nate  day,  and  by  the  end  of  that  time  a  deeper  state  was
induced ;  and  she  then  became  slightly  impressible  to  plireno-
mesmerism.  By  the  middle  of  the  third  month  I  availed
myself  of  this  increased  power,  and  was  enabled  to  excite
several  organs ;  and  this  circumstance,  I  believe,  most  ma-


392  Cases  of  Insanity ,  severe  Nervous  Affections,  tyc.f

terially  facilitated  her  comparatively  rapid  recovery.  Thus,  as
she  was  usually  much  depressed,  had  no  confidence  in  her  own
resources,  and  was  very  suspicious  and  over  anxious,  as  is
usual  in  the  disease,  I  now  acted  specially  on  particular  organs,
such  as  Hope,  Mirthfulness,  Firmness,  and  the  entire  moral
region.  I  could,  both  singly  and  collectively,  induce  a  de¬
cided  manifestation  in  these  various  organs.  There  were
others,  such  as  Caution  and  Combativeness,  which  I  endea¬
voured  to  repress  by  a  reverse  action  or  partial  demesmerising.

I  generally  left  her  in  hope  and  mirthfulness,  and  I  have
known  the  effects  continue  until  the  next  visit.  Sleep*  was
was  now  quite  restored,  and  at  the  same  time  nearly  all  the
previous  irritability  was  removed.  After  the  third  month  I
only  saw  this  lady  occasionally,  but  mesmerism  was  still  con¬
tinued  by  a  friend  of  the  family.

She  now  began  to  think  herself  quite  well,  and  was  con¬
sidered  so  by  her  family.  She  would,  however,  feel  worse  at
times,  particularly  under  excitement,  but  a  little  additional
mesmerism  soon  relieved  her.

By  the  end  of  six  months  I  viewed  her  as  entirely  conva¬
lescent,  and  she  has  from  that  period  to  this  remained  nearly
in  the  same  state.

Hypochondriasis.

Also  in  1847,  I  was  consulted  by  a  clergyman  whose
case  was  considered  by  his  ordinary  attendants  as  hypochon¬
driasis.  There  existed  the  usual  depression  of  spirits,  extreme
wakefulness,  with  a  thorough  and  morbid  distrust  of  himself.

I  was  informed  that  he  had  been  out  of  health  for  the  last
three  years,  had  been  obliged  to  resign  his  clerical  duties,
and  had  sought  in  vain  the  aid  of  the  most  eminent  of  the
profession.  These  means  failing,  he  was  advised  to  travel,
and  went  to  Baden  Baden,  and  whilst  there  underwent  the
water  treatment.  This  appeared  for  a  short  time  to  relieve,
but  not  permanently.  He  returned  to  England,  and  came

*  I  have  lately  been  reading  Dr.  Conolly’s  Lectures  on  Insanity,  and  I  think
the  great  merit  of  them  consists  in  the  modesty — pretended  or  real,  I  know  not —
of  his  admission,  that,  literally  speaking,  he  and  the  profession  knew  comparatively
nothing  of  the  subject.  Dr.  Conolly,  however,  admits  that  one  of  the  earliest
symptoms,  and  one  to  be  most  feared,  is  wakefulness  and  want  of  natural  sleep.
Opiates,  he  thinks,  do  more  harm  than  good ;  and  of  so  simple  and  potent  a
means  as  mesmerism  he  professes  to  be  entirely  ignorant.  Is  such  a  man  qualified
for  his  present  position  ?  I  believe  that,  with  mesmerism  fairly  introduced  and
practised  in  our  public  and  private  asylums,  we  should  in  a  few  years  have  half
of  the  patients  set  free.  But  that  tyrant  Prejudice  has  yet  to  be  overcome.  I
would  strongly  advise  Dr.  Conolly,  who  went  out  of  his  way  a  short  time  since
to  repudiate  his  belief  in  mesmerism,  to  turn  his  attention  to  the  subject  even  thus
late.  It  is  impossible  for  him  to  do  full  justice  to  patients  so  afflicted  without
the  aid  of  this  valuable  auxiliary.


by  Dr.  Storer.


393


to  Bath,  where  I  was  first  consulted.  His  wife  told  me  that
they  had  been  advised  to  try  mesmerism  as  a  last  resource.
His  own  account  of  his  feelings  was  very  desponding.  He
assured  me,  that,  though  a  clergyman,  his  promptings  to  self-
destruction  had  been  at  times  so  strong  that  he  thought  he
should  some  day  yield  to  them.

I  mesmerised  him  regularly  for  a  month,  and  induced  but
a  slight  outward  impression,  though  he  thought  himself,  if
anything,  a  little  more  composed.  I  continued  mesmerism
for  another  fortnight,  when  he  fancied  change  of  air  would
agree  better.  I  advised  him  to  try  Clifton,  and  there  I  at¬
tended  him,  conjointly  with  another  party,  for  nearly  three
months.  By  this  time  there  was  a  decided  improvement;
and  now,  finding  I  had  a  slight  control  over  some  of  the  phre¬
nological  organs,  I  locally  excited  those,  the  excitement  of
which  was  calculated  to  do  him  good.  By  the  continued
appeal  to  Mirthfulness,  and  the  entire  moral  region,  I  was
enabled  materially  to  assuage  and  gradually  overcome  his
morbid  feelings.

He  became  so  sensible  of  these  manipulations,  that  he
often  asked  me  to  place  my  fingers  or  hand  over  certain  por¬
tions  of  the  head.

After  the  fourth  month,  he  felt  himself  so  much  better
that  his  lady  thought  that  she  would  with  some  local  assist¬
ance  be  able  to  carry  out  his  cure.  They  returned  home
and  steadily  pursued  mesmerism  for  two  months  longer.  At
the  end  of  this  time,  nearly  six  months,  the  gentleman  was
enabled  gradually  to  resume  his  duties,  after  an  absence  of
three  years ;  and  I  had  an  opportunity  of  hearing  up  to  the
middle  of  this  year  that  he  has  remained  in  comparative
health.  When  over  fatigued  or  feeling  at  all  depressed,  he
then  resorts  to  mesmerism,  which  readily  re-establishes  him.

Hypochondriasis.

As  an  appendix  to  this  case,  being  that  of  a  clergyman,  I
may  mention,  that  during  last  year  I  was  consulted  by  a
young  clergyman,  who  had  come  to  do  duty  in  this  vicinity.
He  stated  that  at  times  he  was  so  very  nervous  that  he  often
thought  he  should  break  down  during  the  services.  I  advised
him  to  lie  by.  He  said  it  was  impossible,  as  he  had  tried
physic  so  long  that  he  had  exhausted  his  purse  as  well  as  his
frame ;  but  still  if  I  thought  mesmerism  would  do  him  good
he  would  try  it.  I  strongly  recommended  it,  and  he  placed
himself  under  my  care  for  about  ten  weeks.  The  changes  in
his  system  were  most  satisfactory.  He  soon  began  to  lose  his
morbid  feelings,  and,  though  obliged  to  continue  his  duties,


394  Cases  of  Insanity,  severe  Nervous  Affections,  fyc.

he  could  do  so  with  far  more  ease  and  comfort :  in  fact  he  be¬
came  gradually  well.  He  has  since  been  presented  to  a
living,  and  hopes  to  be  shortly  able  to  give  a  more  extended
view  of  his  own  case  for  the  benefit  of  other  sufferers.

Extreme  Nervous  Affection  with  Deafness.

In  Nov.  1848,  I  was  consulted  by  a  lady  who  had  been
suffering  for  many  years  from  what  was  called  nervous  irrita¬
bility,  with  tic  douloureux  chiefly  affectingthe  face  and  temples.
Her  sight  had  become  so  much  impaired  that  she  could  see
nothing  without  the  aid  of  glasses ;  the  hearing  likewise  was
so  obtuse  that  she  could  scarcely  distinguish  sounds.  She
had  usually  been  attended  by  the  late  Dr.  Riley,  who  had
more  than  once  said  that  he  believed  he  could  do  no  farther
good,  and  advised  her  to  try  mesmerism.  I  was  soon  after¬
wards  consulted  in  the  case.  I  found  her  slightly  impres¬
sible  to  mesmerism,  and  by  the  end  of  a  month  was  enabled  so
far  to  allay  irritability  that  my  visits  were  looked  forward  to
with  great  satisfaction.

By  the  end  of  the  second  month  the  sight  began  to  im¬
prove,  and  the  floating  objects  which  she  described  as  impair¬
ing  her  vision  gradually  left  her ;  as  also  did  the  pains  of  the
face  and  temples.  By  steady  perseverance,  she  began  to  feel
so  much  better  as  to  fully  encourage  a  belief  that  she  would
ultimately  be  quite  restored.  By  the  third  month  her  hear¬
ing  was  so  improved  that,  during  one  of  her  sittings,  she  was
suddenly  aroused  by  a  strange  noise,  as  she  described  it ;  it
was  nothing  more  than  the  barking  of  a  dog,  that  she  had
not  heard  for  years.

She  could  now  read  without  her  glasses,  hear  very  com¬
fortably,  and  all  her  pains  had  nearly  left  her.  I  now  ceased
my  attendances,  though  mesmerism  was  continued  by  her
husband;  but  I  have  seen  her  at  distant  periods,  and  can
aver  that  the  general  result  has  been  so  decided  that  she  feels
that,  if  any  ailments  arise  which  cannot  easily  be  managed,
she  has  only  to  have  recourse  to  mesmerism  to  be  relieved.

Nervous  Irritability ,  Debility,  with  Deafness.

In  Dec.  1848,  I  was  consulted  by  a  lady,  at  Clifton,  the
mother  of  a  large  family,  who  had  been  very  unwell  for  some
mouths,  suffering  from  what  is  usually  termed  nervousness.
She  had  access  to  the  best  advice,  but  not  getting  better  was
induced  to  try  mesmerism.

She  w?as  only  moderately  susceptible  to  the  influence,  and
did  not  believe  that  she  had  been  at  all  affected ;  but,  when


Review  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Maitland’s  Book.


395


she  was  made  acquainted  that  conversations  had  been  held  in
her  presence,  and  that  I  had  left  the  room  on  three  or  four
occasions  without  her  knowledge,  she  admitted  she  must  have
been  deceived.  I  mesmerised  her  daily  for  the  first  month ;
afterwards,  three  times  a  week ;  and  then  only  twice  a  week.
Good  effects  soon  appeared.  She  slept  better,  her  general
irritability  lessened,  and  her  appearance  was  improved.

Whilst  in  attendance,  mv  attention  was  directed  to  the
hearing,  which  on  one  side  was  considered  quite  gone.  By
acting  however  locally,  I  was  enabled  so  far  to  lessen  the
deafness,  that  at  first  she  complained  of  sound  as  painful  to
her.  By  moderating  this,  she  now  heard  distinctly,  and  up
to  my  last  enquiries  continued  to  do  so.

Three  of  the  above  cases  it  will  be  perceived  have  occurred
in  the  families  of  clergymen.  I  regret  that  peculiar  circum¬
stances  prevent  my  giving  names ;  but  any  parties  with  a
truth-seeking  motive  may  have  any  fuller  corroboration  they
require.

To  the  clergy  we  are  now  much  indebted,  and  I  feel
assured  that,  before  long,  mesmerism  will  stand  so  well,  that
they  will  feel  no  difficulty  in  allowing  their  cases  to  be  sub¬
stantiated  with  their  names.


V.  Review  of  “  Illustrations  and  Enquiries  relating  to  Mes¬
merism ,  Part  I.,  by  the  Rev.  S.  R.  Maitland,  D.D.,
F.R.S.,  F.S.A.,  some  time  Librarian  to  the  late  Arch¬
bishop  of  Canterbury,  and  Keeper  of  the  MSS.  at  Lam¬
beth.  London:  William  Stephenson.” — pp.  82.

Dr.  Maitland,  a  gentleman  already  known  in  the  literary
world,  has  published  a  pamphlet  on  the  subject  of  Mesmerism,
some  notice  of  which  may  perhaps  be  acceptable  to  our  readers.

The  author  is  a  person  of  undoubted  learning  and  inge¬
nuity  ;  and  he  is  also,  in  his  notions  on  this  subject  especially,
what  some  would  call  original,  and  others  perhaps  odd ;  de¬
lighting  to  take  a  different  view  from  what  has  occurred  or
was  likely  to  occur  to  any  other  mortal.

He  is  not  one  of  those  who  deride  all  the  accounts  of  mes¬
meric  phenomena  as  impostures  or  idle  fancies :  nor,  again,
is  he  one  of  the  Diabolists ; — viz.  those  who  coolly  refer  to  the
agency  of  foul  fiends  whatever  they  dislike  and  cannot  ex¬
plain  :  and  yet  he  condemns  all  employment  of  mesmerism
on  the  ground  of  a  prohibition  in  Scripture ;  i.  e .,  in  the  Mo¬
saic  Law,  which  he  seems  to  regard  as  binding  on  all  the
Christian  World  !

The  pamphlet  begins  with  the  descriptions  of  several  re-

VOL.  VII.  G  G


396


Review  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Maitland’s  Book.


markable  cases  which  have  from  time  to  time  been  brought
before  the  public,  of  the  curative  and  other  effects  of  mesmeric
influence.  The  author,  though  not  pledging  himself  for  the
correctness  of  the  accounts  given,  yet  seems  far  from  regarding
them  with  incredulity.

Among  the  cases  to  which  public  attention  has  been  called,
though  a  considerable  number  relate  to  somnambulism  and
clairvoyance,  these,  as  is  well  known,  are  but  a  small  propor¬
tion  compared  with  those  in  which  no  such  phenomena  have
occurred,  and  in  which  the  mesmeric  agency  has  operated
only  in  the  removal  or  mitigation  of  pain  or  disease.  Mes¬
merism  however,  cannot,  according  to  Dr.  Maitland,  be
divided.  It  must  be  either  wholly  allowable  or  wholly  un¬
lawful.  On  this  principle,  if  there  be  any  mode  of  employing
Gunpowder,  or  Alcohol,  Opium,  Lytta,  and  other  such  drugs,
that  is  permitted  or  is  reprobated,  the  permission,  or  the  con¬
demnation,  must  extend  to  every  mode  of  employing  those
agents.  This,  we  apprehend,  is  one  of  Dr.  Maitland's  points
of  originality,  or  at  least  of  singularity.*  For  most  persons
consider  that  it  makes  all  the  difference  whether  gunpowder
be  used  for  blasting  rocks  or  for  murdering  men ;  and  whe¬
ther  opium  or  other  powerful  drugs  be  employed  to  cure  disease,
or  to  destroy  life,  or  produce  stupefaction,  or  other  still  worse
effects.

He  next  proceeds  to  prove  (?),  by  an  examination  of  cer¬
tain  Hebrew  roots,  that  the  “  witchcraft"  (so  called  in  our
translation  of  the  Old  Testament)!  and  the  employment  of
what  are  called  “  familiar  Spirits,"  which  was  forbidden  to  the
Israelites,  were  neither  more  nor  less  than  mesmeric  clair¬
voyance.

He  denies  the  comparatively  modern  notions  of  witches
making  compacts  with  evil  spirits,  and  employing  their  ser¬
vices  :  though  these  notions  (whenever  they  arose)  certainly
prevailed  in  those  Ages  to  which  Dr.  M.  is  supposed  to  look
back  with  regretful  veneration.  The  charges  of  witchcraft
brought  against  Eleanor,  Duchess  of  Gloucester,  and  others
long  before  her  time,  are  among  the  instances.

*  Among  other  Singularities,  Dr.  M.  declares  that  he  never  could  meet  with
persons  who  had  dreamed  (except  in  the  mesmeric  sleep)  that  they  were  eating
or  drinking  !  If  he  has  really  any  curiosity  on  the  subject,  he  has  only  to  read
some  of  the  many  published  narratives  of  shipwrecked  mariners  and  others,  who
have  been  exposed  to  famine.  It  is  generally  mentioned  that  they  were  perpetu¬
ally  haunted  by  such  dreams.  But  even  with  those  not  so  circumstanced,  these
dreams  are  very  common,  as  he  may  ascertain  if  he  will  make  bona  fide  inquiries
among  his  neighbours.

t  The  word  which  in  the  New  Testament  (Epistle  to  the  Galatians)  is  ren¬
dered  “witchcraft,”  is  Pharmakeia ,  evidently,  “  poisoning  PharmaJca  being
the  common  word  to  denote  noxious  drugs.


Review  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Maitland's  Book.  397

However,  for  the  “  wisdom  of  our  ancestors”  in  these
matters  Dr.  M.  has  no  respect.  And  he  does  not  seem  to  have
much  more  for  the  belief  of  those  whom  Christians  usually
regard  as  Inspired  Writers.  On  this  last  point,  indeed,  he
is,  whether  designedly  or  accidentally,  not  very  clear  in  his
language.  But  the  impression  likely  to  be  left  on  the  minds
of  most  of  his  readers,  is,  that  he  regards  all  that  is  said  in
Scripture  of  Demoniacal  Agency,  of  whatsoever  kind,  as  either
a  mistake  of  the  Writers,  or  else  a  condescension  to  popular
prejudice  ; — a  practice  of  that  kind  of  “  pious  fraud”  which
the  modern  Tractite- School  call  Phenakism.  The  damsel  at
Philippi,  for  instance,  possessed  by  “  a  spirit  of  divination,”
he  plainly  seems  to  consider  as  nothing  more  than  a  Clair¬
voyant  Somnambulist.  And  all  the  arts  of  Magic,  Witchcraft,
&c. — so  called — which  we  find  mentioned  or  alluded  to  in
ancient  writers,  sacred  or  profane,  he  considers  as  no  other
than  mesmeric  phenomena.

This  conclusion  rests  on  the  supposed  etymology  of  the
Hebrew  word  aub,  (rendered,  in  our  version  a  “familiar
spirit,”)  which  he  conjectures,  from  similarity  of  sound,  to
be  derived  from  a  root  signifying  to  “  will.”  This  he  confirms
from  the  procedure  of  the  Septuagint-Translators,  (who  were
influenced,  very  likely,  by  the  same  supposed  etymology,)  in
their  rendering  of  the  word  which  is,  in  our  Version,  “  dealers
with  familiar  spirits,”  by  a  word  derived  from  a  corresponding
Root  in  Greek.

The  Septuagint-Translators  have  also,  Dr.  Maitland  re¬
marks,  applied  to  those  pretending  to,  or  influenced  by,  ma¬
gical  arts,  the  title  of  “  engastrimuthoi,”  literally  “Ventri¬
loquists  :”  and  this,  in  his  opinion,  identifies  these  with  mag¬
netized  patients,  because  some  of  these  latter  are  reported  to
have  appeared  to  speak  from  their  stomachs.  Hence  it  is
inferred  (though  without  directly  claiming  infallibility  for  the
Septuagint  translators)  that  the  “  witchcraft” — so  called — or
“  dealing  wth  familiar  spirits,”  which  was  forbidden  to  the
Israelites,  was  the  mesmeric  process  by  which  the  will  of
the  Mesmeriser  gains  a  control  over  that  of  his  patient.

The  influencing  of  the  “  will”  by  the  arts  of  persuasion ,
which  has,  in  all  ages,  been  the  aim  of  the  Oratory  Dr.  M.
does  not  advert  to  at  all :  so  that  whether  this  was  prohibited,
or  not,  in  the  Mosaic  Law,  he  leaves  undecided.  But  that  the
influence  exercised  by  a  Mesmerise?'’ s  “  will”  was  the  “Witch¬
craft,”  or  “  Magic,”  or  “  dealing  with  familiar  spirits,”  which
was  forbidden  in  that  Law,  is  evidently  his  decision  :  and
moreover  (2)  that  the  prohibition  is  binding  on  Christians ;
and  (3)  that  it  must  be  understood  as  extending  to  all  em-

g  g  2


398  Review  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Maitland’s  Book.

ployment  of  mesmerism,  even  in  cases  where  the  “  will”  is
not  at  all  concerned.

The  whole  process  of  reasoning,  therefore,  which  in  this
pamphlet  is  diffused  through  several  chapters,  may  be  com¬
pressed  and  summed  up  in  a  kind  of  sorites ;  which  would
make  Archbishop  Whately’s  or  Mr.  Mill's  hair  stand  on  end.
Let  us  suppose  a  person  disposed  to  try  the  effect  of  mesmeric
treatment  on  a  patient, — perhaps  some  dear  relative  or  friend
— labouring  under  blindness,  or  some  other  disease,  which  has
baffled  medical  skill :  he  is  to  reason  thus ; —

“  One  use  of  mesmerism  is  likelv  to  benefit  this  ease :  but

•/

another  kind  of  application  of  it  may  possibly  be  the  aub  which
was  forbidden  in  the  Mosaic  Law  :  and  some  of  the  precepts
of  that  Law  are  binding  on  all  men :  therefore  it  is  probable
than  any  use  of  mesmerism  is  forbidden  to  Christians.  Q.E.D.

“  Therefore  my  parent  or  my  child  shall  be  left  in  blind¬
ness,  or  die  in  lingering  pain,  rather  than  be  so  relieved,  for
fear  of  displeasing  Him  who  said,  ‘  I  was  sick  and  ye  minis¬
tered  unto  me :  .  .  .  forasmuch  as  ye  did  it  unto  one  of  these
my  brethren  ye  did  it  unto  me/  ”

Now  is  all  this  meant  seriously,  or  merely  as  a  jeu  d’ esprit,
designed  to  shew  how  ingeniously  a  paradox  may  be  main¬
tained  ?  And  is  it  worthy  of  a  serious  examination  ?

This  latter  question  has  caused  us  some  perplexity,  on
remembering  the  ridicule  to  which  Seneca  was  exposed  for
undertaking  a  serious  refutation  of  the  paradox  put  forth  by
some  of  his  Stoical  predecessors,  that  “  the  Cardinal  Virtues
were  Animals.”

But  we  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  though  Dr.  Mait¬
land  probably  began  with  no  other  thought  than  of  making  a
trial  of  his  skill,  and  a  display  of  his  learning,  it  is  not  unlikely
that  he  ended  by  being  himself  entangled  in  the  meshes  of
his  own  ingenuity ;  and  that  it  is  probable  some  of  his  readers
may  be  entangled  along  with  himself.  If  any  of  them  were
to  cast  his  eye  over  a  publication  which  has  been  pretty  gene¬
rally  known  for  the  last  30  years,  the  Historic  Doubts  relative
to  Napoleon  Buonaparte,  he  would  perceive  that  a  far  stronger
case  is  there  made  out  against  the  existence  of  that  illustrious
personage,  than  by  Dr.  M.  against  the  lawfulness  of  the  em¬
ployment  of  Mesmerism.  But  in  the  one  case  there  is,  and
in  the  other  there  is  not,  a  strong  prejudice  on  the  side  of
the  paradox.  We  will  therefore  offer  a  few  remarks  on  Dr.
Maitland’s  theorv.

It  rests  on  the  interpretation  (an  interpretation  which  has
escaped  all  the  learned  for  twenty  or  thirty  centuries)  of  a
Hebrew  word ;  which  again  rests  on  the  etymology  of  this
word ;  and  that  again,  on  a  similarity  of  sound.


399


Review  of  the  Rev .  Dr.  Maitland’s  Book.

Now  of  the  mistakes  in  etymology  which  have  been  made,
even  by  persons  not  destitute  of  intelligence,  and  of  the  er¬
roneous  notions  based  on  such  mistakes,  numerous  examples
might  be  given.  Josephus  notices  one ;  that  of  an  ancient
writer  who  says  that  Jerusalem  (“  Hierosolyma”)  derived  its
name  from  its  being  decorated  with  the  spoils  of  heathen  tem¬
ples,  and  was  originally  called  Hierosyla,  “  temple-plunder.”

Again,  the  English  wrord  “  Causeway” — more  properly
“  Causey,”  as  being  manifestly  the  French  Chausee,  a  bank, —
I  have  known  pronounced,  and  even  spelt,  by  educated  per¬
sons  “  crossway,”  from  their  mistake  as  to  the  origin  of  the
word.

Gilly-flower,  again,  some  persons  consider  as  so  called,
quasi  July-flower ;  though  certainly  its  blooming  in  the  most
flowery  month  of  the  year  is  no  such  distinction  as  to  be  likely
to  give  rise  to  its  name ;  since  the  same  would  suit  most  of
the  flowers  of  our  gardens.  In  reality  it  is  named  from  its
odour,  from  the  French  “  Gilofre ,”  (often  so  written  by  old
writers  for  “  girofle,”)  a  “  clove,”  apparently  a  derivative  of
“  Caryophyllus”

Again,  a  well-known  tenant  of  our  poultry-yards  is  sup¬
posed  by  some  to  have  been  originally  brought  from  the
Country  called  Turkey ;  though  in  reality  it  is  indigenous  in
America  alone,  and  derives  its  name,  doubtless,  from  its  own
call  of  “  turk,  turk.”

In  old  English  again, — for  instance,  in  the  prayer-book
version  of  the  Psalms — “runnagate”  is  written  for  “renegade,”
(which  is  the  Spanish  “  Renegado,” — one  who  has  renounced
his  faith,)  on  the  supposition,  apparently,  that  it  meant  “  run¬
away ,” — “fugitive.”

And  many  other  instances  might  be  given.

How  unsafe  must  it  be  therefore  to  build  important  prac¬
tical  conclusions  on  etymologies  of  a  language  like  the  Hebrew,
of  which  we  have  such  scanty  remains ;  while  of  the  contem¬
porary  languages  and  dialects  of  the  neighbouring  nations,
(from  which  several  of  their  terms  may  have  been  derived)  we
know  absolutely  nothing !

However,  let  us  for  argument’s  sake  suppose  Dr.  Mait¬
land’s  hypothesis  to  be  demonstrably  established :  let  it  be
supposed  that  this  puzzling  word  aub  was  understood  by  the
ancient  Hebrews  as  applicable  to  persons  who  were  in  reality
(though  not  then  known  to  be)  mesmeric  clairvoyants,  or  their
mesmerizers  :  what  is  the  inference  ?  That  the  Mosaic  Law
forbade  application  to  be  made  to  them.  The  next  enquiry
evidently  is,  whether  this  law  is  binding  on  us.

In  this  enquiry  Dr.  Maitland  affords  us  no  help  whatever.


400  Review  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Maitland’s  Book.

But  we  presume  that  he,  in  common  with  nearly  all  other
Christians  for  the  last  seventeen  centuries,  does  not  consider
the  Mosaic  Law  as  of  universal  and  perpetual  obligation.  He
cannot  maintain  at  least  that  the  Christian  church  requires
abstinence  from  swine's-flesh  and  other  meats,  forbidden  to  the
Jews;  or  prohibits  the  sowing  of  a  field  with  divers  kinds  of
seeds ;  or  requires  a  childless  widow  to  marry  her  deceased
husband's  brother ;  or  forbids  a  man  to  sell  his  land  in  per¬
petuity,  &c.  Yet  on  all  these  points  the  Mosaic  Law  contains
precepts  not  resting  on  any  newly  discovered  interpretation
of  some  doubtful  word,  but  perfectly  plain  to  all,  and  about
whose  signification  there  never  has  been  any  question.  But
it  is  generally  agreed  among  Christians,  that,  though  “no  man
is  exempt  from  obedience  to  those  commands  which  are  called
‘  moral,’  the  obligation  extends  no  further."  And  if  it  be
inquired  what  are  “  moral  precepts,"  the  obvious  answer  must
be,  that  we  are  to  judge  by  the  light  of  Beason  what  things
are  right  or  wrong  in  themselves,  independently  of  any  special
injunction.  Murderforinstance,  andTheft,  and  False  Witness,
we  are  bound  to  abstain  from  because  morally  wrong,  even
though  it  had  not  been  noticed  in  the  Mosaic  Law.  Anything,
again,  which  is  not  morally  wrong,  (such  as  wearing  garments
of  mixed  stufp,  or  eating  Swine's  flesh,)  is  allowable,  even
though  forbidden  to  the  Jews.

If  therefore  Dr.  Maitland  can  prove  mesmerism  to  be  an
evil  in  itself,  he  will  have  proved  that  it  ought  not  to  be  prac¬
tised,  even  supposing  that  Auh  had  nothing  to  do  with  it.  If
he  can  not  prove  this,  then,  even  supposing  the  Mosaic  Law
does  forbid  it  to  the  Jews,  this  does  not  concern  us  Gentiles.
So  that  on  either  supposition,  the  whole  of  his  ingenious
theory, — even  if  based  not  on  doubtful  interpretations  but  on
demonstrable  truths, — would  go  for  nothing.  In  the  one  case
it  would  be  superfluous ;  in  the  other,  foreign  to  the  real
question.

As  for  the  particular  reasons  for  forbidding  to  the  Israelites
several  things  which  are,  to  all  appearance,  in  themselves
indifferent,  most  men  who  possess  a  fair  share  of  good  sense
and  of  modesty  acknowledge  that  in  many  instances  they
can  give  no  explanation.  And  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose
that  each  Mosaic  ordinance  is  binding  on  us  till  we  can  shew
both  what  were  the  reasons  for  the  enactment,  and  that  those
reasons  no  longer  exist.  But  in  the  present  instance  there
seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  persons  (whether  Jews  or
Heathen)  who  practised  and  who  resorted  to  “  Witchcraft," —
“Magic," — “  Aub,"  or  by  whatever  other  name  we  may  denote
forbidden  arts,  did  consider  themselves  as  employing  the  agency


401


Review  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Maitland's  Book.

of  Demons ; — of  Beings  called  Gods,  and  worshipped  by  the
heathen,  quite  distinct  from  Jehovah  the  God  of  the  Jews.
Now  supposing  that  no  such  beings  ever  did  really  afford  any
aid  to  these  Aubite-magicians,  their  idolatry, — since  all  sin
consists  in  the  intention — was  precisely  the  same.  When  a
king  of  Israel  was  rebuked  for  “  sending  to  consult  the  oracle
of  Baalzebub,  the  god  of  Ekron,”  every  child  can  understand
that  the  sin  consisted  not  in  his  obtaining  a  response  from  a
real  god  at  Ekron,  but  in  his  seeking  it.

So  also,  in  the  case  of  the  Soothsaying  damsel  at  Philippi
already  referred  to;  the  people  manifestly  believed  her  pos¬
sessed  with  a  demon,  to  whose  aid  they  intended  to  resort.
Dr.  Maitland  seems  to  think  that  they  were  mistaken ;  and
that  Paul  and  Luke  either  partook  of  the  delusion,  or  connived
at  it.  But  this  makes  no  difference  as  to  the  “reality  of  the
popular  belief  and  intention.

And  the  church  again,  which,  in  the  times  referred  to  by
Dr.  M.  denounced  witchcraft,  did  so,  evidently,  under  the  con¬
viction  that  it  was  a  resort  to  the  agency  of  evil  spirits.

Even  supposing,  therefore,  that  it  were  proved  that  all
the  cases  of  Magic,  Witchcraft,  &c.,  on  record  were  in  reality
mesmeric,  we  can  perfectly  understand  the  reason  of  the  pro¬
hibitions  given  to  the  Jews.  It  was  designed  to  put  down  all
attempts  to  resort  to  the  aid  of  demons.  Whether  the  attempt
were  successful  or  not, — whether  the  demons  were  real  or
imaginary — makes  no  difference  as  to  the  moral  character  of
what  was  forbidden.  And  the  reason  of  the  prohibition  no
longer  exists,  when  men  have  ceased  to  believe  in  or  to  attempt
anything  of  the  kind.  No  one  would  now  scruple  to  orna¬
ment  his  furniture  with  a  brazen  figure  of  a  serpent ;  because
there  is  no  danger  now  of  its  being  an  object  of  idolatrous
worship,  like  the  brazen  serpent  which  king  Hezekiah  (very
wisely  and  rightly)  “  broke  in  pieces.”

The  only  suggestion  thrown  out  by  Dr.  Maitland  that  at
all  affects  the  real  question — that  as  to  the  allowableness  at
the  present  day  of  employing  the  powers  of  mesmerism — is,
that  it  is  a  very  powerful  agent,  which  m<ay  be  abused  to  bad
purposes.  He  remarks  on  the  observation  of  Dr.  Elliotson,
as  to  the  harmlessness  of  mesmerism  “  unless”  practised  impro¬
perly  ;  and  exclaims,  "  What  an  unless  /”  He  might  equally
exclaim  respecting  an  “  unless”  in  many  other  matters  also.
A  Lunatic  Asylum  is  a  good  thing,  unless  the  patients  are  treated
cruelly,  or  sane  persons  confined  there.  Opium  is  a  valuable
medicine,  unless  taken  imprudently,  or  administered  for  the
purpose  of  stupifying  the  victims  of  robbers.  Steam-carriages
are  good,  unless  through  negligence,  they  are  driven  off  the


402  Review  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Maitland’s  Booh.

rails,  or  the  boilers  burst.  Government  is  a  good  thing,  unless
the  governors  oppress  and  rob  their  subjects.  And  Printing  is
a  useful  art,  unless  authors  of  more  cleverness  than  discretion
publish  pamphlets  calculated  to  mislead  or  perplex  their  readers.
In  short,  there  is  no  power,  instrument,  or  institution  pos¬
sessed  by  man  to  which  the  same  objection  would  not  apply.

What  then  is  the  practical  inference  Dr.  M.  would  draw  ?
Is  it,  that  our  rulers  should  pass  a  law  to  prohibit  Mesmerism,
Lunatic  Asylums,  the  use  of  potent  Drugs,  Railroads,  &c.;  and
lastly,  (by  a  suicidal  ordinance),  Government  itself?  For  all
these  things  are  manifestly  liable  to  very  great  and  mischievous
abuse.  Or  is  it  this ;  that,  since  bad  men  may  make  a  hurtful
use  of  mesmerism,  therefore  it  should  be  left  entirely  in  the
hands  of  bad  men ,  by  an  agreement  and  combination  among
all  the  best  men  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  it  ?  One  can
hardly  suppose  him  to  have  deliberately  adopted  either  of
these  conclusions ;  and  yet  there  appears  no  other  practical
conclusion  to  which  his  observations  can  tend.

The  truth  is,  probably,  that,  as  we  formerly  observed,  he
set  out  without  any  definite  design  at  all,  except  to  exercise
his  ingenuity  and  display  his  erudition ;  and  that  he  ended
in  being  himself  bewildered.

But  be  this  as  it  may, — whether  he  has  been  throughout
in  earnest  or  in  jest, — it  is  much  to  be  wished  that  he  would
hereafter  confine  the  sports  of  his  genius  to  subjects  in  which
no  practical  evil  is  likely  to  result.

That  will  not  have  been  the  case  in  the  present  instance,
if  he  shall  have  succeeded  in  influencing  any  one  by  what  he
has  said.  He  will  have  done  harm  if  he  shall  have  succeeded
in  deterring  some  well-meaning  but  weak  brethren  from  seek¬
ing  relief  from  distressing  maladies  by  means  which  the
bounty  of  Providence  has  placed  within  their  reach.  He
will  have  done  harm  if  he  shall  have  diminished  the  propor¬
tion  of  good  men  to  bad  among  those  who  inquire  into  and
endeavour  to  control  an  agent  powerful  for  good  or  for  evil.
And  he  will  have  done  harm  in  representing  the  Most  High
as  requiring  us  to  be  guided  in  our  daily  duty  by  a  precept
so  expressed  that  only  one  man  in  all  Christendom  could  guess
at  its  meaning — even  that  one  being  able  only  to  guess — this
precept,  moreover,  occurring  in  a  code  of  Laws  generally  un¬
derstood  to  be  not  binding  on  Christians  :  and  yet  to  be
obeyed  even  in  opposition  both  to  the  express  injunctions  of
Christianity,  and  to  the  dictates  of  natural  morality,  which
alike  direct  us  to  administer  relief  to  the  afflicted.

No  more  effectual  way  could  he  have  taken  to  expose  the
religion  he  professes  to  odium  and  to  scorn.  A.  B.


(  403  )


t


VI.  A  few  of  Mr.  Capern’s  Cures.  Communicated  by

Dr.  Elliotson.

“  If  this  be  a  real  power,  is  it  natural  or  supernatural  ?  Is  it  lawful  or  un¬
lawful, ,  in  whole  or  in  part?”  p.  598.

“  If  this  act  or  power,  in  its  different  branches,  can  be  applied  to  medicine  or
surgery,  can  this  use  of  it  be  separated  from  other  uses  ?  and  whether  it  can  or
cannot,  is  the  application  a  lawful  one  ?"  p.  600. — The  British  Magazine,  Nov.,
1849.  Review  of  Dr.  Maitland’s  book  by  a  friend  of  that  gentleman.*


“  Whilst  I  was  removing  these  sculptures,  Tahyar  Pasha  visited”  “  the  ruins,
and  expressed  no  less  wonder  at  the  sculptures  than  the  Arabs :  nor  were  his
conjectures  as  to  their  origin  and  the  nature  of  the  subjects  represented,  much
more  rational  than  those  of  the  sons  of  the  desert.  The  gigantic  human-headed
lions  terrified,  as  well  as  amazed,  his  Osmanli  followers.  ‘  La  Illahi  il  Allah/
(there  is  no  God  but  God),  was  echoed  from  all  sides.  ‘These  are  the  idols  of
the  infidels /  said  one  more  knowing  than  the  rest.  s  I  saw  many  such  when  I
was  in  Italia  with  Reshid  Pasha,  the  ambassador.  Wallah,  they  have  them  in  all
the  churches,  and  the  Papas  (priests)  kneel  and  burn  candles  before  them.’  ‘  No,
my  lamb/  exclaimed  a  more  aged  and  experienced  Turk,  ‘  I  have  seen  the  images
of  the  infidels  in  the  chambers  of  Beyoglu ;  they  are  dressed  in  many  colours ;
and,  although  some  of  them  have  wings,  none  have  a  dog’s  body  and  a  tail ;
these  are  the  works  of  the  Jin,  whom  the  holy  Solomon,  peace  be  upon  him,  re¬
duced  to  obedience  and  imprisoned  under  his  seal.’  ‘  I  have  seen  something
like  them  in  your  apothecaries’  and  barbers’  shops/  said  I,  alluding  to  the  well-
known  figures,  half  women  and  half  lion,  which  is  met  with  so  frequently  in  the
bazaars  of  Constantinople.  ‘  Istafer  Allah!’  (God  forbid,)  (piously  ejacu¬
lated  the  Pasha,  ‘  that  is  the  sacred  emblem  of  which  true  believers  speak  with
reverence,  and  not  the  handy-work  of  infidels.’  ‘  There  is  no  infidel  living/
exclaimed  the  engineer,  who  was  looked  up  to  as  an  authority  on  these  subjects,
‘  either  in  Frangistan  or  in  Yenghi  Dunia  (America),  who  could  make  anything
like  these ;  they  are  the  work  of  the  Majus  (Magi),  and  are  to  be  sent  to  England
to  form  the  gateway  to  the  palace  of  the  Queen.’  ‘  May  God  curse  all  infidels
and  their  works/  observed  the  cadi’s  deputy,  who  accompanied  the  Pasha,  ‘  what
comes  from  their  hands  is  of  Satan ;  it  has  pleased  the  Almighty  to  let  them
be  more  powerful  and  ingenious  than  the  true  believers  in  this  world,  that  their
punishment  and  the  reward  of  the  faithful  may  be  greater  in  the  next .’  ”  vol.  i.,
p.  141.

“  When  they  beheld  the  head,  they  all  cried  together,  ‘  There  is  no  God  but
God,  and  Mahomet  is  his  prophet.’  It  was  some  time  before  the  Sheikh  could
be  prevailed  upon  to  descend  into  the  pit  and  convince  himself  that  the  image  was
of  stone.  ‘  This  is  not  the  work  of  man's  hand/  exclaimed  he,  ‘but  of  those
infidel  giants  of  whom  the  prophet,  peace  be  with  him,  has  said,  that  they  were
higher  than  the  tallest  date-tree.  Truly  this  is  one  of  the  idols  which  Noah,  peace
be  with  him,  cursed  before  the  flood.  In  this  opinion,  the  result  of  a  careful
examination,  all  the  bystanders  concurred.”  vol.  ii. ,  pp.  67,  68,  Nineveh  and
its  Remains.  By  Austen  Henry  Layard,  Esq.,  D.C.L.

The  Zoist  for  last  July  contained  an  account  of  a  public  meet¬
ing  at  Tiverton  to  investigate  some  of  Mr.  Capern's  wonderful
mesmeric  cures.  This  modest  and  excellent  man  is  really  a
modern  Greatrakes,  and  like  his  predecessor  has  charged  no¬
thing  for  his  labours,  and  has  accepted  a  present  in  only  a  few

*  What  can  have  been  the  education  of  men,  though  at  Oxford  or  Cambridge,
who  can  ask  such  a  childish  question,  as  whether  moving  the  hands  up  and  down
before  a  sick  person,  or  upon  an  agonized  part,  and  looking  at  him,  and  thus


404


A  few  of  Mr.  Caper  n’s  Cures.

instances.  The  whole  of  his  cases,  I  understand,  will  bear
the  strictest  investigation.  He  is  about  to  publish  about  a
hundred  and  forty  of  the  most  striking  in  a  small  book  by
subscription ;  and  has  kindly  permitted  me  to  forward  the  few
following  to  The  Zoist.

John  Elliotson.

December  10th,

Conduit  Street,  London.

I.  Rheumatism.

George  Candy,  lime  burner,  Ellmore,  Tiverton,  aged  55
years,  was  subject,  from  his  twentieth  year,  to  frequent  at¬
tacks  of  rheumatism,  suffering  much  pain  and  often  disabled
from  following  his  occupation.  On  one  of  those  occasions  he
had  been  three  weeks  on  crutches,  when  he  happened  acci-

restoring  ease  and  health,  is  natural  or  supernatural — miraculous,  lawful  or  un¬
lawful  ?  Are  men  who  ask  such  questions  superior  in  information  and  intelli¬
gence  to  an  old  village  nurse  or  even  an  untutored  Indian  ?  Can  they  be  fit  to
instruct  the  people  as  ministers  of  religion,  and  point  out  the  distinction  of  the
miraculous  characters  of  revelation  from  the  stupendous  universal  laws  of  nature  ?
But  Dr.  Maitland  and  his  friend  the  reviewer  consider  such  doating  to  be  adopt¬
ing  the  Bible,  and  philosophy  to  be  founded  on  man  instead  of  God  :  as  though
philosophy  or  science  were  anything  else  than  the  knowledge  of  the  natural  truths
of  the  universe,  inanimate,  animate,  and  animal.  Believers  should  hold  it  sinful
to  pretend  to  derive  their  own  nonsensical  opinions  upon  physical,  historical,  or
moral  matters  from  the  Bible,  and  then  attempt  to  damage  the  good  name  of
others,  not  so  ill  informed  or  so  weak  as  themselves,  by  accusing  them  of  not
adopting  the  Bible.  Christ  taught  us  to  learn  men  from  their  works ;  and  a
Christian  ought  to  learn  nature  from  observing  nature.  Philosophy  founded  on
man  !

The  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  four  hundred  years  ago  would  have  dismissed
a  librarian  so  superstitious  as  to  fancy  mesmeric  passes  supernatural.  He  knew
that —

“  Miracles  are  ceased.

And  therefore  we  must  needs  admit  the  means.

How  things  are  perfected."

Archbishop  of  Canterbury ,  in  King  Henry  V.,  Act  i.,  Sc.  i.

Had  Dr.  Maitland  and  his  reviewer  lived  earlier,  they  would  no  doubt  have
considered  the  natural  philosophy  of  Friar  Bacon  to  be  witchcraft  and  unlawful.
I  wonder  they  can  stand  the  electric  telegraph  or  a  balloon.

The  manual  classes  in  our  towns  are  far  above  such  ignorance,  and  begin  to
look  with  contempt  upon  the  teachers  in  Israel  who  write  and  discourse  ignorance
and  superstition.  Were  Lord  Bacon  alive,  he  would  still  repeat  what  he  said
in  his  Novum  Organum: — “  Religion  is  full  of  vile  suspicions  and  imbecile  con¬
tempt  of  all  the  improvements  and  discoveries  of  philosophy, ”  (vol.  i.,  p.  89.)

Happily  for  us,  we  have  clergymen  who  understand  science,  and,  like  Bishop
Butler,  acknowledge  that  Christianity  is  a  republication  of  “  natural  religion
in  its  genuine  simplicity,’ ’  and  that  “  moral  precepts  are  precepts  the  reason
of  which  we  see”  and  which  “arise  out  of  the  nature  of  the  case  itself  prior  to
external  command.”  A  life  of  usefulness  and  virtue — of  true  philosophy — is  the
best  creed.  An  enlightened  man,  as  Milton  says  of  the  divine  spirit,  prefers

“  Before  all  temples  the  upright  heart  and  pure.”


John  Elliotson.


A  few  of  Mr.  Capern’ s  Cures.


405


dentally  to  meet  with  Mr.  Capern,  near  a  public  house,  above
a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  his  own  residence.  He  requested
Mr.  Capern  to  try  whether  he  could  do  him  any  good.  Mr.
C.  consented,  and  went  with  him  into  the  parlour  of  the  pub¬
lic  house,  and  commenced  the  usual  passes.  He  felt  some
immediate  relief  whilst  this  was  being  done ,  and,  as  he  was
proceeding  homewards,  he  recovered  suddenly  the  full  use  of
his  limbs ,  and  was  able  to  walk  with  ease  and  comfort  to  his
own  house,  carrying  his  crutches  in  triumph  over  his  shoulders.
He  contracted  a  cold  in  consequence  of  imprudent  exposure,
and  had  a  return  of  the  pain  in  his  ancles,  and  was  entirely
confined  to  his  bed  for  five  or  six  weeks,  unable  to  lift  a  limb
owing  to  the  great  suffering  caused  by  the  least  motion.  He
was  under  constant  medical  treatment ,  but  experienced  little
or  no  relief  horn  the  remedies  employed.  His  bill  for  medi¬
cines  and  attendance  amounted  to  £5  14s.  At  the  end  of
the  period  named,  he  again  had  recourse  to  Mr.  Capern,  and,
after  several  operations,  his  health  was  entirely  restored,  and
he  has  never  had  a  return  of  the  complaint  since,  with  the
exception  of  a  slight  pain  in  the  knee,  immediately  removed
by  a  few  passes  from  Mr.  Capern.  He  is  now  quite  well,  and
to  all  appearance  a  hale,  healthy,  and  exceedingly  active
man.  It  is  nearly  three  years  since  the  first  cure  was  effected,
and  about  four  or  five  months  since  he  was  the  second  time
relieved.

II.  Rheumatism .

William  Middle,  of  Cullompton,  painter  and  glazier,  had
been  afflicted  with  rheumatic  gout  from  ten  to  twelve  years,
during  one  half  of  which  time  he  was  disabled  from  working
at  his  trade.  He  first  applied  to  Mr.  Capern  on  Sunday,
September  9th,  being  then  unable  to  move  his  leg  except
by  taking  hold  of  it  or  raising  it  with  both  his  hands ;  with
this  precaution  the  movement  caused  pain.  He  rose  from  his
chair  with  difficulty,  and  usually  only  after  many  ineffectual
attempts  to  do  so :  his  nights  were  almost  sleepless,  and  he
had  very  little  appetite.  He  had  only  left  his  bed,  where  he
had  been  confined  for  eight  weeks,  the  Thursday  previous,
and  from  the  immense  swelling  of  the  knee,  the  general  pros¬
tration  of  strength,  with  the  intense  pain  which  he  suffered,
he  believed  that  he  would  be  altogether  disabled  from  work
for  the  future.  He  could  not  walk,  without  assistance,  beyond
the  threshold  of  his  door.  His  only  mode  of  getting  up  stairs
was  to  rest  one  knee  upon  the  step  above  him,  then  drag  the
affected  leg  after  it.  Standing  for  any  time,  or  any  exertion,
caused  great  exhaustion  and  a  copious  sweating.  For  the


406


A  few  of  Mr.  Capern’s  Cures.

last  twelve  months  he  had  been  unable  to  pull  off  his  stock¬
ings  without  assistance,  and  for  six  months  to  lift  his  leg  on
the  bed.  When  he  retired  to  rest  his  stockings  were  always
pulled  off,  and  his  leg  raised  and  laid  on  the  bed  for  him  by  his
wife  or  some  other  person.  A  little  girl  was  sent  with  him  to
Tiverton  for  the  express  purpose  of  performing  those  accus¬
tomed  services  ;  but  her  aid  was  never  required,  as  after  the
first  mesmerisation  he  was  able  to  manage  without  any  diffi¬
culty.  During  his  illness,  he  had  had  the  benefit  of  the  ad¬
vice  of  five  or  medical  men,  and  tried  a  variety  of  remedies
without  effect .  Contact  passes  with  the  flat  of  the  hand  were
made  over  the  left  shoulder  and  arm  for  about  seven  minutes,
and  then  in  the  same  manner  down  the  leg  and  the  affected
side.  He  soon  felt  an  unusual  glow  of  heat,  and  in  about
twelve  minutes  after  the  commencement  of  the  treatment  was
relieved  from  all  pain  and  able  to  move  his  leg  freely ,  and
even  to  lift  and  place  it  with  ease  upon  the  table  before  him.
On  the  same  afternoon  he  walked  more  than  a  mile  without  the
assistance  of  a  stick  with  no  pain  and  with  more  ease  and  free¬
dom  than  he  had  experienced  for  many  years.  There  was  an
immediate  improvement  in  his  sleep  and  appetite.  On  going
out  into  the  air  about  twenty  minutes  after  his  first  mes-
merisation,  he  was  suddenly  seized  with  a  violent  shaking
of  the  limbs  and  chattering  of  the  teeth  that  lasted  about
half  an  hour,  and  then  went  off  spontaneously.  He  con¬
tinued  to  be  mesmerised  twice  every  day  daring  his  stay  in
Tiverton,  and  with  rapid  and  decided  improvement.  On  the
eighth  day  he  returned  home  quite  free  from  pain ,  with  no
stiffness  of  the  limbs ,  and  able  to  walk  about  all  day  without
fatigue  or  sweating ,  or  any  inconvenience  whatever.  His  appe¬
tite  was  good,  he  slept  long  and  soundly  at  night,  and  in  fact
there  was  nothing  left  of  his  former  symptoms  but  the  swell¬
ing  of  the  knee,  which,  however,  was  much  reduced ;  and  it
was  his  intention  to  resume  his  work  on  the  following  day.

III.  Rheumatism.

Mrs.  Mary  Tapp,  aged  60,  was  afflicted  upwards  of  fifteen
years  with  violent  pains  in  the  head,  and  severe  rheumatic
pains  in  the  arms,  hips,  and  thighs.  During  the  whole  of
this  period,  she  was  never  entirely  free  from  pain.  She  was
often  unable  to  obtain  any  rest  at  night,  in  consequence  of
her  sufferings,  which  were,  at  times,  so  severe  as  to  oblige
her  to  leave  her  bed,  and  endeavour  to  find  relief  in  motion
or  change  of  position.  She  was  rendered  altogether  incapable
of  any  laborious  exertion,  and  was  unable  to  take  any  active
part  in  the  management  of  her  farm-yard.  Sometimes,  for


A  few  of  Mr.  Capern’s  Cures.


407


weeks  together,  she  suffered  so  much  that  she  was  unable  to
comb  her  hair  or  lace  her  stays  without  assistance.  Happen¬
ing  to  be  accidentally  at  Mr.  Capern's  on  some  business  when
one  of  Mr.  C's.  patients  was  being  mesmerised,  and  seeing
the  great  relief  afforded  by  the  passes,  she  was  induced  to  ask
Mr.  Capern  to  try  what  he  could  do  for  her.  She  had  very
little  expectation  of  receiving  benefit  from  his  exertions,  since,
from  her  advanced  age  and  the  long  duration  of  her  sufferings,
she  had  been  led  to  look  upon  her  case  as  hopeless.  The  first
operation  was  followed  by  the  almost  entire  disappearance  of
the  pain  in  the  limbs.  She  did  not  see  Mr.  Capern  again
until  after  an  interval  of  some  weeks,  when,  by  the  passes
being  made  over  the  head,  the  pains  in  that  part  were  almost
entirely  removed.  Afterwards  she  was  mesmerised  three  or
four  times,  the  passes  being  continued  about  ten  or  twelve
minutes  each  time.  She  now  considers  herself  cured.  She
takes  the  active  management  of  the  farm-yard ,  performing  the
operation  of  milking  her  cows,  which  for  many  years  she  was
totally  unable  to  do.  She  works  and  suffers  no  inconveni¬
ence  from  the  exertion.  There  is  still  a  certain  degree  of
stiffness  in  the  fingers  and  elbow-joint  on  the  side  which
was  principally  affected.  At  most  times,  she  is  entirely  free
from  pain,  and  although,  when  the  weather  is  unfavourable,
her  old  complaint  does  now  and  then  return,  the  attacks  are
so  slight  that  they  do  not  interfere  with  her  work,  and  she
thinks  little  or  nothing  of  them.  It  is  now  three  years  since
the  cure  was  effected.

IV.  Rheumatism.

Statement  of  Mr.  Edwards,  Prospect  Place,  Tiverton.

“  Francis  Edwards,  son  of  Phoceon  Edwards,  was  suffering
for  four  years  frequent  attacks  of  rheumatism  in  the  knee  and
leg,  and  at  times  prevented  from  walking  without  the  assist¬
ance  of  a  stick.  He  applied  various  remedies  without  pro¬
ducing  any  beneficial  result,  and  looked  forward  to  his  entire
incapacity  for  labour  or  exertion,  the  disease  appearing  to  gain
the  ascendency  until  nearly  three  years  since,  when  I  named
it  to  Mr.  Capern,  who  unhesitatingly  offered  to  use  his  exer¬
tions  to  relieve  my  son,  assuring  me  that  he  had  confidence
in  his  powers.  At  the  first  mesmerisation,  there  was  produced
a  genial  comfortable  heat,  and  an  improvement ;  at  the  second,
considerable  progress  was  made  in  the  right  direction,  and
after  the  third,  there  was  a  total  and  an  entire  alleviation  of
pain ,  as  well  as  an  additional  strength  to  that  side  of  the  body.
This  took  place  about  three  years  since,  and  I  have  never  heard
him  complain  from  that  time.  There  had  been  a  considerable


408


A  few  of  Mr.  Capern?  s  Cures.


swelling  of  the  knee  that  subsided,  and  previously  to  the  first
operation  he  could  not  walk  up  and  down  the  stairs  without
assistance.”


V.  Rheumatism.

William  Isaacs,  carpenter,  West  Exe,  Tiverton,  in  the  em¬
ploy  of  Messrs.  Heathcoat  &  Co.  He  was  suddenly  seized  in
the  autumn  of  1847,  while  employed  at  the  bench,  with  severe
pains  in  the  groin,  that  immediately  extended  to  the  foot.
The  pain  near  the  knee  was  excruciating.  He  thought  at  first
that  it  was  caused  by  a  splinter,  but  on  examination  it  was
proved  that  this  was  not  the  case.  He  was  carried  home  by
two  men  and  put  to  bed :  two  surgeons  were  immediately
called  in,  who  advised  his  removal  to  the  hospital.  The  ago¬
nies  he  endured  were  fearful ;  on  one  occasion,  an  attempt
being  made  to  move  in  his  bed,  he  fainted  with  the  pain.  The
leg  and  foot  were  enormously  swelled,  so  much  so  that  when
he  extended  his  leg  straight  before  him  he  was  unable  to  see
his  toes.  This  continued  several  weeks.  The  surgeons,  be¬
lieving  there  was  a  formation  of  matter,  made  an  incision  a
little  below  the  knee  (or  in  the  limb  near  the  knee) ;  a  small
quantity  of  matter  then  issued  from  the  wound,  but  the  ope¬
ration  afforded  him  no  relief  whatever.  He  was  confined  to
his  bed  for  nearly  two  months,  during  which  time  the  pain
was  most  excruciating .  He  had  no  rest  whatever,  he  was
nearly  worn  out  for  want  of  sleep,  his  appetite  was  gone,  and
he  was  reduced  to  a  state  of  great  weakness,  despairing  of
obtaining  any  relief  from  the  surgeons;  and,  being  strongly
advised  by  his  friends  to  apply  to  Mr.  Capern,  he  procured  a
pair  of  new  crutches,  and  left  his  home  for  the  purpose  of
going  to  Mr.  Capern's  residence.  He  was  unable  to  put  his
foot  to  the  ground,  and  it  was  only  with  great  difficulty  that
he  could  manage  to  get  along.  Happening  to  meet  Mr.  Capern
on  the  Exe  bridge,  he  stated  his  object ;  Mr.  C.  invited  him
to  turn  back,  and  accompany  him  to  the  Swan — an  inn  not
far  from  his  own  home.  At  the  very  first  pass  some  sensations
were  experienced,  and  in  less  than  five  minutes  he  was  entirely
free  from  pain  :  he  was  delighted,  and  shouldered  his  crutches ;
and  was  so  amazed  at  his  sudden  cure,  that,  without  even
awaiting  to  thank  Mr.  Capern,  he  ran  off  to  the  workshopy
where  he  made  his  appearance  to  the  great  astonishment  of
his  fellow- workmen,  who  knew  the  state  to  which  he  had  been
reduced.  From  his  workshop  he  proceeded  to  the  club-house,
where  he  gave  notice  of  his  intention  to  relinquish  his  sick
pay.  This  was  on  a  Friday,  and  on  the  following  Monday  he
was  in  full  work.  He  has  never  had  a  return  of  the  pain ,  or


A  few  of  Mr.  Capcrn’s  Cures.


409


lost  a  daifs  work  since.  At  the  time  of  his  application  to
Mr.  Capern,  he  had  no  faith  whatever  in  mesmerism.

An  outline  of  this  case  appeared  in  The  Zoist  for  J uly  last.

YI.  Neuralgic  Pains .

John  Crook,  mason,  aged  49  years,  caught  a  chill  through
working  in  an  oven,  and  was  ill  for  nearly  five  years :  for  two
years  and  a  quarter  of  the  time  he  was  under  treatment  by  the
medical  officers  of  the  Exeter  hospital,  both  as  an  in  and  out
patient;  he  was  an  in-patient  twelve  months,  when,  finding
that  he  was  no  better ,  he  left  the  institution  and  returned  to
Tiverton.  On  his  return  home  he  felt  some  improvement,
which  induced  him  to  resume  work  :  but  he  was  unable  to
complete  even  one  week  of  labour.  On  the  sixth  day  he  sud¬
denly  became  so  ill  that  he  was  obliged  to  be  assisted  home
by  two  of  his  fellow-workmen.  With  the  exception  of  not
quite  six  days,  on  this  occasion,  he  was  unable  to  do  a  stroke
of  work  during  the  whole  period  of  his  illness.  Becoming
worse  and  worse,  he  placed  himself  under  the  care  of  the
parish  doctor ;  but  there  was  no  improvement.  After  an  ab¬
sence  of  about  four  or  five  months,  he  returned  to  the  hos¬
pital  at  Exeter.  While  there,  he  was  in  a  most  pitiable  state ;
he  suffered  extreme  pain  over  almost  the  whole  body ;  even  with
crutches  he  was  unable  to  move  about,  or  go  up  and  down  stairs
without  assistance.  He  lost  strength  and  flesh,  became  ex¬
tremely  weak  and  emaciated,  and  had  little  or  no  appetite.
Despairing  of  ever  getting  better,  he  at  length  returned  home.
His  neighbours  all  thought  that  he  was  a  dying  man,  and
that  in  a  few  weeks  he  would  be  in  his  grave.  A  person  wfith
whom  he  had  formerly  worked  had  several  times  invited  him
down  to  his  house,  which  is  situated  at  some  distance  from
his  own  residence.  After  having  several  times  refused,  he  at
length,  with  the  assistance  of  two  men,  managed  to  make  his
way  down  to  her ;  she  strongly  advised  him  to  apply  to  Mr.
Capern,  of  whose  mesmeric  cures  he  had  never  heard  before.
Mr.  Capern,  happening  just  then  to  pass  the  door,  was  invited
to  come  in,  and  at  once  commenced  the  usual  manipulations.
Almost  at  the  very  first  pass  the  patient  felt  a  strong  sensation
of  warmth,  and  in  a  few  minutes  he  was  almost  entirely  free
from  pain ;  at  the  conclusion  of  the  operation  he  walked  home
without  assistance  in  perfect  ease,  carrying  his  crutches  over
his  shoulders.  On  his  way  homewards  he  felt  somewhat
drowsy,  and,  on  his  reaching  his  own  house,  felt  so  irresistible
an  inclination  to  sleep,  that  he  threw  himself  upon  the  bed,
and  slept  uninterruptedly  for  sixteen  hours.  During  the  eight
weeks  previous  he  had  not,  he  declares,  had  an  hour’s  sleep.


410


A  few  of  Mr.  Capern’ s  Cures.


His  wife  was  so  alarmed  at  the  length  of  his  nap,  that  she
called  in  her  neighbours,  one  after  the  other,  to  try  to  awake
him ;  but  their  efforts  were  in  vain.  He  awoke  spontaneously,
greatly  refreshed  and  quite  free  from  pain.  The  operation  was
repeated,  but  not  every  day,  for  ten  or  twelve  weeks.  His
recovery  was  rapid :  in  eleven  weeks  he  increased  in  weight
forty -two  pounds.  In  five  or  six  weeks  after  his  first  appli¬
cation  to  Mr.  Capern,  he  was  able  to  do  a  little  work  :  in  ten
or  twelve  w  eeks  he  was  in  full  employ,  and  not  many  weeks
afterwards  he  was  not  only  able  to  do  a  good  day’s  work ,  but
to  walk  five  miles  to  his  labour  and  five  miles  back  every  day  in
the  depth  of  winter ,  and  over  one  of  the  worst  roads  in  the
county.  He  is  now  as  strong  and  well  as  he  ever  was  in  his
life.  It  is  nearly  three  years  since  his  cure  was  effected.  He
was  told  at  Exeter  by  the  surgeons  of  the  hospital ,  that  he
would  never  be  able  to  do  a  day’s  work  again.  During  the  last
eight  weeks  of  the  two  years  and  a  quarter  that  he  was  a
patient  of  the  hospital,  he  drank  sixteen  quarts  of  oil.

J.  Crook.

Mem. — During  the  treatment  of  this  case,  the  patient
experienced  at  one  time  considerable  pain  in  the  leg.  By
way  of  experiment,  I  made  the  passes  through  an  iron  of
two-pounds  weight,  which  I  held  with  my  left  hand  over  the
seat  of  the  pain  at  the  distance  of  two  or  three  inches.  Before
this,  the  passes  had  invariably  caused  a  strong  sensation  of
warmth,  but  on  this  occasion  intense  cold  was  felt  in  the  part
immediately  under  the  iron,  extending  quite  through  the
limb,  and  diffused  over  a  space  exactly  corresponding  to  the
size  of  the  weight.  Nothing  that  the  patient  could  do  pro¬
duced  any  warmth  in  the  part ;  he  sometimes  stood  holding
the  limb  so  close  to  the  fire  as  to  singe  his  clothes,  without
the  sensation  of  cold  being  in  the  least  diminished,  and  the
passes  which  I  made  were  equally  ineffective.  After  this  had
continued  two  or  three  weeks,  I  one  day  tried  the  experiment
of  making  the  passes  through  a  heated  body, — a  piece  of  marble,
about  an  inch  and  a  half  thick,  held  over  the  part,  and  the  sense
of  cold  instantaneously  disappeared.  Mr.  Crook  appears  to
be  extremely  susceptible  to  the  influence  of  metals  and  crys¬
tals.  A  piece  of  silver  being  drawn  a  few  days  since  over  the
hand  in  the  manner  mentioned  by  fteichenbach,  he  felt  very
considerable  pain  down  the  arm,  particularly  at  the  elbow
joint.  The  same  result  took  place  when  a  piece  of  rock  crystal
was  substituted  for  the  silver.  A  few  passes  removed  the  pain.

Thomas  Capern.

A  brief  outline  of  this  case  appeared  in  The  Zoist  for  July
last.


A  few  of  Mr.  Capern’ s  Cures.  41 1

VII.  Nervous  Affection ;  with  pain.

Statement  received  from  Mrs.  Wilson,  Fore  Street,  Tiverton.

“  Harriett  Cornisli,  when  in  a  mesmeric  sleep,  told  me,
in  answer  to  Mr.  Capern,  that  my  complaint  was  entirely  on
the  nerves,  that  no  medicine  would  do  me  any  good,  but
that  Mr.  Capern  could  cure  me  by  making  passes,  which  she
described.  She  also  told  me  I  was  suffering  severely  in  the
face  and  head  ;  that  the  pain  which  I  felt  in  my  ears  was  oc¬
casioned  by  the  weakness  of  the  nerves,  and  that  there  was
something  in  Mr.  BeedelFs  shop  which  would  effect  a  cure,
if  I  would  send  for  a  pennyworth :  this  something  was  in  a
small  bottle  on  the  fourth  shelf  on  the  left-hand  side  going
into  the  parlour,  that  it  was  the  fourth  bottle ;  that  there
were  three  other  bottles  of  the  same  in  different  parts  of  the
shop,  and  that  they  were  not  marked.  I  was  to  drop  one
drop  on  a  little  bit  of  wadding,  and  put  in  each  ear ;  then
wrap  my  face  in  flannel,  which  would  be  the  better  if  Mr.  C.
would  mesmerise  it,  and  to  drink,  as  soon  as  I  awoke,  mes¬
merised  water,  which  would  strengthen  me.  I  sent  for  the
drug  according  to  her  description,  and  applied  it  with  success,
being  much  relieved  within  five  minutes.

“  I  have  now  been  under  Mr.  Capern’s  care  for  a  fortnight,
and  with  feelings  of  the  deepest  gratitude  I  confess  the  effects
of  his  passes  have  been  almost  miraculous  on  me.  As  mine
was  entirely  a  disorder  of  the  nervous  system,  medical  advice
was  of  no  avail,  whereas  the  mesmeric  passes  have  sustained
me,  I  may  say,  with  comfort  through  a  time  of  great  trial  and
vexation,  the  contemplation  of  which  at  times  nearly  disordered
my  intellect.  I  am  much  stronger  both  in  body  and  mind,
and  my  only  regret  at  leaving  Tiverton  is,  that  I  shall  be
deprived  of  his  kind  attention.  I  take  this  opportunity  of
assuring  Mr.  C.  that  I  shall  always  feel  the  deepest  gratitude
towards  him,  as  I  am  well  assured  that  he  has  been  the  means,
under  a  merciful  Providence,  of  saving  my  life.

“  Emma  Wilson.

“Tiverton,  Sept.  29th,  1849.”

VIII.  Nervous  Affection ;  with  noises  in  the  head.

Mary  Land,  of  Bampton  Street,  aged  about  70  years,  was
afflicted  for  many  years  (thinks  about  fifteen)  with  dreadful
noises  in  the  head  attended  with  pain,  which  rendered  her
life  completely  miserable,  and  almost  drove  her  distracted.  She
states  that  it  is  impossible  to  describe  these  noises,  as  they
were  entirely  different  from  anything  else  she  has  ever  heard
in  her  life.  Although  she  was  never  wholly  free  from  them

YOL.  VII.  H  H


412


A  few  of  Mr.  Capern’ s  Cares.


at  any  time,  they  occurred  with  increased  violence  when  she
was  in  bed,  and  were  always  worse  every  other  night.  The
terror  and  distraction  which  they  occasioned  were  often  so
extreme  that  she  would  scream  at  intervals  the  whole  night
through  so  loudly,  the  policemen  on  duty  have  occasionally  come
in  to  enquire  what  ivas  the  matter.  She  declares  that  on  these
occasions  nothing  whatever,  no  dread  even  of  instant  death,
could  have  kept  her  quiet.  Her  nights  were  almost  sleepless,
and  every  other  night  she  was  certain  to  get  no  rest  whatever ;
at  times  she  was  unable  to  remain  in  her  bed  from  the  dread¬
ful  annoyance  caused  by  the  noises,  but  was  obliged  to  get
up  and  walk  about  the  room,  even  in  the  coldest  night  of
winter.  She  speaks  of  her  sufferings  as  extreme ;  she  knew
not  what  it  was  to  enjoy  ease  and  comfort,  or  to  be  a  moment
free  from  anxiety,  since  she  was  never  safe  from  an  attack,
and  never  knew  when  the  noises  might  come  on  writh  violence.
Her  mind  was  so  much  affected,  that  the  parish  authorities
had  it  in  view  to  send  her  to  a  lunatic  asylum.  Her  memory
was  also  greatly  impaired ;  so  that,  during  the  period  of  her
illness,  she  was  unable  to  keep  an  exact  account  of  time,  and
cannot  state  with  any  degree  of  certainty  what  was  the  dura¬
tion  of  her  sufferings.  She  was  incapable  of  occupying  her¬
self  with  reading,  of  which  she  had  previously  been  very  fond.
She  consulted  three  physicians  and  three  surgeons,  but  without
the  least  benefit  being  obtained.  She  believed  that  it  would
have  been  impossible  for  her  to  have  borne  her  sufferings
much  longer,  and  that  very  soon  she  must  either  have  gone
mad,  or  sunk  under  them  and  died.  Shortly  before  the  noises
came  on  she  had  had  rheumatic  fever  and  nervous  fever,  and
also  been  subject  to  tic  douloureux.  At  length  she  was  advised
by  a  friend  to  apply  to  Mr.  Capern,  but  was  very  reluctant
to  do  so.  Nevertheless  Mr.  Capern  went  to  see  her,  and  com¬
menced  operating  upon  her  daily,  and  for  three  weeks  no  effect
resulted  from  the  treatment.  She  frequently  urged  him  not
to  trouble  himself  any  more  about  her,  as  she  felt  persuaded
that  all  his  exertions  for  her  relief  would  be  in  vain.  After
three  weeks  she  felt  what  she  called  a  creeping  sensation  in
her  head  when  the  passes  were  made  over  it.  The  violent
attacks  began  to  occur  less  frequently  and  to  diminish  in
intensity.  The  improvement  was  slow  and  gradual.  Tor
three  months  she  was  mesmerised  daily,  and  afterwards  less
frequently  for  some  time  longer.  She  now  considers  herself
cured;  for,  although  she  is  still  subject  to  an  almost  constant
singing  in  the  ears,  this,  in  comparison  with  the  old  noises,
she  looks  upon  as  only  a  trifling  inconvenience.  Her  life  is
comfortable  and  easy;  and  she  is  again  able  to  employ  herself


A  few  of  Mr.  Cctpern’s  Cures.


413


in  reading ;  she  speaks  of  her  recovery  and  of  Mr.  Capern’ s
kind  attention  in  the  warmest  terms  of  gratitude.

IX.  Neuralgic  Pains.

Mr.  Samuel  Doble,  whitesmith,  Gold  Street,  about  24
years  since  received  a  blow  on  the  left  leg  by  a  heavy  sledge
hammer  wielded  by  one  of  his  fellow- workmen.  The  small
bone  of  the  leg  was  broken,  and  inflammation  of  the  part
subsequently  began :  a  few  months  after  he  was  attacked  by
pains  in  the  same  limb ;  the  attack  came  on  quite  suddenly.
He  continued  subject  to  these  attacks  ten  or  twelve  times  a
year ;  they  always  came  on  without  previous  warning,  some¬
times  when  he  was  walking  in  the  street,  or  engaged  in  his
usual  occupation,  so  that  he  was  obliged  to  be  assisted  home.
On  one  occasion  he  was  suddenly  attacked  whilst  on  a  ladder
engaged  in  carrying  up  about  20  pounds  of  soda  in  a  state  of
fusion,  which  he  was  compelled  to  throw  down,  and  had  to  be
assisted  to  the  ground  by  some  of  his  fellow- workmen.  The
attack  sometimes  lasted  twro  or  three  weeks,  and  the  pain  was
very  severe ;  he  was  disabled  during  their  continuance  from
attending  to  his  work,  and  was  generally  confined  to  his
house  and  frequently  to  his  bed.  He  never  had  any  medical
advice,  but  tried  a  variety  of  remedies  without  improvement.
He  had  once  been  engaged  on  heavy  work  all  night,  when
Mr.  Capern,  on  going  to  him  in  the  morning,  found  him  in
great  pain,  hardly  able  to  go  about  the  house,  and  offered  to
operate  upon  him.  Contact  passes  with  the  flat  of  the  hand
being  made  down  the  affected  limb,  he  found  immediate
relief;  there  was  a  strong  sensation  of  warmth  and  a  pricking
like  that  caused  by  the  stinging  of  nettles  in  the  soles  of  the
feet :  in  less  than  five  minutes  the  pain  had  entirely  ceased,
and  did  not  return  for  nearly  three  years.

About  six  weeks  ago  Mr.  Capern  accidentally  met  him  in
the  street,  and,  hearing  that  he  was  suffering  from  a  slight
return  of  his  old  pain  in  consequence  of  a  cold,  offered  to
make  the  passes  over  him ;  and  in  a  few  minutes  entirely
relieved  him,  and  the  pain  has  not  returned.

X.  Affection  of  Lungs  and  Heart.

George  Shopland,  Cadbury  :  Statement  made  to  Mr.  E.  Dunsford.

George  Shopland,  residing  at  Cadbury,  in  the  employ  of
Mr.  Rewe,  surveyor  of  highways.  I  was  taken  ill  in  June
1848,  and  was  incapable  of  labour  for  a  quarter  of  a  year :
but,  although  weak  and  unwell,  I  continued  to  labour  except
the  time  named,  until  the  spring  of  1849,  when  I  was  com-

h  h  2


414  Review  of  Arcanes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles,  §c.,

pelled  to  wholly  relinquish  work.  I  had  applied  to  a  surgeon,
who  told  me  it  was  a  disease  of  the  heart  and  asthma,  that
nothing  would  do  me  good,  but  advised  my.  going  to  the  Exeter
Hospital.  Instead  of  doing  so,  I  applied  to  a  medical  gen¬
tleman  of  Exeter  who  at  first  gave  me  relief,  after  which
I  became  worse.  I  was  then  advised  to  apply  to  Mr.  Capern,
and  the  first  time  the  passes  were  made  over  the  stomach  and
heart,  I  found  great  relief.  On  my  seventh  visit  I  felt  confi¬
dent  of  the  result,  and  the  following  day  I  was  enabled  to
resume  my  labours  of  quarrying  stone  for  Mr.  Rewe,  surveyor
of  highways.

Without  his  touching  me,  I  experienced  great  sensations
from  Mr.  C/s  hand  being  drawn  over  the  affected  part.  Hav¬
ing  a  wife  and  a  family  of  five  children  under  twelve  years  of
age,  I  was  unwilling  to  go  to  the  hospital.

Memorandum. — The  Surgeon  who  attended  George  Shop-
land  appeared  before  the  magistrates  at  Tiverton,  and  made
an  affidavit  that  his  complaints  were  disease  of  the  heart  and
asthma,  and  that  they  would  produce  permanent  disability.


VII.  Review  of  M.  Alphonse  Cah agnet’s  Arcanes  de  la
Vie  Future  Devoiles,  fyc.  By  the  Rev.  George  Sandby,
Vicar  of  Flixton,  Suffolk.

“  Is  it  not  then  natural,  that  men  should  eagerly  seek  for  some  superhuman
means  of  information  on  subjects  so  interesting  to  their  curiosity  ?  Is  it  not  to
be  expected,  that  the  visions  of  an  enthusiast  should  abound  in  food  for  this  cu¬
riosity  ? — till  a  diseased  fancy  mistakes  its  day  dreams  for  a  revelation  ?” — Arch¬
bishop  of  Dublin.  Essays,  vol.  i.,  p.  211.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Flixton,  November,  1849.
Sir. — A  mesmeric  work  has  recently  been  published  at  Paris,
which  merits  some  attention  from  the  English  reader,  both
on  account  of  the  singular  nature  of  its  contents,  and  the
notice  it  has  obtained  in  the  French  magnetic  world.  The
Baron  du  Potet,  in  his  Journal  of  Magnetism. ,  says,  that  the
“  book  has  produced  a  sensation  amongst  them  there,  and
that  it  is  a  step  towards  the  unknown  and  to  judge  from  its
pages,  the  author  has  secured  a  host  of  correspondents  and
friends  in  support  of  his  views.  In  England,  but  compara¬
tively  few  persons  are  aware  of  its  existence.  The  Family
Herald,  a  periodical  with  an  enormous  circulation,  perplexed
its  readers  lately  by  an  article  respecting  it :  but  the  editor
gave  little  more  than  a  summary  of  its  contents,  and  admitting
that  it  was  a  “  singular  book,”  and  not  hastily  to  beset  aside,.


by  the  Rev.  George  San  dbg.


415


concluded  with  no  opinion,  but  added  that  he  “  should  wait
and  see  what  others  thought  of  it.”  I  have  read  the  book
carefully  through,  comparing  it  with  other  works  of  the  same
character,  and  now  propose  to  tell  you  what  I  think  respecting
it ;  for  which  opinion,  however,  your  pages  will  be  in  no
manner  responsible.  Many  will  probably  dissent  from  my
views :  still  it  may  be  hoped  that  some  portion  of  truth  will
be  elicited  from  the  enquiry.

The  work  consists  of  two  volumes,  and  is  called,  The  Se¬
crets  of  the  Future  Life  unveiled,  and  the  Existence  and  Occu¬
pations  of  the  Soul  when  separated  from  the  Body  proved  by
the  Apparition  and  Revelations  of  divers  Spirits  to  ecstatic
Somnambules,  fyc.  The  author,  M.  Alphonse  Cahagnet,  says
that  he  is  a  plain  working-man  (simple  ouvrier ),  with  no  posi¬
tion  in  the  social  or  scientific  world,  but  that  he  is  enabled  by
the  medium  of  mesmerism  to  present  the  most  momentous
truths  to  the  knowledge  of  his  fellow-creatures,  and  to  confirm
the  reality  of  his  statements  by  irrefragable  testimony.  For
this  purpose  he  has  the  assistance  of  eight  ecstatic  or  lucid
somnambules  (the  most  important  by  far  of  whom  is  Madame
Adele  Maginot),  who  all  have  the  alleged  power  of  calling  up,
of  seeing,  and  of  conversing  with  the  souls  of  the  departed.
No  less  than  seventy  or  eighty  spirits  thus  make  their  appear¬
ance,  besides  angels  and  evil  demons,  and  among  them  we
find  Swedenborg,  Louis  XVI.,  priests,  philosophers,  and  al¬
chemists,  and  a  long  succession  of  the  relatives  of  those  that
are  present  at  the  sittings,  and  who  request  their  friends  to
be  thus  summoned.  The  greater  part  of  the  two  volumes  is
taken  up  with  a  description  of  the  persons  of  the  spirits  who
thus  appear,  and  who,  it  should  be  observed,  are  only  visible
to  the  clairvoyant ;  and  with  conversations  on  religious,  philo¬
sophical,  and  domestic  subjects  between  M.  Cahagnet  and  his
friends  on  the  one  side,  and  the  spirits  who  are  summoned  on
the  other,  the  somnambule  being  the  medium  of  communica¬
tion.  And  the  wonderful  thing  in  the  book,  aud  what  indeed
offers  a  startling  difficulty  for  our  solution,  is  the  marvellous
accuracy  with  which  the  persons  of  the  spirits  are  invariably
portrayed.  Parties  who  had  been  dead  twenty  or  thirty  years,
and  whom  neither  the  clairvoyant  nor  M.  Cahagnet  had  ever
seen,  instantly,  upon  their  names  being  only  mentioned  by  a
third  person  in  the  room,  present  themselves  to  the  vision  of
the  somnambule,  who  at  once  describes  their  dress,  their  age,
their  height,  their  features,  their  complexion,  the  colour  of
their  hair,  the  colour  of  their  eyes,  their  personal  defects,
and  characteristic  habits  and  temperament,  with  a  fidelity  of
representation  that  baffles  all  denial.  Trivial  domestic  circum-


416  Review  of  Ar canes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles,  tyc.,

stances,  that  were  only  known  to  the  survivor,  are  mentioned,
and  facts,  which  were  forgotten  or  misunderstood,  brought  up
or  explained.  And  all  this  does  not  happen  once  or  twice  and
accidentally,  but  upon  upwards  of  a  hundred  occasions,  as  it
would  appear  by  these  volumes.  Neither  is  the  testimony  to  the
truthfulness  of  the  above  statements  of  light  value.  Persons
of  the  highest  respectability  and  in  all  grades  of  life  affirm,  by
their  signatures  and  their  addresses,  the  correctness  of  wrhat
is  here  published.  Several,  who  had  entered  M.  Cahagnet's
apartments  unbelievers  in  a  spiritual  world  and  in  a  future
state  of  existence,  quitted  Adele's  communications  converted
and  convinced,  and  satisfied  that  they  had  but  just  parted
from  the  presence  of  those  who  in  their  lifetime  had  been
most  dear  to  them.  Now  a  book  pretending  to  such  infor¬
mation,  and  conveying  statements  that  are  backed  by  evidence
of  this  character,  ought  not  to  be  passed  over  with  a  super¬
cilious  sneer  of  incredulit3q  or  be  explained  away  at  a  mo¬
ment’s  notice  by  some  customary  and  favourite  theory.  What¬
ever  the  ignorance  of  the  non-mesmeric  public  may  suggest,
a  philosophical  mesmerist  should  at  least  look  the  question  in
the  face.  Either  the  book  is  a  scandalous  fabrication,  and
M.  Cahagnet  and  his  friends  vile  impostors,  whose  falsehoods,
for  the  credit  of  mesmerism,  ought  to  be  exposed  in  The  Zoist,
— or  Madame  Adele  Maginot  offers  one  of  the  most  brilliant
instances  of  the  powers  of  thought-reading  and  clairvoyance,
especially  of  the  former  faculty,  that  I  have  yet  either  heard
or  read  of, — so  brilliant  indeed,  that  her  case  deserves  peculiar
study;  or,  the  fact  is,  asM.  Cahagnet  assumes,  that  the  spirits
of  the  departed  do  and  can  appear  to  a  mesmeric  ecstatic,  and
in  that  condition  can  communicate  truths  the  most  interesting
and  vital  for  our  information.  After  a  cautious  perusal  of  the
book,  I  can  see  no  other  conclusion  than  one  of  the  above
inferences ;  and,  whichever  of  them  the  case  may  be,  the  sub¬
ject  demands  a  patient  investigation  at  your  hands.

The  reader  will  by  this  time  see  that  the  work  falls  under
the  class  to  which  belong  the  Principles  of  Nature  and  her
Divine  Revelations,  by  Davis,  the  Poughkeepsie  clairvoyant,
the  Seeress  of  Prevorst,  by  Justin  Kerner,  Haddock's  Som-
nolism  and  Psycheism,  at  section  38,  and  some  minor  French
magnetic  works  :*  and  it  is  as  well  to  add,  that  the  tendency
of  all  these  works  is  to  support  the  doctrines  of  Emanuel


*  I  have  never  read  Jung-Stilling’s  Theory  of  the  Doctrine  of  Spirits,  which
is  of  the  same  class,  and  with  which  many  of  your  readers  are  familiar.  He
teaches,  I  believe,  that  those  who  have  gone  before  us  are  able  to  place  themselves
en  rapport  with  us  ;  and  that  this  relationship  depends  upon  the  degree  in  which
the  spiritual  condition  is  free  from  the  influences  of  the  external  senses.


by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.


417


Swedenborg.  Now  it  is  a  curious  fact,  if  it  be  not  also  a
staggering  one,  that  so  many  of  the  higher  clairvoyants  do
coincide  thus  strongly  in  asserting  the  truthfulness  of  Sweden¬
borg's  statements.  The  followers  of  that  remarkable  man  are
a  numerous  and,  I  believe,  an  increasing  body ;  and  many  of
them  derive  no  small  confidence  as  to  the  authenticity  of  his
Revelations,  from  the  countenance  that  they  obtain  through
recent  somnambules.  Among  these  followers  the  learned
Professor  Bush  of  New  York  occupies  a  leading  place.  His
work  called  Mesmer  and  Swedenborg  is  well  known.  And  it
therefore  becomes  an  interesting  question  to  ask,  whether  the
disclosures  of  clairvoyance  do  throw  light  upon  the  teaching
of  Swedenborg?  and  if  so,  is  it  by  adding  important  cor¬
roboration  to  the  views  of  that  extraordinary  man,  or  is  it  by
reducing  the  teacher  himself  to  the  simple  level  of  an  ecstatic
visionary  ?

Before,  however,  we  enter  upon  that  inquiry,  our  first
query  must  be,  Is  this  book  to  be  depended  upon  ?  In  truth,
I  can  see  no  reason  to  question  either  the  good  faith  of  the
author  or  the  credibility  of  his  witnesses.  I  must  believe  that
the  conversations  as  reported  have  substantially  taken  place,
and  that  the  description  of  persons  and  things  was  as  correct
in  the  main  as  the  parties  interested  in  the  inquiries  affirm
them  to  have  been ;  or  I  must,  on  the  other  hand,  reject
every  testimony,  however  respectable,  that  runs  counter  to
my  own  opinions,  and  adopt  the  odious  doctrine  that  “  all
men  are  liars.”  The  book  is  decidedly  written  in  an  earnest,
truth-loving  spirit.  Nay  I  might  almost  say,  that  it  was  a
religious  book,  and  composed  with  a  reverential  feeling  for
things  sacred.  For  though  I  may  express  regret  at  the  strange
nature  of  several  of  its  tenets,  still  it  must  be  remembered,
that  it  is  in  great  measure  written  with  a  religious  purpose,
and  for  the  sake  of  extending  the  creed  of  a  particular  sect  of
religionists.  In  fact,  M.  Cahagnet's  object  appears  to  be,  to
strengthen  the  world's  belief  in  the  doctrines  of  a  future  state
of  existence,  and  of  the  happiness  of  the  virtuous  and  good
on  their  departure  from  this  life ;  and  this  he  endeavours  to
do  on  the  very  same  principles  and  from  the  very  same  class
of  alleged  evidence,  on  which  a  numerous  body  of  Christians
in  this  country  and  in  the  United  states  have  founded  their
churches.

This,  at  once,  gives  an  unexpected  interest  to  the  subject :
and  as  probably  many  of  your  readers  are  not  aware  of  the
grounds  on  which  Swedenborg  laid  claim  to  the  honours  of  a
divine  mission,  and  professed  to  have  been  favoured  with  a
special  revelation,  it  may  be  convenient  to  state  in  few  words


418  Review  of  Ar  canes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles ,  tyc.,

the  reasons  for  which  he  established  the  New  Jerusalem
Church.

Emanuel  Swedenborg,  then,  (to  use  Professor  Bush's  own
words*),  claims  to  have  been  (( super  naturally  put  into  a  con¬
dition  that  enabled  him  to  hold  converse  with  the  spiritual
world ,  and  to  lay  open  to  human  view  its  otherwise  inscruta¬
ble  mysteries."  He  was  originally  of  the  Swedish  Lutheran
church,  was  an  unusually  learned  man,  and  eminently  versed
in  the  mathematical  and  physical  sciences,  held  a  situation
under  the  government  of  Stockholm,  and  was  a  member  of
the  Swedish  Diet.  About  1743  he  announced,  that  he  had
ascended  to  the  invisible  world,  had  enjoyed  thereby  repeated
visions  of  angels  and  of  spirits,  had  obtained  an  accurate
understanding  of  man's  condition  in  the  next  life,  and  a
clearer  comprehension  than  had  been  yet  vouchsafed  to  any
previous  mortal  of  the  sense  and  purport  of  the  Christian
scriptures.  We  need  not  particularize  what  Swedenborg’s
doctrines  were  :  it  is  sufficient  to  say,  that,  taking  Christianity
for  his  basis,  he  amplified  and  “improved"  upon  it  by  his
disclosures  and  interpretations,  that  he  is  regarded  in  the
light  of  an  apostle  by  the  “New  Church,"  and,  lastly,  that
the  writings,  in  which  all  these  revelations  are  contained,
exhibit  considerable  ability  or  “  illumination."  Since  the
death  of  its  founder,  Swedenborgianism  has  been  rather
gaining  ground  than  otherwise,  especially  in  these  latter
years;  and  in  London,  at  this  moment,  there  are  two
“  churches"  in  which  its  doctrines  are  publicly  taught.  Still,
however,  with  the  great  body  of  Christians,  these  “revela¬
tions"  have  been  quite  unknown  or  held  in  small  repute;  and
Swedenborg  himself  has  been  looked  upon  as  little  else  than
a  madman,  or  a  blasphemous  fanatic;  and  thus  matters
seemed  likely  to  remain.  When,  suddenly,  “a  new  phasis  of
our  nature,"  as  Professor  Bush  expresses  it,  is  developed,
and  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism  enter  “  into  juxta-position
with  the  spiritual  disclosures  of  Swedenborg."  The  very
same  or  similar  visions, — the  very  same  or  similar  communi¬
cations, — the  very  same  or  similar  doctrines,  are  presented  to
the  perceptions  of  ecstatic  clairvoyants.  Angels  and  spirits
without  number  stand  before  the  somnambule  at  a  moment's
notice,  and  re-assert  the  truthfulness  of  the  Swede's  original
revelations.  Nay,  the  great  prophet  himself  obeys  the  bid¬
ding,  and  confirms,  in  solemn  phrase,  the  general  accuracy
of  his  own  teachings.  A  strong  sensation  is  naturally  excited
with  very  many.  Surprise,  gratification,  and  triumph  per¬
vade  the  fold  of  the  “  New  Church."  The  harmony  between

*  Mesmer  and  Swedenbory,  p.  15.


by  the  Rev.  Georye  Sandby.


419


the  character  of  the  two  developments  is  felt  to  be  so  com¬
plete,  that  nothing  short  of  a  miraculous  interposition  on  the
part  of  Providence  itself  could  have  brought  about  the  iden¬
tity.  The  Swedish  seer  throws  a  sacred  light  round  the  mar¬
vels  of  mesmerism  ;  while  Mesmer  authenticates  the  divine
legation  of  the  Swedish  seer.  A  learned  Professor  and  Theo¬
logian  “  has  no  scruple  to  avow  it  as  his  firm  conviction  that
the  phenomena  of  mesmerism  have  been  developed  in  this
age  with  the  express  design  of  testifying  by  external  evidence
to  the  absolute  truth  of  the  disclosures  and  doctrines  which
Swedenborg  has  promulgated  to  the  world.”  Thus  also  it  is,
that  the  clairvoyant  powers  of  Andrew  Davis  assume  the
character  of  supernatural  revelations.  Thus  it  is  that  the
magnetic  dreams  of  Madame  Hauffe,  of  Wirtemberg,  approach
the  dignity  of  authoritative  expositions.  Thus  it  is  that  Mr.
Haddock,  of  Bolton,  perceives  in  the  statements  of  his  admir¬
able  clairvoyante,  Emma,  “  a  harmony  with  the  principles  of
divine  revelations,”  and  instructions  on  “  the  nature  of  the
spirit’s  home”  and  the  habits  of  the  “  spirit  world.”*  And  thus
it  is  that  in  the  two  volumes  before  us,  M.  Cahagnet  unveils
the  mysterious  secrets  of  our  “  future  life,”  and  communicates
“  facts,”  and  “  doctrines,”  and  “  spiritual  truths,”  which  agree
through  a  f/w«si-miraculous  harmony  with  those  originally
promulgated  by  Emanuel  Swedenborg.

All  this  offers  matter  for  respectful  inquiry.  To  take  the
lowest  view  of  the  subject,  these  repeated  coincidences  are  a
curious  fact,  instructive  in  a  merely  physiological  light,  but
of  much  importance  when  they  assume  a  religious  aspect.
For  the  parties,  who  are  under  the  influences  of  these  alleged
revelations,  are  not  wild  uneducated  enthusiasts,  but  thought¬
ful  and  able  men,  and  a  priori  as  competent  to  come  to  a  just
conclusion  as  one  of  ourselves.  If,  therefore,  they  be  right,
we  are  strangely  wrong :  and  if  they  be  under  erroneous  im¬
pressions  it  would  be  but  decorous  in  us  to  point  out  the
sources  of  their  delusion  in  a  candid  tone  of  discussion,  and
not  get  rid  of  the  question,  as  too  many  of  us  are  disposed,
by  a  hasty  laugh  of  sceptical  bigotry.

To  return,  then,  to  M.  Cahagnet’s  ecstatics,  the  problem
for  our  solution  is, — what  was  the  medium  through  which
they  arrived  at  their  knowledge?  Was  the  agency  natural
or  supernatural  ?

When  M.  Cahagnet’s  first  volume  appeared,  the  leading
mesmerists  of  the  French  metropolis  at  once  pronounced  that

*  See  Mesmer  and  Swedenborg,  p.  6  ;  The  Principles  of  Nature,  fyc.,  by-
Davis.  The  Sccress  of  Prevorst,  by  Dr.  Kerner  ;  and  Haddock’s  Somnolism  and
Psycheism ,  p.  69.


420  Review  of  Arcanes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles ,  fyc.,

these  assumed  appearances  of  the  spiritual  world,  and  these
faithful  delineations  of  persons  and  things,  were  little  else
than  fresh  instances  of  that  old  power  with  which  we  are^all
acquainted,  transmission  of  thought , — to  which  conclusion,
after  a  close  analysis  of  the  book,  I  myself  also  arrived.
Hereupon  M.  Cahagnet  publishes  his  second  volume,  embrac¬
ing,  if  possible,  still  more  extraordinary  facts  than  the  first,
and  containing  his  refutation  of,  and  arguments  against,  the
aforesaid  theory;  his  definition  of  thought-reading  and  an
exposition  of  its  limits ;  and  explaining  why  that  faculty,  how¬
ever  extraordinary,  could  by  no  means  reach  to  an  elucidation
of  his  cases,  inasmuch  as  the  parties  en  rapport  with  the
clairvoyant  were  not  thinking  of,  or  not  acquainted  with,
the  points  under  inquiry,  had  no  feeling  in  favor  of  the
views  put  forth,  or  no  belief  in  the  doctrines,  and  sometimes
even  laboured,  though  in  vain,  to  obtain  demonstrations  of
an  adverse  nature.  And  here  it  is  that  our  author  intro¬
duces  sundry  observations  which  I  cannot  entirely  pass  over.
M.  Cahagnet  has  become  a  staunch  anti-materialist :  but  his
bitterness  and  warmth  against  materialist  views,  and  the  osten¬
tatious  humility  with  which  he  denounces  the  wisdom  of  the
the  scientific,  are  put  forth  in  a  manner  so  unnecessarily
offensive  that  they  give  to  his  otherwise  instructive  contribu¬
tions  the  tone  of  an  unpleasant  controversy.  I  am  no  mate¬
rialist  myself :  au  contraire,  and  would  moreover  gladly  adopt
several  of  the  declarations  of  M.  Cahagnet’s  unseen  visitants,
as  containing  doctrines  of  a  most  consolatory  and  delightful
tendency :  but  the  present  question  is  this, — not  whether  we
are  surrounded  by  a  spiritual  world, — but  whether  M.  Cahag-
net’s  disclosures  prove  that  we  are,  or  add  any  increased  con¬
fidence  to  our  previous  persuasions  on  the  subject;  or  whether
all  his  facts,  however  staggering  they  may  be  at  the  first  con¬
sideration,  may  not  be  at  last  solved  on  mesmeric  principles,
without  this  intervention  of  extra-natural  machinery.

Let  me,  then,  now  state  in  general  terms  what  may  be
understood  by  the  phrase,  transference  of  thought.  This  mar¬
vellous  manifestation  of  mesmeric  influence  falls  into  that
class  of  high  phenomena  resulting  from  the  mysterious  re¬
lationship  which  exists  between  the  magnetizer  and  his  sub¬
ject,  and  which  exhibit  themselves  under  the  type  of  com¬
munity  of  sensation.  This  sympathy  of  the  senses  presents
itself  under  more  than  one  guise,  varying  with  various
patients ;  in  some  being  scarcely,  if  at  all,  perceptible,  in
others  developing  itself  to  an  intense  degree.  Transference
of  touch,  transference  of  taste,  transference  of  pain,  are  effects
with  which  we  are  all  of  us  more  or  less  familiar.  And  trans-


by  the  Rev.  George  Sand  by.


421


fercncc  of  thought,  or  the  communication  of  ideas  from  one
brain  to  another,  is  nothing  but  a  development  of  the  very
same  principle,  though  evidently  of  a  higher  order.  The
next  question,  then,  is,  to  what  extent  this  latter  power  is  or
can  be  carried  :  in  other  words,  is  this  transmission  of  thought
confined  to  what  is  generally  passing  in  the  brain  of  the  mes-
meriser,  or  can  facts  which  lie  has  forgotten,  facts  which  have
vanished  from  his  mind  altogether,  but  which  we  may  suppose
to  be  still  latent  in  the  cerebral  region,  and  retaining  the
traces  of  their  first  impression,  can  these  facts  be  revived,  as
it  were,  and  transferred  to  the  sensitive  brain  of  the  som-
nambule,  without  the  mesmeriser  himself  being  conscious  of
their  re-existence  ?  Can  a  brain,  too,  which  is  not  in  apparent
rapport  with  the  sleeper, — a  brain  which  is  at  a  distance, —
or  which  in  years  long  past  had  been  in  sympathetic  inter¬
course  with  some  person  that  is  present, — can  this  brain,  by
a  quasi-electric  chain  of  most  mysterious  communication,  con¬
duct  its  still  uneffaced  impressions  to  the  brain  of  the  ecstatic  ?
These  are  queries  which  observation  has  forced  upon  my  con¬
sideration,  and  which  bear  most  closely  upon  the  contents  of
these  present  volumes.  Of  course,  the  first  difficulty  is,  to
believe  in  transference  of  thought  at  all;  but  when  that  phe¬
nomenon  is  once  established  as  a  truth,  the  other  points  are
only  questions  of  degree.  And  certainly  additional  experience
leads  me  to  suspect,  that,  in  certain  rare  and  exquisitely-sen-
sitive  cases  of  ecstatic-sleep  waking,  the  power  of  the  human
brain  for  receiving  by  transference  these  mental  impressions
reaches  to  a  far  greater  extent  than  from  our  earlier  observa¬
tions  we  ventured  to  conclude.*

Archbishop  Whately  makes  an  observation  in  his  work  on
Evidences,  peculiarly  apposite  to  cases  of  this  description.
“  We  are  often  obliged  to  believe  something  that  is  very  won¬
derful,  in  order  to  avoid  believing  something  else  that  is  still
more  wonderful/’  And  however  difficult  it  may  be  to  believe
in  so  extraordinary  an  extension  of  the  faculty  of  thought¬
reading,  as  I  have  just  referred  to,  I  can  still  more  readily
believe  in  such  an  abnormal  enlargement  of  a  well-established
power,  than  call  up  for  the  solution  of  our  difficulty,  the  ex¬
istence  of  a  new  and  still  more  marvellous  manifestation.  To
quote  the  Archbishop  again :  “  I  am  compelled  to  believe  the
one,  because  I  cannot  think  of  any  other  way  that  is  not  far
more  incredible.

*  In  Mesmerism  and  its  Opponents,  p.  88  and  p.  308,  second  edition,  I  have
given  a  description  of  “transference  of  thought,"  from  which  on  a  re-perusal  I
see  nothing  that  can  be  subtracted,  and  to  which,  in  our  present  imperfect  know¬
ledge,  I  fear  that  there  is  not  much  that  can  be  added.

f  Evidences,  p.  29.


422  Review  of  Arcanes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles,  tyc.,

It  is  now  time  that  we  examine  M.  Cahagnet’s  reply  to
the  mesmeric  argument  of  the  communication  of  thought.

1.  “  Is  it  true  (he  asks),  that  a  clairvoyant  can  see,  hear,  feel,
and  converse  (sentir  et  converser)  with  another  being  at  a  distance?

2.  “  Is  it  true,  that  it  is  only  necessary  to  put  the  clairvoyant
en  rapport  with  the  names  of  the  places  and  of  the  persons  that  we
desire  to  make  him  perceive  at  a  distance,  for  him  to  perceive  them  ?

“  If  you  answer  yes  to  these  two  single  questions,  (and  you  cannot
answer  no,)  you  admit  the  existence  of  an  intelligent  being  or  fluid,
independent  in  that  state  of  the  material  body,  and  able  to  take  cog¬
nizance  of  such  things.  Now  such  a  being  or  fluid  well  deserves  a
name  ;  and  we  give  it  the  name  of  soul.”*

Now  I  at  once  deny  the  logical  accuracy  of  this  conclusion.
The  fallacy  of  our  author’s  hypothesis  lurks  in  the  word  “  in¬
dependent  and  M.  Cahagnet  does  not  perceive  that,  at  the
very  beginning  of  his  argument,  he  is  begging  the  whole
question  which  is  at  issue  between  us.  As  a  firm  believer  in
clairvoyance,  I  may  perhaps  say  “yes”  to  his  two  queries,
though  I  somewhat  demur  to  the  phrase  “converser,”  and
perhaps  to  that  of  “  sentir  but  putting  my  own  interpreta¬
tion  upon  his  language,  and  employing  his  words  in  a  gene¬
ralized  sense,  I  will,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  adopt  his  two
first  propositions  as  real.  But  what  then?  Does  it  therefore
follow,  that  we  must  admit  that  the  medium  of  clairvoyance
is  “independent  of  the  material  body,”  and  “  independent  of
material  laws,”  (p.  12,)  and  enjoys  an  “  individualized  exist¬
ence,”  apart  from  the  corporeal  frame  ?  Now  that  is  the
very  point  that  we  all  want  to  know  ;  that  is,  in  truth,  the
very  question  on  which  hinges  the  whole  secret  respecting
the  causes,  and  the  principles,  and  the  action  of  clairvoyance.
I  cannot,  therefore,  admit  our  author’s  proposition, — neither
do  I  deny  it;  for  this  simple  reason,  that  I  know  nothing
about  it.  To  assert,  therefore,  that  the  clairvoyant  medium,
“  be  it  soul,  or  fluid,  or  spirit,  or  what  you  will,”  (p.  12,)
separates  itself  from  its  “  carnal  envelope,”  becomes  indepen¬
dent  of  it,  and  can  go  where  it  will,  alone  and  disunited  from
it,  is  to  adopt  an  hypothesis  exceedingly  convenient  for  our
author’s  subsequent  reasonings,  but  which  demands  a  little
more  proof  than  has  been  at  present  attainable.  In  the  pre¬
sent  state  of  our  knowledge,  one  hypothesis  is  as  good  as
another ;  and  we  are  assured  by  sundry  magnetists,  that  the
clairvoyant  agent  is  an  invisible,  imponderable,  quasi-electric
telegraphic  wire,  which  shoots  forth  from  the  brain  of  the
somnambule  to  the  brain,  or  the  place,  or  the  person  with
which  it  is  en  rapport,  and,  making  its  observation  on  the

*  Vol.  ii.,  p.  11.


423


by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.

spot,  returns  back  from  whence  it  started,  without  having  the
line  of  communication  for  an  instant  divided.  Now  whether
this  theory  approach  nearer  to  the  truth  than  M.  Cahagnet’s
we  know  not;  and  till  the  true  theory  be  ascertained,  any
deductions  from  any  hypothesis,  however  agreeable,  are  clearly
inadmissible.

The  whole  pith,  then,  of  M.  Cahagnet’s  arguments  is  so
completely  included  in  the  above  extract,  and  especially  in
the  word  "independent,”  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  pursue  his
train  of  reasoning,  or  to  deny  that  a  “  soul,  when  thus  sepa¬
rated  from  and  independent  of  the  body,  might  see  and  con¬
verse  with  other  souls,  and  secure  a  large  amount  of  interesting
information.”  All  this  we  might  allow,  were  this  disjunction
of  the  clairvoyant  medium  but  once  established ;  but,  in  de¬
fault  of  this,  our  author’s  lengthened  argumentations  only
leave  us  where  we  began,  in  doubt  as  to  the  correctness  of
his  very  first  principle.  And  wffiile,  therefore,  I  would  speak
with  all  diffidence  on  so  doubtful  a  subject,  and  admit  that
several  statements  in  M.  Cahagnet’s  narrative  are  extremely
perplexing,  and  present  difficulties  for  which  I  cannot  always
find  an  immediate  solution,  I  must  still  come  to  the  conclusion
that  his  main  facts  are  explicable  on  the  old  mesmeric  prin¬
ciples  of  thought-reading  and  clairvoyance,  while  for  the  con¬
versational  or  “  revelation”  portions  of  the  book  we  must  look
for  the  origin  in  sources  of  a  less  real  and  less  reliable  cha¬
racter.

And  what  sources  are  these  ?  In  other  words,  why  were
all  these  facts  presented  to  the  sleepwaker  through  the  appa¬
rent  medium  of  spiritual  communication,  and  not  simply  and
nakedly  on  the  brain  at  once  ?  My  answer  is,  that  suggestion,
imagination,  a  powrer  of  artificial  dreaming,  and  a  love  of  pro¬
ducing  wonder  will,  according  as  the  case  may  be,  respectively
and  reciprocally  explain  the  mystery.  And  here,  in  passing,
let  me  request  the  mesmerist  not  to  be  frightened  at  the  bare
mention  of  these  topics,  and  conceive  that,  by  thus  introducing
them,  we  are  yielding  ground  to  the  enemy.  The  phantastie
creations  of  the  brain  act  far  more  in  mesmerism  than  at  first
we  are  quite  aware  of,  more  especially  at  the  later  stages,  and
when  the  magnetic  relationship  is  once  well-established.*  And
in  the  cases  before  us,  the  agency  of  these  influences  is  clearly
traceable.  For  instance,  M.  Cahagnet  shews  us  at  the  begin¬
ning  of  his  first  volume  (pp.  13,  14),  that  he  had  had  a  han¬
kering  about  the  doctrine  of  spirits.  Though  incredulous

*  The  reader  is  referred  to  the  last  number  of  The  Zoist,  p.  250,  for  some
admirable  observations  by  Dr.  Elliotson  on  this  head,  which  will  well  repay
perusal.


424  Review  of  Arcanes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles,  fyc.,

respecting  their  existence,  as  he  says,  he  still  wanted  to  hear
about  them,  to  see  them,  and  to  make  up  his  mind  respecting
them.  He  seems  to  have  kept  a  journal  of  his  experiences,
and  of  his  visions,  and  of  the  “  corporeal  phenomena”  that
had  occured  to  him.  From  the  whole  tenor  of  the  two  volumes
there  is  strong  internal  evidence  that  the  subject  had  been
uppermost  in  his  mind  for  some  time ;  and,  though  we  must
not  say  that  he  had  come  to  a  u  foregone  conclusion”  before
the  evidence  was  completed,  since  he  assures  us  so  much  of
his  scepticism,  we  still  see  enough  to  know  that  his  mind  was
well-prepared  for  impressions  on  the  subject,  and  that  he  had
paved  the  way  for  inevitable  conclusions.  Though  I  acquit
M.  Caliagnet  of  the  design  of  guiding  his  somnambules  into
a  particular  train  of  answers,  by  putting,  as  it  were,  leading
questions  to  them,  it  is  impossible  not  to  observe  what  was
the  tendency  of  his  thoughts,  and  not  to  see  that  “  sugges¬
tion”  must  have  had  an  active  operation.  Granted  that,  in
the  first  instance,  the  suggestion  might  have  been  ever  so  faint
or  indirect,  still  the  smallest  suggestion  is  sufficient,  and  half
a  hint  does  the  work.  Ce  n’est  que  le  premier  pas,  on  these
occasions,  as  on  many  others  ;  for,  when  the  main  idea  of  a
spiritual  world  is  apprehended,  the  rest  follows  of  course.
Neither  do  I  tax  the  somnambules  with  intentionally  deceiv¬
ing  M.  Caliagnet ;  for  such  is  the  power  of  fancy,  and  such
the  creative  action  of  the  brain  in  this  sensitive  state  of  impres¬
sionability,  that  they  themselves  believe  in  their  own  inven¬
tions;  they  see  what  they  wish,  and  find  what  they  know  will
be  agreeable.  And  thus  it  is  that  the  remotest  allusion  from
without  takes  a  form  and  consistencv  within ;  and  a  word
dropped  from  a  magnetizer  respecting  our  future  existence
leads  to  a  whole  train  of  visual,  or  rather  cerebral,  illusions,
through  which  a  world  of  angels  and  of  spirits,  in  the  most
vivid  and  life-like  shapes,  pass  in  review  before  the  nervous
system  of  the  sleeper.

So  early  as  at  p.  8  of  the  first  volume,  we  find  questions
respecting  Swedenborg,  addressed  to  Bruno,  the  first  ecstatic.
At  p.  82,  the  author  tells  that  he  had  now  become  a  regular
student  of  Swedenborg’s  works,  since  he  had  obtained  a  glimpse
into  the  spiritual  world.  As  we  go  on  reading,  we  see  the
Swedenborgian  doctrines  growing  and  expanding,  and  assum¬
ing  more  and  more  of  a  definite  shape.  We  see  this  particu¬
larly  in  the  case  of  the  great  ecstatic  Adele,  whose  confidence
in  her  powers  seems  to  gain  ground  by  practice,  and  whose
emendations  and  improvements  upon  her  first  revelations  are
very  noticeable.  And  at  last,  when  Swedenborg  himself  ap¬
pears,  the  self-deception  has  become  so  complete  that  the


by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.


425


inquiries  no  longer  contain  indirect  allusions  to  liis  writings,
but  point-blank  questions  respecting  the  accuracy  of  particular
parts  of  his  statements  are  addressed  to  the  somnambule,  who
returns  most  specific  answers,  repeating  and  confirming  almost
everything  that  Swedenborg  had  written.

I  think  that  I  can  now  furnish  you  with  proof  conclusive
as  to  the  cerebral  illusion  under  which  these  ecstatics  are
influenced  ;  and  for  this  purpose  I  shall  refer  to  two  of  M.
Cahagnet's  most  favourite  “  facts.”

The  reader,  then,  will  bear  in  mind,  that  the  position
which  these  volumes  endeavour  to  prove,  is,  that  the  spirits  of
the  departed  can  and  do  make  their  appearance  to  an  ecstatic
sleep-waker,  and  can  hold  conversations  with  him.  When  we
have  no  means  of  ascertaining  the  truth  of  wrhat  is  asserted,
a  somnambule  may  say  what  he  likes ;  but  wThat  if  the  som-
nambule  forget  himself,  or  is  led  astray  by  his  illusions,  and
endeavours  to  prove  a  little  too  much  ?

M.  Lucas,  of  Rambouillet,  (vol.  ii.,  p.  32,)  being  uneasy
about  the  fate  of  a  brother-in-law,  who  had  disappeared  about
twelve  years,  and  of  whom  he  had  received  no  intelligence,
consults  Madame  Adele  respecting  him.  As  soon  as  she  sum¬
mons  the  lost  relative  by  name,  he  makes  his  appearance ;
whereupon  she  gives  such  an  exact  description  of  his  features
and  person,  that  M.  Lucas  declares  that  the  identity  is  com¬
plete.  Thus  far  we  have  simply  an  instance  of  the  accurate
power  of  thought-reading;  but  the  somnambule  then  says,  that
the  brother  is  not  dead,  but  is  residing  in  a  foreign  country,
America  probably.  When  the  apparition,  too,  at  length  speaks,
he  says,  “  I  am  not  dead,  I  am  living  in  Mexico  ;  I  followed
the  Emperor  Don  Pedro,  and  have  been  five  years  a  prisoner,
— but  my  relations  will  see  me  again.”  It  is  not  necessary,
for  the  present  argument,  to  give  any  farther  details  of  this
case,  except  to  add,  that  it  afterwards  transpires  that  some
of  the  man's  relatives  had  at  one  time  conjectured  that  he
had  joined  the  army  of  Don  Pedro,  and  had  consequently
made  inquires  respecting  him  in  that  direction.  Have  we  not
here,  therefore,  something  like  cause  and  effect,  and  a  curious
instance  of  the  chain  by  which  an  idea  can  be  transmitted
from  brain  to  brain  ?

M.  Mirande,  of  St.  Cloud,  (vol.  ii.,  p.  63,)  demands  through
Adele  the  apparition  of  a  brother,  whom  he  believes  to  have
died  in  the  campaign  against  Russia.  The  brother  appears  ;
and  the  description,  with  certain  exceptions,  of  his  figure,  his
uniform,  and  his  character  is  so  correct,  that  M.  Mirande
recognizes  him  at  once.  But  this  brother  is  not  dead  either ;
for  when  he  speaks,  he  says  that  he  had  suffered  much, — had


42(3  Review  of  Arcanes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles,  fyc.,

been  made  prisoner,  had  been  sent  to  the  furthest  parts  of
Russia,  but  did  not  know  the  name  of  the  country  where  lie
was, — that  his  brother  would  see  him  again,  &c.,  &c. ;  but  the
particulars  are  unimportant.

Now  M.  Cahagnet  attaches  great  importance  to  these  two
cases,  arguing,  that  if  the  spirits  of  living  men  (“  great  virtue
in  this  if”)  could  thus  make  their  appearance  and  converse,
it  follows  a  fortiori  that  the  spirits  of  those  that  are  separated
by  death  from  the  body  must  with  far  greater  probability
possess  the  same  power,  and  that  thus  by  these  two  cases  we
have  acquired  a  certitude  of  all  that  he  had  hitherto  asserted
in  this  respect.  The  enthusiasm  of  M.  Cahagnet  prevents
him  from  seeing  that  his  own  facts,  it  is  to  be  feared,  overturn
his  own  hypothesis,  and  prove  the  unsubstantiality  of  his
visions ;  for  we  must  nail  him  and  his  followers  down  to  these
two  cases,  and  bring  their  possibility  to  an  easy  test.  For
instance,  these  alleged  communications  were  real  or  unreal;
if  real,  and  it  be  true  that  the  spirits  of  these  two  men,  the
one  resident  in  Mexico,  and  the  other  on  the  borders  of  China,
could  thus  maintain  a  conversation  with  a  somnambule,  (and
whether  that  the  somnambule’s  spirit  travelled  to  them,  or
that  theirs  travelled  to  the  somnambule,  is  unimportant,)  it
is  clear  that  the  men  themselves  must  have  been  conscious  of
the  intercourse.  The  spirit,  according  to  M.  CahagneCs  own
doctrine,  is  the  actual  man;  it  must  have  been  the  spirit,
then,  that  spoke,  and  asserted  that  he  was  living :  the  reality,
therefore,  of  the  whole  transaction  is  easy  of  proof.  We  do
not  want  these  two  men  to  be  fetched  from  afar  to  narrate
their  singular  experiences ;  the  fact  can  be  tried  nearer  home.
Let  Adele  one  morning  communicate  after  the  same  fashion
with  the  spiritual  part  of  some  persons  resident  in  Paris  or
France, — let  her  hold  a  dialogue  with  them,  as  she  did  in
Mexico  and  Russia, — and  unless  these  absent  persons  become
conscious  of  the  communication,  and  agree  in  the  accuracy
of  the  conversations  in  which  they  are  supposed  to  take  a
part,  the  unreality  of  the  assumed  “  perception”  is  at  once
obvious,  and  we  have  incontestable  proof  that  the  whole  is  a
mental  delusion.

I  contend,  then,  that  we  have  in  these  two  cases  evidence
conclusive  that  a  reflection  of  persons  or  things  can  be  so
strongly  mirrored  on  the  brain  by  some  power  of  concentra¬
tion,  as  to  assume»the  semblance  of  an  actual  embodiment.
Now  an  effect,  which  I  assume  to  be  possible  in  respect  of  par¬
ties  supposed  to  be  living,  can  be  equally  possible  in  respect
to  parties  supposed  or  known  to  be  dead.  The  illusion  in  both
instances  is  identical.  The  characteristics  of  each  class  of  ap-


by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.


427


parition  are  one  and  the  same.  And  though  we  cannot  prove
that  the  spirits  of  the  departed  do  not  communicate  with  this
lucid  lady,  as  she  so  confidently  asserts  that  they  do,  we  can
yet  prove  that  the  spirits  of  the  living  do  no  such  thing  (unless
she  fulfil  the  condition  above  referred  to) ;  and  inasmuch  as
both  communications  fall  under  the  same  category,  and  are
both  attended  by  the  same  class  of  circumstantial  and  sup¬
posed  facts,  the  nature  of  these  visions  becomes  at  once  evi¬
dent,  and  the  refutation  of  the  theory  complete.*

To  prove  still  more  clearly  the  reductio  ad  absurdum  to
which  this  doctrine  of  apparitions  is  pushed  by  M.  Cahagnet,
I  must  furnish  you  with  one  more  case  before  I  leave  this
part  of  the  subject,  for  it  clearly  marks  the  true  character  of
these  visions ;  for  if  there  were  any  apparition  at  all  in  the
following  story,  it  was  an  apparition  of  spirits  by  the  legion.

Madame  Osborn  (vol.  ii.,  p.  199)  receives  from  Adele  a
description  of  the  death  of  an  uncle,  who  had  died  in  battle
some  years  before.  The  ecstatic  sees  the  whole  battle  in  ac¬
tion  (elle  voit  la  bataille  dans  toute  son  action  ,  cette  scene  lui
apparait  pleine  d’adivite)  ;  she  sees  the  uncle  struck  down  b}*-
a  cannon  ball ;  she  hears  the  sound  of  the  cannon  when  it  is
fired,f  and  feels  an  inexplicable  oppression  at  the  noise.  Now
so  far  I  can  understand  the  above  facts :  they  are  remarkable
instances  of  the  power  of  imagination  upon  the  brain  in  that
sensitive  state  when  clairvoyance  is  in  action ;  but  M.  Cahag¬
net  regards  them  as  proofs  of  a  spiritual  existence.  Either ,
then,  he  must  believe  that  the  spirits  of  all  those  that  were
engaged  in  the  conflict  were  so  obliging  as  actually  to  re¬
appear  before  Adele,  and  to  fight  their  battle  over  again  for
her  instruction  ;  in  which  case,  his  belief  is  comprehensive
enough,  and  he  must  certainly  regard  the  world  of  spirits  as
marvellously  condescending  :  or,  if  he  admit  that  any  part  of
the  above  vision  were  but  a  picture  on  the  brain,  he  admits  the
possibility  of  a  spectral  illusion,  and  the  argument  on  his  side
is  closed  at  once.  For  everything  else  that  he  has  mentioned

*  A  remarkable  instance  of  the  power  of  imagination  over  the  body  occurs
at  the  stance  with  M.  Lucas,  and  is  adduced  by  our  author  as  a  proof  that  the
spirit  of  the  somnambule  had  travelled  to  Mexico  for  the  interview.  It  is  a  rainy
day  at  Paris  :  but  Adele  suffers  a  coup  de  soleil  from  presumed  exposure  to  the
rays  of  the  tropical  luminary.  That  there  was  an  analogous  effect  produced  is
certain ;  for  several  parties  were  present  and  witnessed  it.  The  question  is,  what
was  the  cause  ?  See  vol.  ii.,  pp.  37  and  208.  On  another  occasion,  Adele  suf¬
fers  severely  from  the  disease  of  which  an  ‘  apparition’  had  died  some  years  before,
p.  171.  Again,  what  was  the  cause  ?  Did  the  spirit,  after  many  years  residence
in  the  other  world,  communicate  the  disease  ?  or  was  it  sympathetic  action,  the
result  of  cerebral  impressions  ?

f  Professor  Bush  mentions  the  case  of  a  clairvoyante,  who  was  taken  (men¬
tally)  to  the  Falls  of  Niagara,  who  described  the  fall  of  water,  and  said  she  should
become  deaf  if  she  stayed  near  it,  p.  40.

VOL.  VII.  I  I


I


428  Review  of  Arcanes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles ,  fyc.,

may  equally  be  the  same  sort  of  cerebral  deception,  and  one
spirit  is  no  more  real  than  another.

I  hope  that  I  may  have  done  some  service  to  mesmerism
in  thus  endeavouring  to  separate  truths  that  really  belong  to
it,  from  extravagant  notions  which  only  bring  discredit  to  the
cause.  An  examination  of  any  further  facts  is  not  necessary;
Sufficient  have  been  given  to  indicate  the  nature  of  the  rest.
But  inasmuch  as  Professor  Bush,  in  his  work  already  quoted,
speaks  of  the  u  internal  character”  of  Swedenborg’s  discoveries,
as  affording  evidence  of  their  truth,  it  may  be  as  well  to  fur¬
nish  you  with  a  similar  test  in  regard  to  the  contents  of  these
volumes,  that  those  of  your  readers,  who  may  still  have  a  lean¬
ing  towards  these  developments  of  spiritualism,  may  judge  how
far  they  are  in  accordance  with  common  sense  and  reason.

I  shall  confine  myself  to  two  points, — the  “  contradictions”
between  these  different  revelations,  and  the  “  poverty  of  ideas”
that  is  exhibited.

I.  Of  course,  if  revelations  are  to  be  accredited,  there
should  be  complete  harmony  between  the  different  parts.  If
one  spirit  advances  one  thing,  and  one  another,  we  form  our
conclusions  as  to  their  trustworthiness :  but  M.  Cahagnet  has
here  given  us  a  new  doctrine  on  this  head.  I  was  noting
down  for  comment  the  points  in  which  these  volumes  differed
from  the  disclosures  given  through  Davis  and  Madame  Hauffe,
but  more  especially  the  manifest  discrepancies  that  existed  in
the  volumes  themselves,  when  I  suddenly  came  upon  a  piece
of  information  that  at  once  relieved  me  of  this  labour.  The
“  revelations”  are,  in  fact,  scarcely  revelations.  The  contra¬
dictions,  in  short,  are  so  palpable,  that  they  are  at  once  ad¬
mitted,  and  our  author  gives  the  explanation.  It  is  this, — it
is  not  that  the  spirits  are  “  lying  spirits,”  but  that  the  fancies,
the  feelings,  the  studies,  the  pursuits,  the  society,  nay,  the
religious  and  philosophical  notions  of  this  life  so  accompany
the  spirit  on  his  arrival  into  the  other,  that  he  is  scarcely  more
instructed  upon  any  single  point  than  we  are ;  so  that,  in
fact,  when  we  receive  a  communication  from  him,  his  state¬
ments  are  so  coloured  by  his  antecedent  habits  and  opinions
that  we  not  only  do  not  obtain  the  absolute  truth,  but  not
always  an  approximation  to  it.  In  other  words,  a  Jew  seems
to  remain  a  Jew;  a  Catholic,  a  Catholic;  and  a  miser  to  be
as  fond  of  gold  as  before  ;  and  thus  disclosures  which  are
magnificently  put  forth  as  being  the  “  secrets  of  the  future
unveiled,”  turn  out  to  be  a  mere  mass  of  misstatements,  on
the  accuracy  of  which  not  the  slightest  reliance  can  be  placed.
Truly,  a  most  lame  and  impotent  explanation  !  but  it  illustrates
what  I  have  before  advanced,  that  Adele,  as  she  progressed,


by  the  Rev.  George  Sandby.


429


improved  greatly  upon  her  first  communications;  and  the
reason  is  obvious :  somnambules  who  talk  much  require  good
memories.  The  consistency  of  their  statements  is  sure  to  fail
them  sooner  or  later;  and  the  best  explanation  that  is  at  hand
is  vamped  up  for  the  occasion.  On  this  head,  I  refer  the
reader  to  vol.  ii.,  pp.  27,  28,  29,  43,  132,  176,  179,  &c.

II.  But  the  poverty  of  ideas,  which  pervades  these  com¬
munications,  proves  still  more  the  sources  of  their  inspiration.
They  are  “of  the  earth,  earthy.”  Anything  more  puerile
can  scarcely  be  imagined.  The  representations  of  the  other
world  are  just  the  sort  of  dreams  which  we  might  expect  to
receive  from  any  boy  or  girl,  who  had  heard  or  read  a  little
on  the  subject,  and  who  had  picked  up  his  notions  of  paradise,
partly  from  Swedenborg,  and  partly  from  fairy  tales.  I  had
marked  several  passages,  but  they  scarcely  merit  extraction  ;
yet  you  must  have  a  few  as  a  sample.  Some  angels  have
wings,  and  some  have  not.  Wings  are  a  proof  of  a  religious
disposition.  Horses  have  wings.  Then  there  are  the  old
names  of  Gabriel  and  Raphael.  There  are  the  same  occupa¬
tions  in  heaven  that  we  have  on  earth.  Spirits  eat,  drink,
walk,  read,  amuse  themselves  with  music,  with  the  sciences,
and  with  metaphysics.  One  spirit  seems  particularly  fond  of
peaches  ;  she  never  appears  without  eating  one.  There  is  one
tree  from  which  they  gather  pears,  plums,  peaches,  and
cherries,  at  the  same  time,  and  can  eat  as  many  as  they  like.
There  are  the  most  beautiful  flowers  too,  but  they  are  for¬
bidden  to  be  gathered.  There  are  toys  too  for  children,  which
never  break ;  and  every  dress,  that  men  wear  in  this  life,  has
its  impression  so  stamped  upon  the  spiritual  part,  that  the
spirit  is  able  to  present  himself  to  us  under  any  costume  that
would  be  most  convenient  for  his  recognition.  The  theological
opinions  are  little  else  than  a  transcript  from  Swedenborg.
But  it  is  not  necessary  to  pursue  this  topic  any  further.  It
is  sufficient  to  say  that  there  is  scarcely  an  idea  in  the  work
which  is  not  borrowed  or  adopted  from  some  one  else.

I  have  thought  it  desirable  to  give  this  lengthened  analysis
of  the  book,  because  many  of  our  friends  imagine  that  we  are
on  the  eve  of  great  discoveries  through  the  aid  of  mesmerism,
and  that  these  volumes  will  contribute  a  large  quota  of  assist¬
ance  to  the  work.  How  far  they  are  entitled  to  receive  this
degree  of  consideration,  your  readers  must  now  judge.  But
though  we  may  not  estimate  the  contents  of  this  book  at  the
worth  at  which  they  are  prized  by  M.  Cahagnet,  we  may  still
regard  them  as  a  valuable  contribution  to  the  mesmeric  library
through  the  unquestionable  instances  that  they  record  of  the
powers  of  clairvovance  in  its  highest  phase.  In  this  respect,

i  i  2


430  Review  of  Ar canes  de  la  Vie  Future  Devoiles,  fyc.

these  volumes  are  truly  remarkable,  and  well  deserving  of
the  attention  of  every  student  of  mesmerism.

Let  us  now  return  to  the  question  with  which  we  originally
started,  viz.,  what  is  the  light  which  these  pages  cast  upon
the  doctrines  of  Swedenborg  ?  Are  they  corroborative  of  his
claims  to  the  prophetic  character?  and  do  they  tend  to  compel
“  a  credence  in  him  as  a  truthful  reporter  of  the  facts  and
phenomena  of  the  spirit  world  ?”*

My  answer  is  anticipated.  The  mysterious  disclosures  of
Madame  Adele  are  like  the  mysterious  disclosures  of  sundry
previous  clairvoyants,  the  mere  result  of  accident  and  nothing
else.  Had  she  fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  mesmeriser,  whose
inquiries  tended  to  a  different  direction,  her  revelations  would
have  taken  a  different  type,  and  Wesley,  or  Mohammed,  or
St.  Francis,  would  have  occupied  the  foreground  of  the  pic¬
ture,  instead  of  Emanuel  Swedenborg,  the  great  hero  of
modern  psychology .f

But  a  close  examination  of  these  volumes  has  led  me  a  step
still  further.  I  feel  more  than  ever  assured,  that  an  ecstatic
dreamer  can  fancy  almost  anything;  and  that  the  embodiment
of  those  fancies  does  come  out  in  such  bold  and  clearly  de¬
fined  relief,  that  the  dreamer  becomes  so  deceived  himself
that  at  last  his  wildest  flights  of  imagination  assume  in  his
eyes  the  garb  of  the  holiest  inspiration.  Now  why  should  not
this  phenomenon  of  mesmerism  be  spontaneously  developed
in  some  cases  of  peculiar  idiosyncracy,  like  the  other  pheno¬
mena  of  this  power, — as  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  Sweden¬
borg?  It  is  well  known  that  Swedenborg  has  been  termed
by  many,  “  a  self-mesmerised  clairvoyant m”  and  the  more  I
look  into  his  case,  the  more  inclined  I  am  to  adopt  that
opinion.  The  pages  of  The  Zoist  have  already  contributed
some  information  on  this  subject.  J  And  certainly,  upon  ex¬
amining  the  details  of  his  life  and  of  his  physical  condition,
I  am  strongly  led  to  believe  that  Swedenborg,  by  long-sus¬
tained  self-meditation,  had  wrought  himself  up  unconsciously
into  a  </w<m-mesmeric  trance  of  frequent  occurrence,  under
which  the  reflective  powers  of  a  superior  mind  became  con¬
siderably  exalted,  and  the  ardent  wishes  of  his  quickened  sen¬
sibility  were  embodied  under  forms  congenial  to  his  studies.

The  quaere,  then,  that  I  put  to  the  followers  of  Sweden¬
borg  is  the  very  converse  of  the  proposition  adopted  by  Pro¬
fessor  Bush.  Do  not  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism  lead  them

*  Professor  Bush.  Preface.

t  The  reader  is  referred  to  the  seventh  chapter  of  Mesmerism  and  its  Oppo¬
nents,  where  various  instances  illustrative  of  this  position  are  given  at  length.

X  Zoist,  Vol.  V.,  pp.  345  and  347.


Thought-reading  and  Clairvoyance.


431


to  suspect  the  correctness  of  their  judgment,  and  instead  of
obeying  a  divine  revelation,  are  they  quite  certain  that  they
are  not  beguiled  into  iheir  religious  opinions  by  nothing  more
nor  less  than  a  cerebral  illusion  ?

I  remain,  Mr.  Editor,

Your  humble  servant,

George  Sandby.


VIII.  Thought-reading  and  Clairvoyance.

Some  of  the  phenomena  of  mesmerism,  such  as  thought-read¬
ing  and  clairvoyance ,  are  subjects  of  incredulity  with  many
scientific  men,  and  yet  they  are  supported  by  testimony  which
can  leave  no  doubt  of  their  existence.  The  whole  subject,
however,  is  enrapt  in  mystery,  and  in  these  philosophic  times,
when  miracles  cease  to  be  the  order  of  the  day,  mysteries
will  be  always  enveloped  in  doubt  until  they  are  rationally
accounted  for.  With  this  view  I  suggested  the  possible  solu¬
tion  of  what  seems  to  be  well  established,  viz.,  the  capability
of  a  person  mesmerised  to  comprehend  sensations  or  ideas  com¬
municated  in  a  language  with  which  he  is  unacquainted.*
Observe,  I  speak  of  the  possibility  of  understanding  ideas
conveyed  in  an  unknown  tongue,  and  not  of  the  person  mes¬
merised  speaking  in  a  tongue  previously  unknown  to  him ;
two  propositions  widely  different.  With  regard  to  thought¬
reading,  (the  power  of  disarming  the  thoughts  of  the  mes-
meriser,  or  of  any  other  person  with  whom  the  person  mes¬
merised  is  en  rapport ,)  and  clairvoyance, f  to  a  certain  extent
I  think  they  may  be  both  also  accounted  for.  Let  us  consider
for  an  instant  the  curious  discovery  of  daguerreotype,  and  the
mode  by  which  the  operation  is  performed.  We  have  here  a
chemical  combination  of  certain  molecules,  which  the  sun’s
rays  (not  improbably  a  modification  of  electric  matter)  act
upon  in  an  extraordinary  manner,  and  so  as  to  produce  the
form  of  the  objects  from  which  such  rays  are  reflected.  Now
we  have  in  this  process  forms  which  are  effected  by  an  arrange¬
ment  of  matter  through  the  instrumentality  of  light.  We
know,  with  respect  to  ourselves,  that  our  thoughts  may  be,
by  our  volition,  put  into  action  through  the  medium  of  a  fluid
which  passes  by  the  aid  of  conductors,  which  we  call  nerves,
and  by  which  the  muscles  are  set  in  motion.  All  our  sensa¬
tions  and  impressions  come  through  the  senses  to  the  mind,
or  sensorium,  in  the  same  manner.  How,  let  me  ask,  does

*  See  Zoist ,  No.  XXV.,  p.  101.  My  address  was  misprinted  Clapton.

f  Clairvoyance  and  thought-reading,  Mr.  Parsons  thinks,  are  different  ope¬
rations,  and  not  to  be  confounded.  Query.


432


Thought-reading  and  Clairvoyance.


this  differ  from  the  operation  of  the  daguerreotype,  except
that  the  mind  is  a  more  perfect  and  a  living  instrument  ?  It
is  evident  that  every  fresh  object  in  the  daguerreotype  must
be  produced  by  a  different  arrangement  of  the  particles  of
matter,  and  so  must,  I  apprehend,  every  fresh  sensation  in
the  human  mind.  Two  distinct  sensations  cannot  exist  under
the  same  modification  of  matter.  Why  then  should  not  the
mind  be  a  living  and  conscious  daguerreotype  ?  Suppose  then
the  living  mirror  or  mind  to  receive,  by  a  modification  of  its
component  parts,  an  impression  or  idea  from  any  object  of
any  sort,  where  is  the  difficulty  in  supposing  that  such  sen¬
sation  or  idea  may  be  electrotyped  on  another  mind,  or  living
mirror,  by  the  agency  of  the  nervous  fluid,  in  the  same  way
that  the  rays  of  light  imprint  objects  in  the  daguerreotype
machine  ?  And  if  so,  have  we  not  the  solution  of  thought¬
reading  between  the  mesmeriser  and  his  patient?

Now  with  regard  to  clairvoyance  within  a  certain  limita¬
tion,  for  example,  the  power  of  seeing  the  interior  of  any
person,  and  discerning  the  cause  of  disease.  It  seems  well
established,  that,  as  between  the  mesmeriser  and  the  mesme¬
rised,  the  former,  as  well  as  any  other  person  en  rapport  with
the  latter,  appears  to  the  party  mesmerised  in  a  state  of,  what
Mr.  Parsons  calls,  “  luminosity,”  i.  e.,  impregnated  with  an
electric  matter,  which  permeates  all  substances,  and  which
matter  seems  in  these  cases  to  be  located  between  the  mes¬
merised  and  those  with  whom  he  is  en  rapport.  Where  then
exists  the  impossibility  of  supposing  that  this  luminous  matter,
proceeding  from  the  interior  of  any  person  or  thing,  should
communicate  to  the  mind  of  the  person  en  rapport  with  such
fluid  an  impression,  in  the  same  way  as  we  are  sensible  of  the
existence  of  a  fixed  star  in  consequence  of  the  rays  of  light
which  it  emits  meeting  our  eye,  although  the  orb  itself  is  not
within  the  range  of  ordinary  vision,  and  is  altogether  in  a
different  part  of  the  heavens  to  that  in  which  it  appears  to  us ;
a  fact  which  astronomy  demonstrates  ?

As  the  subject  of  this  paper  is  connected  with  phrenology,
I  will  conclude  by  an  obiter  dictum ,  suggesting  for  considera¬
tion  whether  psychologists  have  not  unnecessarily  multiplied
the  powers  of  the  mind  by  supposing  it  divisible  into  various
attributes,  and  whether  consciousness  alone  does  not  embrace
all  the  qualities  or  manifestations  with  which  it  is  concluded
the  mind  is  endued.  For  example,  can  this  living  organ  be
conscious  of  two  sensations  without  of  necessity  comparing
them  together,  and  observing  what  distinguishes  the  one  from
the  other?  How  otherwise  can  there  be  a  consciousness  of
more  than  one  sensation  ?  So  again,  if  a  sensation  be  pro-


Clairvoyance  reported  by  the  celebrated  John  Wesley.  433

duced  by  a  substance  coloured  blue,  another  yellow,  and  a  third
sensation  by  the  union  of  the  two  together,  or  green,  does
not  this  consciousness  necessarily  entail  with  it  the  knowledge
of  dimensions,  or  the  more  and  the  less,  with  the  operations
of  synthesis  and  analysis?  In  fine,  does  not  a  consciousness
of  several  sensations  or  ideas  embrace,  ex  necessitate  rei,  the
exercise  of  all  those  qualities  of  the  mind  which  have  hitherto
been  considered  as  so  many  distinct  attributes  ?  In  fact,  con¬
sciousness  seems  to  bring  within  its  scope  all  the  mental  powers
except  memory,  which  it  is  difficult  to  comprehend  as  falling
within  the  possible  combination  of  a  moveable  arrangement
of  matter.  It  must,  I  think,  be  concluded,  that  the  organ
of  Memory  exists  in  some  part  of  our  organization  which
undergoes  no  change  in  the  distribution  of  its  particles,  though,
like  all  combinations  of  matter,  subject  to  accident  and  the
ravages  of  time.* *

Clifton,  27th  April,  1849.  W.  F.  S.

***  The  nervous,  like  the  electric  fluid,  is  at  present  purely  ima¬
ginary  ;  and  not  spoken  of  by  the  soundest  physiologists.  Let  us
speak  of  phenomena,  and  speak  of  their  analogies.  For  mind,  our
correspondent  should  have  said  brain,  when  he  spoke  of  a  living  in¬
strument.

We  advise  our  correspondent  to  study  Gall’s  work,  Sur  les  Fonc-
tions  du  Cerveau ;  and  we  are  sure  that,  if  he  had,  he  would  not  have
written  such  phrenological  opinions.  Gravitation  is  common  to  all
matter,  but  matter  is  of  many  kinds  ;  consciousness  or  sensibility
is  common  to  every  mental  organ,  but  this  does  not  imply  that  all
the  cerebral  organs  are  alike.  Is  it  one  and  the  same  consciousness
that  makes  the  mathematician  and  the  musician  ?  Is  it  one  and  the
same  consciousness  that  gives  the  desire  of  honour  and  the  desire  to
do  good  ?  When  the  exercise  of  one  faculty  gives  rise,  perhaps  in¬
stantly,  to  the  exercise  of  another  faculty,  this  does  not  shew  them  to
be  the  same  faculties.

As  to  any  organ  of  Memory,  we  may  lose  our  memory  of  words
and  retain  that  of  everything  else.

Sensation  is  not  in  the  organs  of  Sense ;  and  therefore  an  organ
of  Sense  may  be  lost  and  yet  memory  of  sensations  retained. — Zoist.


IX.  Clairvoyance  reported  by  the  celebrated  John  Wesley.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — In  looking  over  the  journal  of  the  celebrated  John
Wesley,  I  have  met  with  the  following  accounts,  which  I

*  Gall,  I  think,  supposes  that  consciousness  exists  with  each  organ  of  sen¬
sation,  to  which  I  oppose  two  objections :  1st. — If  there  were  not  one  common
memory  for  all  sensations,  we  should  lose  our  notion  of  individuality  ;  2nd. — That
if  an  organ  of  Sense  should  be  destroyed,  we  should  have  no  memory  that  it  had
ever  existed  ;  of  which  I  have  never  heard  an  instance.


434  Clairvoyance  reported  by  the  celebrated  John  Wesley.

take  the  liberty  of  transmitting  to  you  as  probably  interesting
illustrations  of  mesmerism,  or  rather,  of  similar  phenomena
occurring  naturally.

With  regard  to  the  first  account,  it  is  to  be  regretted  that
no  further  information  was  obtained  as  to  the  judicial  pro¬
ceedings,  which  the  murder  and  this  remarkable  story  must
have  occasioned.

The  great  similarity  also  to  the'  well  known  methods  of
the  Egyptian  “  conjurers”  or  magicians,  viz.,  in  using  a  look¬
ing  glass,  and  also  in  requiring  young  boys  to  operate  on,  is
deserving  of  attention.  Does  mesmerism  throw  any  light  on
these  particulars  ?

As  to  the  second  relation,  it  has  no  equal  that  I  know  of,
except  the  celebrated  prophecy  by  Cazotte.  Mr.  Wesley’s
account  of  Pyrah’s  becoming  insane  seems  clearly  to  point
to  a  diseased  brain,  being  not  the  result  (as  Mr.  W.  naturally
fancied)  of  his  honours  in  England,  but  the  cause  of  the
prophecy  itself.

If  it  were  not  trespassing  too  much  on  your  time,  I  would
take  the  opportunity  of  inquiring  whether  any  decisive  expe¬
riments  have  yet  been  made  to  determine  whether,  in  the
case  of  “  vision  at  a  distance,”  (such  as  descriptions  of  foreign
scenery,  interiors  of  houses,  &c.,)  the  patient  can  describe
anything  except  what  the  operator  is  thinking  of  and  picturing
in  his  own  mind?*  The  accounts  of  cases  where  the  “  clair¬
voyant”  is  sent  to  look  for  some  person  of  whose  whereabouts
and  actions  every  one  present  is  ignorant,  are  scarcely,  I
think,  satisfactory ;  and  as  the  experiment  is  so  easily  made
and  so  easy  to  verify,  (for  instance,  by  the  operator’s  leaving
word  for  some  one  at  his  house,  or  elsewhere,  to  do  certain
things  at  a  certain  hour,  in  such  a  way  however  that  he  him¬
self  shall  not  be  able  to  guess  exactly  what,)  it  would  be  an
important  addition  to  our  knowledge  of  the  subject.  The
verification  is  very  imperfect,  I  think,  in  the  cases  hitherto
published.

Your’s  obediently,

Alfred  W.  Hobson,  M.A.,

St.  John’s  College,  Cambridge.

Extract  from  Mr.  Wesley’s  Journal ,  under  the  head,

“July,  1761.”

“  About  one,  I  preached  at  Bramley,  where  Jonas  Rush-
ford,  about  14  years  old,  gave  me  the  following  relation : —

*  Certainly:  see  No.  VII.,  p.272;  VIII.,  482;  X.,  224  ;  XVIII.,  128;
XX.,  335;  XXIV.,  370.


Clairvoyance  reported  by  the  celebrated  John  Wesley.  435

c  About  this  time  last  year  I  was  desired  by  two  of  our  neigh¬
bours,  to  go  with  them  to  Mr.  Crowther’s,  at  Skipton,  who
would  not  speak  to  them,  about  a  man  that  had  been  missing
twenty  weeks,  but  bid  them  bring  a  boy  12  or  13  years  old.
When  we  came  in  he  stood  reading  a  book.  He  put  me  into
a  bed  wTith  a  looking  glass  in  my  hand,  and  covered  me  all
over.  Then  he  asked  me,  whom  I  had  a  mind  to  see ;  and  I
said  ‘My  mother/  I  presently  saw  her  with  a  lock  of  wool
in  her  hand,  standing  just  in  the  place  and  the  clothes  she
was  in,  as  she  told  me  afterwards.  Then  he  bid  me  look
again  for  the  man  that  was  missing,  who  was  one  of  our
neighbours :  and  I  looked  and  saw  him  riding  towards  Idle ;
but  he  was  very  drunk :  and  he  stopped  at  the  ale-house  and
drank  two  pints  more ;  and  he  pulled  out  a  guinea  to  change.
Two  men  stood  by,  a  big  man  and  a  little  man ;  and  they
went  on  before  him  and  got  two  hedge-stakes.  And  when  he
came  up,  on  Windhill  common,  at  the  top  of  the  hill,  they
pulled  him  off  his  horse  and  killed  him  and  threw  him  into  a
coal  pit.  And  I  saw  it  all  as  plainly  as  if  I  were  close  to
them  :  and  if  I  saw  the  men  I  should  know  them  again.  We
went  back  to  Bradford  that  night,  and  the  next  day  I  went
with  our  neighbours,  and  shewed  them  the  spot  where  he  was
killed,  and  the  pit  into  which  he  was  thrown.  And  a  man
went  down  and  brought  him  up :  and  it  was  as  I  had  told
them :  his  handkerchief  was  tied  about  his  mouth,  and  fast¬
ened  behind  his  neck.”

On  which  Mr.  Wesley  makes  this  remark : —

“  Is  it  improbable  only,  or  flatly  impossible,  when  all  the
circumstances  are  considered,  that  this  should  all  be  pure
fiction?  They  that  can  believe  this,  may  believe  a  man’s
getting  into  a  bottle.”

Another  extract  from  Mr.  Wesley’s  Works,  vol.  x.,  p.  163.

“  A  little  before  the  conclusion  of  the  late  war  in  Flanders,
one  who  came  from  thence  gave  us  a  very  strange  relation.
I  knew  not  what  judgment  to  form  of  this;  but  waited  till
John  Haime  should  come  over,  of  whose  veracity  I  could  no
more  doubt,  than  of  his  understanding.  The  account  he  gave
was  this: — ‘Jonathan  Pyrah,  was  a  member  of  our  society,
in  Flanders.  I  knew  him  some  years,  and  knew  him  to  be  a
man  of  unblameable  character.  One  day  he  was  summoned
to  appear  before  the  board  of  General  Officers.  One  of  them
said,  ‘What  is  this  which  we  hear  of  you?  We  hear  you  are
turned  prophet,  and  that  you  foretell  the  downfall  of  the
bloody  house  of  Bourbon,  and  the  haughty  house  of  Austria.
We  should  be  glad  if  you  were  a  real  prophet,  and  if  your


436


Spontaneous  Sympathy.


prophecies  came  true.  But  what  sign  do  you  give  to  convince
us  you  are  so ;  and  that  your  predictions  will  come  to  pass  ?’
He  readily  answered  : — f  Gentlemen,  I  give  you  a  sign.  To
morrow  at  12  o’clock,  you  shall  have  such  a  storm  of  thunder
and  lightning,  as  you  never  had  before  since  you  came  into
Flanders.  I  give  you  a  second  sign  : — as  little  as  any  of  you
expect  any  such  thing,  as  little  appearance  of  it  as  there  is
now,  you  shall  have  a  general  engagement  with  the  French
within  three  days.  I  give  you  a  third  sign,  I  shall  be  ordered
to  advance  in  the  first  line.  If  I  am  a  false  prophet  I  shall
be  shot  dead  at  the  first  discharge.  But  if  I  am  a  true  prophet
I  shall  only  receive  a  musket-ball  in  the  calf  of  my  left  leg/
At  12  the  next  day  there  was  such  thunder  and  lightning  as
they  never  had  before  in  Flanders.  On  the  third  day,  con¬
trary  to  all  expectation,  was  the  general  battle  of  Fontenoy.
He  was  ordered  to  advance  in  the  first  line,  and  at  the  very
first  discharge  he  received  a  musket-ball  in  the  calf  of  his
left  leg/’

To  which  account  by  Haime,  Mr.  Wesley  adds  : —

“  And  yet  all  this  profited  him  nothing,  either  for  temporal
or  eternal  happiness.  When  the  war  was  over  he  returned  to
England ;  but  the  story  was  got  before  him  :  in  consequence

of  which  he  was  sent  for  by  the  Countess  of  St - s,  and

several  other  persons  of  quality,  who  were  desirous  to  receive
so  surprising  an  account  from  his  own  mouth.  He  could  not
bear  so  much  honour.  It  quite  turned  his  brain.  In  a  little
time  he  ran  stark  mad.  And  so  he  continues  to  this  day,
being  still  as  I  apprehend  on  Wilsey  Moorside,  within  a  few
miles  of  Leeds/’


X.  Spontaneous  Sympathy - — distant  influence  of  thought.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Sir, — I  send  you  the  following  extract,  in  case  you  should
consider  it  of  any  interest,  as  containing  what  appears  to  be
a  case  of  spontaneous  rapport.  It  is  a  note  from  the  life  of
Dr.  Adam  Clarke .*

Alfred  Boffe.

48,  Ossulston  Street,  Somers  Town.

“  A  most  singular  circumstance  occurred  a  short  time
before  Mr.  Tracy  Clarke’s  death  :  (Mr.  T.  C.  was  a  surgeon,
and  elder  brother  to  Dr.  Adam  Clarke.)  He  had  gone  to  the
Isle  of  Man  for  the  benefit  of  his  health,  having  with  him


*  Second  Edition,  p.  4  :  published  by  Longman  and  Co.


Relief  from  Mesmerism  during  ordinary  treatment.  437

one  of  his  sons.  During  the  night  which  had  preceded  his
return  to  England,  he  dreamed  that  he  had  been  to  see  Mrs.
Clarke,  and  that,  contrary  to  custom,  she  was  sleeping  in  the
best  bed  room  ;  and,  as  they  walked  to  the  place  of  embarka¬
tion,  he  communicated  this  dream  to  his  son.  On  arriving
at  Liverpool,  Mr.  T.  C.  was  prevailed  upon  to  pass  a  night  at
his  brother’s  house,  while  his  son  went  forward  to  Maghull,
to  announce  their  safe  arrival  to  his  mother.  When  she  saw
him  coming  without  his  father,  she  fell  into  a  paroxysm  of
grief,  and  could  not  without  great  difficulty  be  persuaded  of
her  husband’s  safety.  The  cause  of  these  misgivings  was  not
a  little  remarkable.  During  the  same  night  in  which  Mr.  C.
had  dreamed  his  dream,  she  fancied  she  heard  him  ride  up
to  the  stable,  bring  his  saddle  and  bridle  into  the  house,  and
hang  them  up  as  usual.  She  then  heard  him  ascend  the  stairs,
enter  the  room  in  which  she  lay,  which  was  indeed  the  best
bed  room,  and  walk  round  the  bed.  All  this  she  assured  her
younger  son,  on  rising  in  the  morning,  she  had  heard  dis¬
tinctly,  affirming  that  she  could  not  be  deceived  in  thinking
the  footsteps  those  of  his  father,  and  expressing  her  fears  that
some  misfortune  had  befallen  him.”

***  The  wife's  brain  accidentally  dreamed,  and  influenced  the  husband’s — Zoist.


XI.  Great  relief  from  Mesmerism  during  ordinary  treatment
in  an  affection  of  the  Prostate  Gland.  By  Mr.  Henry
Jacob,  35,  Surrey  Street,  Strand.

Mr.  J.  Jones,  of  129,  Strand,  my  uncle,  an  aged  man ,  70
years  of  age,  had  been  five  weeks  suffering  so  much  from
disease  of  the  prostate  gland  that  he  had  no  sleep,  and  was
in  the  most  excruciating  agony,  although  the  strongest  opiates
were  administered.  He  was  attended  by  Mr.  Fergusson,  of
King’s  College.  A  lady,  to  whom  I  mentioned  the  case,
urged  me  to  try  mesmerism.  But  as  I  had  no  idea  of  what  it
was,  she  advised  me  to  apply  to  Dr.  Elliotson  for  instructions.
He  at  once  told  me  to  make  slow  passes  with  one  hand  from
opposite  the  forehead  downwards.  I  immediately  put  his  in¬
structions  in  practice  on  Saturday  evening,  Dec.  5,  1846;
for  Mr.  Jones  eagerly  accepted  of  my  offer  to  mesmerise
him.  Although  when  I  commenced  he  was  in  great  pain ,  in
about  five  minutes  he  fell  into  a  sound  sleep,  and  snored,
but  was  apparently  disturbed  by  any  slight  noise.  He  slept
from  twenty-five  minutes  to  11  until  five  minutes  past  12 —
an  hour  and  a  half.  He  then  awoke,  took  food,  relieved  his
bladder,  and  was  in  good  spirits  and  much  refreshed.  At
eighteen  minutes  past  one  I  passed  my  hands  again,  and  in


438


Great  relief  from  Mesmerism  during  -


the  course  of  four  minutes  he  fell  into  a  sound  sleep,  and
snored,  until  a  quarter-past  two  o’clock — fifty-three  minutes.
He  again  took  refreshment,  emptied  his  bladder  without  the
aid  of  instruments,  and  at  two  and  a  half  minutes  past  three
I  passed  my  hands  again,  and  in  three  and  a  half  minutes  lie
fell  into  a  sound  sleep  for  two  hours  and  twenty  minutes —
sleeping  altogether  nearly  five  hours.  He  stated  that  he  felt
considerably  refreshed,  did  not  seem  to  require  so  much
nourishment,  and,  much  to  his  delight,  continued  to  pass
his  water  freely  and  in  a  stream  without  pain.

Mr.  Fergusson  called  to  see  him  in  the  morning,  and
said,  “Well,  Mr.  Jacobs,  you  have  done  more  for  him  than
I  could  •”  and  was  very  much  pleased,  and  desired  me  to  say
to  Dr.  Elliotson  that  he  was  very  satisfied  with  the  effects  of
the  sleep,  and  requested  me  to  repeat  the  mesmerism  again
on  the  following  night.  An  opiate  was  given  to  Mr.  Jones
on  Friday  night,  (the  night  before  I  first  mesmerised  him,)
but  without  effect.  He  had  not  had  so  much  rest  in  any  one
day  or  night  before  for  five  weeks.

I  must  not  forget  to  add,  that  it  was  done  without  the
least  effort  or  fatigue  to  myself ;  and  perhaps  the  effect  may
be  considered  the  more  curious,  as  it  was  necessary  for  a
candle  to  be  held  full  glare  in  the  face  of  the  patient  while
lying  in  bed,  so  that  we  could  see  each  other's  eyes.

In  the  morning,  Mr.  J.  Jones  expressed  himself  so  won¬
derfully  better,  and  that  there  seemed  to  be  a  new  era  in  his
existence.

On  Sunday,  Dec.  6th,  I  attempted  again  to  put  him  at
his  request  to  sleep  :  but  he  did  not  continue  to  slumber  long,
and  I  left  him  about  half-past  two  in  the  day  asking  for  his
dinner.

In  the  evening  I  passed  my  hand  again,  and  in  ten  mi¬
nutes  he  again  fell  asleep,  but  remained  only  ten  minutes  in
that  state.  He  did  not  sleep  all  night,  but  at  seven  o'clock
in  the  morning  he  fell  into  a  natural  sleep  for  two  hours,  re¬
lieved  his  bladder,  as  he  stated,  beautifully,  and  seemed  to
all  in  the  house,  and  really  was,  considerably  improved  in
health.

Monday  night,  Dec.  7.  Commenced  passing  at  a  quarter
to  1 1 ;  in  eight  minutes  afterwards  he  was  in  a  sound  sleep.
I  placed  my  hands  once  or  twice,  extended,  on  his  forehead  :
I  then  left.  He  slept  till  ten  minutes  past  12,  awoke,  relieved
his  bladder  copiously,  and  took  refreshment.  The  son  of  the
patient  tried  to  mesmerise  him,  and  succeeded ;  but  he  slept
for  ten  minutes  only.  Fie  afterwards  fell  into  a  sound  sleep
from  a  quarter  past  two  until  a  quarter  before  four  o'clock ;


ordinary  treatment,  by  Mr.  Henry  Jacob.  439

shortly  after  that  had  several  refreshing  sleeps.  I  saw  him  at
nine  o’clock,  when  he  told  me  he  felt  very  comfortable,  and,
in  his  own  words,  “  50  per  cent,  better.”  He  states  that  he
is  confirmed  in  the  idea  that  mesmerism  has  had  a  very  bene¬
ficial  effect  on  him  in  producing  sleep.

Tuesday,  Dec.  8.  Mr.  Jones  continued  improving,  his
complaint  hardly  troubling  him.  No  sleep  all  day ;  thought
that  he  could  not  get  any  sleep  if  I  did  not  mesmerise  him.
He  ate  very  heartily,  and  took  two  glasses  of  sherry  with  the
consent  of  Mr.  Fergusson.  Mesmerised  the  patient  again  at
eleven  minutes  past  11,  and  in  about  eight  minutes  after¬
wards  he  fell  into  a  sound  sleep,  and  slept  one  hour.  I  had
left  him  previously ;  on  my  return  in  the  morning  I  heard  that
he  had  passed  a  restless  night,  not  any  sleep,  and  expressed
a  wish  that  I  should  be  sent  for  to  mesmerise  him.  I  called
on  him  at  nine  in  the  morning,  and  found  him  in  a  slumber,
which  continued  only  for  a  few  minutes.

Wednesday,  Dec.  9.  Mesmerised  again  at  ten  minutes
past  10,  morning,  and  he  fell  asleep  again  at  half-past  10,
but  only  for  a  few  moments.  I  was  compelled  to  leave  him
all  day,  during  which  time  he  slept  but  only  in  short  inter¬
rupted  slumbers,  expressing  a  most  urgent  desire  that  I
should  remain  with  him  all  night ;  his  complaint  had  entirely
left  him,  and  he  passed  his  water  better  than  he  had  done
for  years  previously.  After  partaking  of  oysters,  &c.,  at  half¬
past  12  this  night,  he  got  into  his  bed.  (Mr.  Jones  was  so
certain  of  its  power  that  he  stated  words  can  hardly  convey
his  feelings  of  gratitude  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  and  that  he  would
write  him  a  letter  of  thanks  on  his  recovery.)  I  mesmerised
him  at  fourteen  minutes  to  one,  Thursday  morning,  Dec.  10,
and  in  ten  minutes  he  slept  until  half-past  two.  He  awoke,
took  his  refreshment ;  he  was  mesmerised  again  at  ten  mi¬
nutes  past  three,  and  slept  until  twenty  minutes  past  four.  He
then  awoke  very  refreshed,  laughed,  and  was  extremely  jocose
when  I  left  him  about  a  quarter  to  five  to  go  to  bed.  I  arose
at  nine,  and  found  by  his  nurse  that  he  had  slept  (without
mesmerism)  from  half-past  five  to  half-past  seven — two  hours,
much  refreshed  and  comfortable,  and  in  excellent  spirits.  He
observed  that  although  he  had  not  actually  slept  so  long  a
time  this  night  as  he  did  on  the  first  night  I  remained  with
him,  still  he  felt  more  refreshed  and  invigorated.  Previously
to  going  to  bed  this  night  he  placed  his  feet  in  hot  water  by
the  advice  of  Mr.  Fergusson  in  the  idea  that  it  would  allay
his  fever,  the  whole  of  the  skin  from  his  hand  peeling  off.

Thursday  night,  Dec.  11.  All  day  comparatively  well  and
improving,  enjoying  his  food.  Mesmerised  him  for  twenty-


440  Relief  from  Mesmerism  during  ordinary  treatment.

five  minutes,  but  he  only  slept  one  hour  all  night  after,  until
about  five,  when  he  slept  for  about  two  hours.  I  find  that
unless  I  remain  writh  him  all  night  he  gets  very  little  sleep.
I  also  notice  that  he  sleeps  sounder  during  the  continuance
of  the  passing  of  the  hands.  I  find  no  difficulty  in  getting
him  sleep  when  I  am  with  him  and  he  once  makes  up  his
mind  to  it.  I  have  never  once  failed,  although  frequently
the  sleeps  are  not  of  any  duration.

Friday  night,  Dec.  12.  By  appointment  at  10,  patient
ready  in  bed  waiting  for  me.  At  five  minutes  past  10  in  a
sound  sleep.  Mesmerised  in  less  than  four  minutes.  Re¬
mained  asleep  a  very  short  time  (I  having  left  the  house) .  Slept
from  one,  midnight,  for  about  an  hour  and  a  half.  Remained
awake  for  an  hour,  and  then  slept  for  about  an  hour  and  a
half.  I  saw  him  again  this  (Saturday)  morning,  Dec.  12,
about  12,  and  mesmerised  him  again  for  about  twenty  mi¬
nutes.  Patient  states  he  feels  a  soothing  sensation  when  his
eyes  are  closed,  although  not  asleep,  if  my  hands  are  pass¬
ing  to  and  fro.  Mr.  Fergusson  says  he  is  wonderfully  better.
The  patient  finds  the  sleep  very  refreshing  that  succeeds  the
mesmeric  sleep  (that  is  to  say,  the  natural  rest) .

Mr.  Jones  not  inclined  to  be  mesmerised  early  this  night
in  consequence  of  being  refreshed  by  sleep  during  the  day,  I
left  him  at  11  o'clock,  he  having  made  up  his  mind  to  remain
sitting  in  his  chair  until  inclined  for  sleep  without  me.

Sunday,  Dec.  13.  Mr.  Jones  having  passed  so  comfortable
a  night,  and  having  slept  without  my  assistance  the  previous
night,  declined  to  be  mesmerised  for  the  present.  In  the
course  of  the  day  I  saw  the  surgeon,  Mr.  Fergusson,  who
complimented  me  upon  my  success,  assuring  me  that  the
sleep  had  been  most  beneficial  and  conducive  to  the  recovery
of  Mr.  Jones.

Sunday  night.  Slept  for  the  first  time  without  any  nurse
or  person  remaining  up  with  him.

Monday  morning.  Saw  Mr.  Jones.  Passed  a  delightful
night,  accompanied  by  pleasant  dreams,  as  was  the  case  ge¬
nerally  when  mesmerised.  Grateful  to  Dr.  Elliotson  for  his
humanity  and  for  his  benevolence  to  him  in  instructing  me  on
the  means  of  affording  him  such  wonderful  relief.

Mr.  Jones  has  never  had  an  attack  since,  and  is  now  in
excellent  health,  walking  six  or  seven  miles  a  day.


(  441  )


XII.  Advantage  of  Mesmerism  while  ordinary  treatment  is
adopted.  By  Mr.  Armour.  Communicated  by  Dr.
Elliotson.


113,  Wardour  Street.


To  Dr.  Elliotson.

Sir, — You  will  perhaps  remember  that,  on  the  day  I  gave
you  the  particulars  of  my  brother’s  complaint,  (whose  death
I  communicated  to  you,)  I  incidentally  mentioned  that  I  had
begun  to  mesmerise  my  sister,  who  was  lying  ill  of  nervous
fever :  and  as  your  advice  encouraged  me  to  persevere  with
mesmerism,  I  think  you  will  excuse  me  if  I  relate  to  you  the
effects  produced ;  more  especially  as  the  medical  man  who
had  attended  her  was  so  much  astonished  at  the  result  of  the
first  mesmerisation,  as  to  call  upon  you  the  next  day.

On  the  17th  of  September  my  youngest  sister,  a  girl  18
years  of  age,  of  lively  and  engaging  manners,  dark  com¬
plexion,  and  endowed  with  good  moral  and  intellectual  quali¬
ties,  was  taken  ill  from  cold,  which  was  thought  to  be  occa¬
sioned  by  getting  her  feet  wet  a  day  or  two  previously.  She
had  had  some  mental  excitement  a  few  weeks  before.  She
felt  worse  the  next  day,  and  medical  assistance  was  procured ;
the  surgeon  who  had  for  some  time  attended  the  family  was
called,  and  pronounced  her  to  be  in  strong  nervous  fever.  She
continued  getting  worse  every  hour,  the  treatment  adopted
did  no  good,  and  in  three  days  she  became  delirious,  constantly
plucking  at  the  bed-clothes,  and  screaming  and  talking  so
distressingly  as  to  be  painful  to  those  attending  upon  her.
She  could  obtain  no  sleep,  no  relief  from  her  sufferings.  Her
head  was  shorn  of  all  the  back  hair,  she  was  leeched  on  the
temples,  and  narcotics  given  to  produce  sleep  ;  but  all  availed
nothing.  She  continued  in  this  state  till  the  28th  September,
a  period  of  ten  days,  during  the  whole  of  which  time  she  had
not  slept  six  hours.  The  medical  man  had  done  all  for  her
he  could ;  he  told  us  that  he  had  given  her  medicines  for  days
as  strong  as  he  dared  administer  them :  but  not  the  slightest
inclination  to  sleep  or  to  remain  quiet  was  manifested.

My  parents  were  distressed  at  her  condition,  and  they
decided  that  I  should  attempt  to  mesmerise  her,  in  the  hope
of  obtaining  sleep  and  quietude.  Accordingly,  on  the  28th,
I  commenced  making  downward  passes  at  half  past  one
p.m.,  and  in  forty  minutes  I  had  the  pleasure  of  sending  her
into  a  sound  sleep,  which  lasted  till  half-past  six,  p.m. ;  and
she  awoke  less  delirious,  and  somewhat  refreshed.  Mesmerism
thus  accomplished  what  narcotic  medicines  had  failed  in  doing,
although  taken  for  days.  We  were  all  astonished  at  the  result.


442  Advantage  of  Mesmerism  while  ordinary  treatment

The  medical  attendant  was  amazed ;  he  could  scarcely  believe
the  fact,  and  he  candidly  acknowledged  that  mesmerism  had
effected  in  forty  minutes  what  a  continuance  of  medicine
could  not  effect.  My  parents  felt  dissatisfied  with  the  treat¬
ment  of  this  medical  man,  and  they  determined  upon  con¬
sulting  Dr.  Epps,  and  that  gentleman  saw  my  sister  while
she  was  in  the  first  mesmeric  sleep.  He  made  no  objection
to  my  mesmerising  her ;  and  it  was  agreed  that  I  should  con¬
tinue  to  mesmerise  her,  and  he  would  prescribe  for  her.  I
mesmerised  her  again  that  evening,  at  eight  o’clock,  and  she
went  to  sleep  in  forty  minutes,  and  slept  till  one  a.m.  of  the
29th.  She  said  when  she  awoke  from  this  sleep  that  she  felt
very  languid  and  sleepy ;  and  she  was  much  less  delirious.  I
continued  sending  her  to  sleep  twice  every  day  for  ten  days,
each  time  taking  less  than  the  former,  till  at  length  she  be¬
came  so  susceptible  of  the  influence,  that  by  my  merely
standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed  she  would  fall  into  a  profound
sleep,  which  lasted  for  hours.  The  mesmeric  sleeps  invariably
created  a  desire  for  natural  sleep ;  but  a  great  difference  was
observable  in  the  two  kinds  of  sleep ;  the  mesmeric  being
characterized  by  quietude  and  refreshment,  the  natural  being
generally  noisy  and  disturbed.

She  appeared  to  be  recovering  fast;  Dr.  Epps  gave  us
every  hope  of  a  speedy  cure :  all  the  fever  had  left  her ;  and
her  long  sleeps  greatly  comforted  her.  But  on  the  tenth  day
of  Dr.  Epps’s  attendance  and  of  my  mesmerising  her,  she
complained  of  pain  at  the  bottom  of  the  back,  and  it  was
found  a  large  wound  or  ulcer  was  forming  there.  This  gra¬
dually  increased  in  size,  and,  as  it  got  larger,  all  the  old  symp¬
toms  returned,  she  becoming  horridly  delirious.  As  she  got
worse,  mesmerism  had  no  effect  upon  her :  I  certainly  got
her  to  sleep,  but  the  violence  of  her  suffering  awoke  her
directly.  She  would  be  two  days  without  knowing  any  one,
all  the  while  giving  utterance  to  heart-rending  screams  and
cries  of  pain ;  and  she  would  at  times  yell  so  frantically  as  to
frighten  all  about  her.  She  lingered  till  the  20th  of  October ;
and  though  we  all  felt  severely  a  second  death  in  our  family
within  the  space  of  four  weeks,  yet  we  could  not  but  feel
relieved  when  she  was  released  from  the  agonizing  suffering
caused  by  the  frightful  ulcer.

I  did  hope,  at  the  commencement  of  mesmerising  her,
that  I  should  have  an  interesting  case  of  cure  to  communicate
to  you,  and  I  took  notes  for  that  purpose.  But  I  cannot  but
persuade  myself  that,  as  far  as  mesmerism  is  concerned,  it
shews  the  vast  superiority  of  mesmeric  means  to  those  ordi¬
narily  employed  for  producing  sleep  in  such  distressing  dis-


Mesmerism  in  Africa,  forty  years  ago.  443

eases- as  my  sister’s.  As  far  as  mesmerism  went,  it  did  much
good,  producing  calm,  quiet  sleep,  and  a  feeling  of  refresh¬
ment  afterwards ;  and  this,  after  narcotics  had  been  given,
as  the  medical  man  declared  to  me,  as  strong  as  he  dared  to
give  them.  And  if  mesmerism  does  this  only,  if  it  merely
enables  the  poor  sufferer  to  obtain  a  slight  relief  in  sleep  from
the  agony  of  pain,  how  much  should  it  be  prized  by  medical
men !  They  try  everything  but  mesmerism,  as  if  the  very
thought  of  it  was  degrading  to  their  fine  sensibilities ;  and
yet,  if  asked  why  they  treat  the  subject  with  indifference,
they  will  either  evade  the  question,  treat  it  with  abuse,  or
else,  like  the  surgeon  who  attended  my  sister,  they  will  tell
you  that  they  do  not  understand  it, — that  the  tide  of  public
opinion  is  against  it,  and  that  their  practice  is  their  bread
and  cheese.

You  will,  I  hope,  pardon  this  intrusion  on  your  time,  but
I  felt  it  my  duty  to  send  these  particulars  to  you,  as  I  have
great  reason  to  be  grateful  for  your  kindness  to  me ;  and,  if
the  above  is  any  evidence  of  the  truth  of  mesmerism,  it  will
not  be  the  less  esteemed  by  you,  even  though  communicated
by  a  working  man,  who  has  no  opportunity  to  mesmerise  but
after  the  day’s  work  is  over.

I  am,  Sir,

Your  obedient  humble  servant,

Andrew  D.  Armour.

***  This  patient  died  from  want  of  attention  to  her  back,
which  should  have  been  inspected  daily,  as  in  all  cases  of
fever. — -Zoist.


XIII.  Mesmerism  in  Africa ,  forty  years  ago.

By  Captain  Bagnold.

TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  ZOIST.

Saxmundham,  Sept.  28,  1848.
Dear  Sir, — To  the  European  facts  recorded  in  The  Zoist,  my
brother*  has  sent  some  Asiatic  ones.  Allow  me  to  offer  you
an  account  of  what  I  witnessed  at  Goree,  a  small  island  close
to  Cape  Yerd,  on  the  west  coast  of  Africa,  in  1806.  A  native,
who  occasionally  visited  the  island  in  his  canoe  from  the  main¬
land,  was  generally  reported  to  be  a  fetish  man,  or  magician,
having  the  power  “  to  kill  somebody,  and  give  him  life  again.”
This  was  so  clearly  asserted  both  by  the  inhabitants  and  the
officers  of  the  garrison,  that  I  sought  an  opportunity  of  wit-

*  No.  XXII.

VOL.  VII.  K  K


444


Mesmerism  in  Africa,  forty  years  ago.


nessing  his  performance,  which  was  as  follows :  seating  him¬
self  on  the  ground,  with  his  knees  drawn  up  to  his  chin,  the
patient’s  head  resting  against  them,  he  applied  his  fingers  on
each  side  of  the  neck  under  the  ears,  and  in  the  course  of  a
few  minutes  the  subject  was  in  a  profound  state  of  coma.
When  called  upon  to  restore  him,  he  did  so  by  pressing  two
or  three  times  firmly  on  the  sternum.  So  much  for  mesmer¬
ism  in  Africa  40  years  since.

My  brother,  at  my  desire,  referred  you  to  a  curious  account
given  in  Captain  Carver’s  travels  in  America,  1777.  As  you
may  have  difficulty  in  finding  the  work  at  the  present  day,  I
will  give  you  the  leading  facts  from  memory — perfect  in  all
points  but  that  of  exact  locality.  The  Captain  travelling  in
company  with  a  party  of  Indians  on  one  of  the  lakes,  by
the  wreck  of  their  canoes  in  a  storm  found  themselves  (if  I
recollect  right)  on  an  island ;  their  provision  all  but  exhausted,
without  hope  of  escape  or  assistance.  After  suffering  severe
privations  for  many  days,  it  was  proposed  by  the  tribe  that
their  priest  should  consult  the  great  Spirit.  A  number  of
stakes  were  firmly  driven  into  the  ground,  forming  an  inclosure
of  about  six  feet  by  three,  and  wattled  with  twigs  into  a  kind
of  rude  basket,  having  the  earth  for  its  bottom.  The  priest,
after  undergoing  various  ceremonies,  was  wrapped  closely  in
deer-skins,  and  bound  round  in  all  directions  with  thongs  of
the  same ;  by  which  all  his  limbs  were  closely  confined,  giving
him  the  appearance  of  a  mummy  :  this  done,  he  was  laid  on
his  back  in  the  enclosure,  and  the  whole  carefully  covered
from  sight  by  buffalo  hides — the  spectators  retiring  a  few
paces.  A  low  and  slow  moaning  was  soon  heard  within  the
enclosure,  which  gradually  encreased  both  in  tone  and  quick¬
ness,  and  soon  terminated  in  violent  shouts  and  struggles.
The  covering  being  removed,  the  man  was  discovered  with
his  limbs  at  perfect  liberty,  his  whole  frame  bathed  in  profuse
perspiration,  and  his  countenance  strongly  marked  by  a  pecu¬
liar  wildness.  His  recovery  was  immediate ;  when  he  an¬
nounced  that  he  had  seen  the  great  Spirit,  who  had  informed
him  that  on  the  morrow,  at  noon,  some  canoes  should  appear
rounding  a  point  of  land  then  in  sight,  and  would  be  the
means  of  their  deliverance.  The  narrative  proceeds,  that  on
the  next  day  at  noon  all  eyes  were  anxiously  fixed  on  the  point
in  question,  and,  strange  to  say,  the  prophecy  of  the  priest
was  fulfilled  to  the  letter.  Carver  was  then  travelling  to  choose
a  site  for  his  future  settlement.  He  gives  in  his  book  an
animating  description  of  the  spot  he  selected  near  the  falls  of
St.  Anthony,  and  it  is  to  this  day,  I  believe,  known  as  Carver’s
Grant.  This  land  was  on  sale  in  England  25  years  ago,  and


On  the  boundaries  of  the  Cerebral  Organs.  445

it  was  the  agent  for  the  sale  who  lent  me  the  volumes  from
which  I  give  you  the  foregoing,  as  the  perfectly  true  essence
of  the  tale.

If  this  letter  should  be  deemed  of  any  service  to  the  cause
of  truth,  make  what  use  of  it  you  please,  and  believe  me,

Yours,  very  faithfully,

M.  Bagnold.

P.S.  Your  readers  may  be  interested  in  reading  Carver’s
Travels  in  North  America,  for  an  account  of  some  Indians
consulting  the  great  Spirit.


XIV.  On  the  boundaries  of  the  Cerebral  Organs.

Sir, — It  must  occur  to  a  person  on  his  very  first  acquaintance
with  phrenology,  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  obscurity  and
difference  of  opinion  with  regard  to  the  boundaries  of  the  va¬
rious  organs  of  the  brain.  Some  think  that  each  organ  has  a
constant  individual  form  in  the  head :  (which  indeed  seems
partly  correct,  since  the  organs  correspond  in  their  form
with  the  shape  of  the  head,  where  they  are  situated ;  thus  in
the  forehead,  the  organs  are  for  the  most  part  round ;  at  the
side,  they  are  longer  and  rounded  off,  &c. ;  and  spherical  in
the  back  of  the  head  :)  others  think  that  the  shape  is  indefi¬
nite,  and  that  they  are  dovetailed  into  one  another  :  and  some,
on  the  other  hand,  maintain  that  there  is  an  intermediate
portion  of  the  brain  between  each  organ.  But  it  has  often
been  urged  against  these  opinions,  that,  if  they  do  dovetail  in,
how  do  we  know  the  correct  form  of  the  joints  ?  and,  if  they
do  not,  what  becomes  of  the  intermediate  portion  of  the  brain  ?

Now  it  will  probably  to  most  appear  very  bold  to  advance
any  new  theory,  but  I  cannot  help  thinking,  that,  if  we  con¬
sider  the  brain  to  be  of  three  classes  of  function,  the  intel¬
lectual,  moral,  and  animal,  of  which  parts  there  are  no  minor
divisions,  but  in  them  certain  nuclei  corresponding  in  their
functions  with  the  acknowledged  phrenological  organs ;  and,
as  is  often  the  case,  when  a  part  of  the  brain  between  any
of  these  nuclei  is  developed,  that  it  exhibits  a  function  par¬
taking  of  the  combined  nature  of  those  between  which  it  is
situated ;  it  will  do  away  with  many  of  the  seeming  inconsist¬
encies  in  phrenology.  From  analogy  this  would  seem  to  be
borne  out.  Let  us  observe  the  rainbow;  in  it  there  are
several  acknowledged  primary  colours,  yet  who  can  define  the
boundary  of  any  colour  ?  but  between  each  of  two  primary
colours  we  find  a  third  partaking  of  the  nature  of  the  two ;
thus  green,  between  blue  and  yellow.  Again  in  music,  no


446  Postscript  to  Dr.  Elliotson’s  Paper.

ear  can  tell  the  line  that  separates  two  notes;  they  melt
away  as  it  were  by  imperceptible  gradations  into  one  another.

Before  Mr.  Prideaux  had  advanced  his  reasons  for  enter¬
taining  the  existence  of  an  organ  of  Sympathy,  I  had  ob¬
served  this  part  of  the  brain  large  when  Benevolence  and
Comparison  were  deficient.  Now  sympathy  clearly  partakes
of  the  nature  of  these  two ;  yet,  according  to  the  present
rules,  how  could  a  person  manifest  sympathy  with  deficient
Benevolence?  Again,  between  Caution  and  Secretiveness  I
have  very  often  observed  a  development,  when  the  former  have
been  deficient,  which  I  consider  to  manifest  the  function  of
Suspicion.  Now,  with  Benevolence  and  Conscientiousness
large,  Caution  and  Secretiveness  small,  how  should  a  person
be  suspicious,  according  to  the  existing  rules  ?  Again,  between
Time  and  Order :  and  how  many  persons  there  are  who
manifest  their  order  merely  in  keeping  appointments  and  in
punctuality.  Cases  might  be  multiplied,  but  the  few  I  have
advanced  will  serve  to  explain  the  theory ;  and  if  these  few
remarks  should  deserve  a  notice,  it  would  gratify

Tour's  obediently,

July  7th,  1849.  M.


XV.  Postscript  to  Dr.  Elliotson’s  Paper  (Article  III.)  and  to
his  Note  to  the  Mottos  prefixed  by  him  to  Article  VI.

When  I  spoke  of  the  deaths  from  chloroform  being,  to  my
knowledge,  far  more  numerous  than  the  public  imagine,  and
especially  when  administered  in  parturition,  I  had  no  doubt
that  this  was  the  case  in  Scotland  as  well  as  in  England.
Since  my  paper  was  struck  off,  the  following  communication
has  appeared  in  the  Medical  Gazette  of  Dec.  22 : —

“  Obstetric  practice  in  Edinburgh. — The  use  of  Chloroform.

“  Sir, — On  reading  in  a  late  number  of  your  journal,  the
able  and  interesting  lecture  of  Dr.  Barnes,  ‘  on  the  rational
and  safe  conduct  of  labour/'’  I  was  struck  with  the  fact  of
the  gradually  increasing  mortality  from  childbirth  in  Edin¬
burgh  during  the  years  1847  and  1848,  having  been  exactly
coincident  with  the  introduction  of  chloroform  and  its  exten¬
sive  use  in  midwifery  in  that  city.  From  Dr.  Barnes’s  table
it  appears  that  in  1846  the  proportion  of  deaths  in  childbed
in  Edinburgh  was  1  in  116;  in  1847  it  had  increased  to  1  in
97 ;  while  in  1848  it  had  risen  to  1  in  91.  The  Record  news¬
paper,  a  few  weeks  since,  in  leading  article  type ,  brings  for¬
ward  some  strong  reasons  1  to  quicken  medical  men  in  other
parts  of  the  world  as  to  the  benefits  of  chloroform  in  midwifery ’


Postscript  to  Dr.  Elliotson’s  Paper.


447


the  chief  of  which  is,  that  a  few  ladies  with  high  sounding
titles  await  in  Edinburgh  their  approaching  accouchement,
drawn  thither  by  the  fame  of  chloroform,  and  it  may  be  by
such  puffing  paragraphs  as  that  which  makes  mention  of  these
things.  We  need  have  no  fear,  however,  with  such  statistics
as  those  of  Dr.  Barnes  before  us,  that  our  professional  brethren
will  be  turned  from  the  performance  of  the  duties  of  their
high  office  by  any  such  considerations,  even  if  they  could  look
for  the  most  abounding  newspaper  laudation  as  a  reward.  The
following  is  extracted  from  the  Record  of  Nov.  12  : —

“  ‘  Chloroform. — It  is  generally  known  that  no  incon¬
siderable  opposition  to  the  use  of  this  specific  for  pain  under
surgical  operations  and  in  female  accouchements,  is  offered  in
the  metropolis,  and  in  many  parts  of  England,  as  well  as  in
France.  In  the  Scottish  metropolis,  on  the  other  hand,  no
such  scruples  exist.  It  is  freely  used  on  all  occasions.  .  .  .
The  effect  of  this  difference  of  perception  among  the  medical
men  of  the  two  capitals,  is  operating  in  a  way  which  we  pre¬
sume  the  opponents  of  chloroform  did  not  anticipate,  but
which  we  think  the  most  natural  in  the  world.  In  a  letter
which  we  have  seen  from  Edinburgh,  it  is  said,  ‘  Professor
Simpson's  share  in  its  introduction  is  operating  favourably  on
his  own  position  and  on  that  of  this  city.  The  Duchess  of
Argyle  and  Lady  Blantyre  are  both  expecting  their  confine¬
ment  ere  long,  and  with  their  mother,  the  Duchess  of  Suther¬
land,  have  taken  large  mansions  in  the  town  or  neighbourhood.
Besides  these,  there  are  others,  titled  and  not  titled,  who
have  done  the  same ;  so  that  Edinburgh  will  be  the  gainer.
‘  Its  great  utility/  continues  the  writer,  ‘  is,  in  this  part  of
the  world,  considered  altogether  established.'  Such  facts  as
these  will  probably  quicken  the  perceptions  of  medical  men
in  other  parts  of  the  world  as  to  the  benefit  of  its  use.  Every
improvement  of  the  kind  has  to  encounter  great- opposition.
No  medical  man  who  had  attained  the  age  of  forty  years  at
the  time  of  Harvey's  discovery  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,
ever  believed  the  fact.'

“  I  am,  Sir,  your's  obediently,

“  A.  B.  C."


In  my  note  to  the  motto  of  Article  VI.,  I  repelled  Dr.
Maitland's  accusation  that  we  found  philosophy  on  man, — that
is,  upon  human  speculations,  as  though  philosophy  could  be
founded  on  anything  but  observation  of  nature.  His  readers
would  suppose  that  he  had  seen  in  The  Zoist  an  exhortation
to  found  philosophy  on  man.  His  words  are,  p.  48,


448


Postscript  to  Dr.  Elliotson’s  Paper.


“  But  among  the  advocates  and  practitioners  of  mesmerism,  there
are  many  who  adopt  the  Bible,  and  are  not  willing  to  see  all  religious
belief  swept  away  to  make  room  for  something  contradistinguished
as  a  true  philosophy,  and  founded  on  man  instead  of  God.”

The  passage  in  The  Zoist  to  which  he  refers  for  this  mis¬
representation,  has  no  such  words ;  it  says,  “  founded  on  the
physiology  of  man,”  i.e.,  upon  the  handy  work  of  Dr.  Mait¬
land's  Creator.  The  physiology  of  man  can  mean  only  the
laws  of  human  nature ;  and  moral  philosophy  ought  to  be  so
founded.

But  this  is  not  the  whole  of  Dr.  Maitland’s  misrepresen¬
tation.  He  quotes  this  and  a  similar  passage  simply  from  The
Zoist ,  leading  his  readers  to  suppose  that  they  were  the  words
of  the  editors  :  whereas  they  are  no  such  thing.  They  are  the
words  of  a  gentleman,  named  Atkinson,  who  was  never  in
any  way  connected  with  The  Zoist ,  and  bear  his  signature :
and  they  do  not  occur  in  any  communication  sent  by  him  to
The  Zoist ,  but  in  a  paper  read  before  the  Phrenological  So¬
ciety,  whose  proceedings  The  Zoist  regularly  recorded,  just
as  the  Athenaeum  records  the  proceedings  of  various  societies ;
and  The  Zoist,  whether  it  agrees  or  not  with  Mr.  Atkinson,  has
no  more  to  do  with  these  statements  than  the  Athenaeum  with
the  various  statements  which  occur  in  the  papers  read  before
the  societies  whose  proceedings  it  records.

These  two  instances  of  misrepresentation  agree  very  badly
with  his  parade  of  his  religious  belief.  All  is  anise  and
cummin,  and  neglect  of  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law  :
and  his  conduct  is  calculated  to  injure  true  Christianity  more
than  all  the  dogmatic  and  formulary  religion,  which  signalizes
the  present  day  as  strongly  as  it  did  the  time  of  Christ,  can
do  good.


I  may  mention,  in  reference  to  p.  881,  that  I  have  just
received  a  note  from  Colonel  Davidson,  including  one  from
Dr.  Sharkey,  written  in  Ireland,  declaring  that  he  forgets  all
about  the  second  case ;  and  giving  no  particulars  respecting
the  first.

Colonel  Davidson  has  discovered  the  young  man,  who  is
twenty  years  old  and  apprenticed  to  a  butcher,  was  at  the
National  Schools,  where  mesmerism  is  forbidden ,  but  mesme¬
rised  by  a  French  doctor  five  years  ago,  to  whom  he  had
applied  for  “  doctor's  stuff,”  because  he  had  fits.  “  Then,”
asked  Colonel  Davidson,  “you  had  the  fits  before  you  went
to  the  doctor's  for  stuff?”  “Yes,  Sir.”  The  boy  has  a
sister  affected  also  with  epilepsy,  who  never  has  been  mes-


Books  received,  Notices  to  Correspondents,  fyc.  449

merised,  and  who,  this  Dr.  Sharkey  declared  to  the  family,
had  become  epileptic  on  seeing  her  brother  in  a  fit.  “  And
how  soon  afterwards  did  her  epilepsy  begin  ?”  asked  the
Colonel.  “  Tw  o  years  afterwards,  Sir.”

This  is  a  sad  business  as  regards  Dr.  Sharkey  and  the  editor
of  the  Gazette,  and  proves  how  eagerly  assertions  are  made
against  mesmerism  without  any  ground.  Without  the  slightest
reason  hundreds  of  medical  men  are  now  telling  patients  that
mesmerism  causes,  perhaps  at  the  distance  of  years,  insanity,
fits,  &c.,  &c.  And  the  editor  of  the  Medical  Gazette  de¬
clares  that  no  one  reads  The  Zoist  but  the  impostors  who
publish  their  cases  in  it.*

*  No.  X.,  p.  201.


BOOKS  RECEIVED.

Illustrations  and  Enquiries  relating  to  Mesmerism,  Part  I.,  by  the  Rev.  S.  R.
Maitland,  D.D.,  F.R.S.,  F.S.A.,  some  time  Librarian  to  the  late  Archbishop  of
Canterbury,  and  keeper  of  the  MSS.  at  Lambeth.  London  :  William  Stephenson.
Emanuel  Swedenborg.  A  Biography.  By  James  John  Garth  Wilkinson.


NOTICES  TO  CORRESPONDENTS.

The  Editors  much  regret  that  though  they  have  given  a  sheet  and  a  half  extra
they  have  been  obliged  to  postpone  till  April  the  papers  obligingly  sent  by  Mr.
Davey,  Dr.  Engledue,  Mr.  Elliot,  Lieut.  Hare,  Mr.  Harley,  Mr.  Hazard,  Mr.
Holland,  Mr.  Sanders,  Dr.  Storer,  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  Mr.  Tubbs,  and  some
other  correspondents.


ERRATA.

In  No.  XXVI.,  p.  117,  I.  21,  for  “  Mr.  C.”  read  “  Mrs.  C

1.  30,  for  “  Dec.,”  read  “  Nov.”

In  No.  XXVIII.,  p.  3G8,  for  “  Dr.  Hall,”  read  “  Dr.  Hull.”


END  OF  VOL.  VII.
