THE ZOIST: A Journal of Cerebral Physiology & Mesmerism, and their Applications
to Human Welfare. Vol. III (April 1845 to January 1846).
Edited by John Elliotson. London: Hippolyte Bailliere, 219 Regent Street.
Public domain. Assembled from the five microfilm issue scans on the Internet Archive (sim_microfilm collection); no bound-volume scan of this volume is available.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. IX.


APRIL, 1845.


I. Fact against Fancy.


Since the establishment of this journal we have not met with
any serious attempt to question the soundness of the prin-
ciples upon which it is conducted. As far as we have seen
the criticisms of the last two years, the principles have been
left untouched, but the presumed tendencies have been found
fault with, and occasionally we have seen an attempt to de-
nounce our efforts, characterized more by passionate invective
than sober reason. The tendencies of certain principles are
often supposed to be injurious, because they interfere with
recognized modes of thought—threaten to overthrow long-
cherished opinions, and thus necessitate improvements which
are exceedingly inconvenient to those habituated by education
and station to one monotonous routine, In fact, when moral
or intellectual innovations are attempted, we hear an analo-
gous cry to that which is raised when the progress of in-
telligence causes the recognition of the truths of political
economy, and prompts men to alter the channels of commer-
cial intercourse, thus giving to the many what the few by
their selfish proceedings have so long monopolized. Interested
parties immediately proclaim, not that they who have so long
subsisted by a system of plunder will be sacrificed, but, by a
sudden burst of pseudo-patriotism, shewing itself now only
when their individual comforts and monopolies are interfered
with, that their country will be ruined by gangs of “levellers”
and “ destructives,”’—that the land of their birth, which has
hitherto ranked first in the scale of nations, must soon sink
into a second or third rate position, Selfishness begets cun-


ning, and the cunning selfish man naturally abhors the ad-
VOL, III, B


2 Fact against Fancy.


vocacy of those principles which will prevent him from reap-
ing his accustomed reward.

Just so is it with men who have grown up in ignorance of
the great truths of cerebral physiology. When they first
hear the principles of this science explained, and have ho-
nestly placed before them the results which must inevitably
ensue on their recognition, they raise a cry about ruin and
moral degradation, which, scaring the timid, retards the ad-
vancement of truth, and for a time the progress of humanity.
The conclusions which we are compelled to adopt, and which
we consider it our duty to attempt to expound, necessarily
interfere with established opinions ; but men refuse to enquire
into the foundation of these opinions, or into the amount of
evidence they may possess for their support,—they say that
their views only are correct and orthodox, and, knowing that
they are supported by unthinking thousands, they point the
finger of scorn at their opponent, they declare that he is
enunciating immoral doctrines, that the frame-work of society
will be disjointed if his views are embraced,—they strike at
his reputation by applying degrading epithets, and attempt
to hide their own weakness and the absence of sound reason
by the plentiful use of those names which usually characterize
the intercourse of the vulgar and illiterate. We deplore this,
and every lover of truth and science should endeavour to ex-
pose the impropriety of such conduct.

In former numbers we have shewn that the improvements
in our system of education, imperfect as they are,—and the
alleviation of the horrors of our criminal code, though far
too bloody it still remains,—have been the result of prolonged
struggles on the part of those who were denounced, by the
men of the day, as enemies to the integrity of the social
compact. Every great scientific, moral and political truth
has been opposed by those who are interested in keeping
things as they are, and, in their endeavours to accomplish
this impracticable feat, they have never been over scrupulous
regarding the means to be resorted to, or considered well the
sufferings they have prolonged. So constant has this been the
case that the student of history ceases to wonder, indeed it is
now recognized as an established fact, that every great prin-
ciple is made to produce its beneficial results by the genera-
tion succeeding that which has witnessed its enunciation. If
half a century is required to awaken men to a sense of their
true position as regards their own individual physical com-
forts, and to cause them to recognize the means by which
they are to increase their own and their neighbour’s welfare
and happiness, by the simple interchange of the productions


Fact against Fancy. 3


of distant climes,—how can we wonder that they do not ap-
preciate the truths of moral and intellectual science, and
adopt as their guides the principles which are so legitimately
deduced, and the recognition and practical application of
which the degraded state of humanity so loudly demands ?

The subject of this paper has been suggested to us by the
perusal of a work by a surgeon named Newnham, a review of
which will be found in this number. In one division of this
work under the title of Phreno-magnetism,—a mere peg
on which the author hangs remarks that have no necessary
connection with the subject on which he has written,—we
have been favoured with forty pages of ridicule, just the kind
of writing we should expect to meet with in the pages of some
of the most ephemeral of our weekly periodicals, and of
course the very reverse of what we should wish to see in the
work of an individual claiming the most remote resemblance
to the character of a philosopher. All this ridicule and
attempted sarcasm is aimed at the principles on which our
journal is conducted, and in these peculiar circumstances
we did not like to trust ourselves to review the work. We
therefore requested a friend to undertake the task ; one who
has no connection with us beyond the fact of his being, like
ourselves, a truth seeker, and devoting a considerable portion
of his leisure to researches in mesmeric science. But, though
we did not think it right to place before our readers our own
estimate of the value of the work as a whole, we claim the
right to support and defend our principles, and to do our
utmost to enforce what we consider truth, and, therefore, on
the present occasion to criticize the opinions expressed in the
forty pages just referred to.

We were never more forcibly struck than while we were
perusing this work, with the fact—the explanation of which is
so simple to cerebral physiologists—that there is often a very
remarkable contrast in the degree in which the power of
fluent expression and the higher faculties are possessed. How
frequently does a man clothe the ideas of another in the most
ready language; but, when he attempts a piece of ratioci-
nation for himself, we find his logic the most contemptible ;
we behold, in fact, the dwarf attempting the labours of the
giant. Let any unprejudiced, thinking man read carefully
the iatter portion of Mr. Newnham’s work, and we feel satis-
fied that whatever merit may be accorded to him as a compiler
on the subject of mesmerism, the former will agree with us that
he certainly mistook his vocation when he obtruded himself
into the arena of philosophy. Absurdities abound. If we were
to attempt to criticize page after page, we could with ease fill

B2


4 Fact against Fancy.


a number of our journal; but we are relieved from such an
unprofitable and uninteresting task, because we feel con-
vinced that the greater portion of his fallacies are transparent,
and can only impose on the unthinking. But where shall we
commence? The first paragraph is a piece of false philosophy,
—the last paragraph contains a sneer at a natural fact,—
the intermediate paragraphs are composed of a series of blun-
ders, nonsensical tirades, and theological rhapsodies. Our
contempt is so great that if we had not a duty to perform in
our capacity of editors, we would leave the production to find
its own level, for we really do regret the valuable space we
have thus occupied.


It is well known, that without having any very positive opinion
on the subject,—fully allowing that the brain is the simple organ of
mind,—and not considering it as a matter of great importance, whe-
ther it be assumed to be a single organ with its variety of function,
or whether we adopt the compartmental hypothesis, yet that upon a
view of the whole question, we have ranged ourselves with those
who withhold their belief from the multiplicity of its organic divi-
sions.” p. 374.


Surely Mr. Newnham greatly overrates his own publicity
and the importance attached to his views, in assuming it “ to
be well known” that he has no very positive opinions on


the subject of cerebral physiology. But the fact is Mr. N.
has quite forgotten his recent work,* which was a disserta-
tion on the presumed amount of power exerted by a phantom
over human organism. We remember in this work that Mr.
N. committed himself in a very positive manner—that he
neglected in toto the rules of Baconian philosophy, and tri-
umphantly arrayed himself with those who discard all facts
which do not square with their preconceived fancies. Hear
this, cerebral physiologists—disciples of the great Gall! Your
labours for the last fifty years have been useless, for it is now
settled, settled too in this age of minute physiological research,
that it is not a matter of great importance whether the brain
be assumed to be a single organ with its variety of function,
or whether we adopt the compartmental hypothesis? Is it
then a matter of such extreme trivialty, that it is of no
“great importance” whether we hold true or false ideas—
whether we accept the conclusions to which science leads us,
or halt and arrogantly assume our own speculations of man’s
formation to be more useful to the race than nature’s own
explanation? Is it thus that the labours of half a century
are to be set aside, and, without a shadow of proof, we are to


* The Reciprocal Influence of Body and Mind, by W. Newnham, Esq.


Fact against Fancy. 5


be told that the question which we had so long considered to
be fundamental, is, on the contrary, quite subordinate,—that
the science we had supposed in our simplicity to be capable
of deciding our opinions upon a vast variety of points in
themselves of the highest importance, is the offspring of a
debilitated brain, a monomaniacal fancy, a subject unworthy
of further consideration? We who enlist the whole of animal
nature, and find not one contradiction to the laws we have
discovered, must have logical proof and not arbitrary asser-
tion, ere we can yield the most minute point of our position.


**But surely when we come to this minute subdivision of an ap-
parently indivisible pultaceous mass, are we not proving too much,
and in very fact reducing the brain, to its one organ, with its great
variety of function?” p. 375.


What does the author mean when he speaks of the brain
as “an apparently indivisible pultaceous mass?” We re-
member some years ago reading the account of a discussion
in which a clergyman, the Rev. Sir H. Thompson, Bart.,
called the brain “a lump of pudding,” and like Mr. N. ridi-
culed the idea of a congeries of organs. The clergyman we
can forgive ; his ignorance of anatomy and physiology led him
to make such a comparison,—but has Mr. N., a medical man,
and by courtesy an anatomist, forgotten that it is a demon-
atel fact that dissimilar functions are performed by “ appa-
rently indivisible pultaceous masses” of nervous matter, which
on minute examination prove neither pultaceous nor indivisi-
ble? Does any physiologist suppose that the tracts of the
spinal cord for sensation and motion are of the same struc-
ture? How many apparently homogeneous masses have been
resolved by the microscope into two or more dissimilar struc-
tures? Has Mr. N. ever submitted to microscopical exami-
nation portions of cerebral matter? It would not be more
unjustifiable to assert a priori that the two chief tracts of the
spinal cord are of the same structure, than that the convolu-
tions forming Benevolence and Destructiveness, Causality and
Philoprogenitiveness, are of the same structure. Mr. N.
cannot be ignorant of this. Is he then so dishonest as know-
ingly to employ a fallacious argument to mislead his unpro-
fessional readers ?

We were amused at the author’s attempt to prove two
gentlemen insane, who have published similar opinions to
those which we enforce in this journal. He says :—


“They exhibit such strong attributes of insanity, that there is
reason to fear that they are some of those diseased individuals, whom
they have so feelingly described as demanding our pity,—not our


6 Fact against Fancy.


reprobation,—and as requiring all our efforts to cure, and not to
punish. Under this conviction, and under the influence of the bene-
volent feelings which flow from it; and truly feeling, that if we ‘hang
a man for going mad,’


‘Then farewell—British freedom !’


we have hesitated long, whether it would be right to attempt the
exposure of their hallucinations to the public gaze;—and we have
been only satisfied in doing so, by the recollection, that before they
can be admitted into the asylums which they project, there must be
certificates of insanity, fc proofs before a competent court, that
they are incapable of managing their own affairs with advantage to
themselves, and without injury to others.” p. 386.


What are the proofs of this presumed insanity? Be it
known, then, that they are insane because they have asserted,
—that mind has only an imaginary existence,—that cerebral
matter does evolve thought,—that as physiologists we have
to do with matter only,—that the actions and thoughts of
man are the inevitable results of his cerebral organism, mo-
dified by the circumstances which surround him,—that the
laws of hereditary descent are neglected,—that criminals
should be treated on the principles of reason, benevolence
and justice, and that the doctrine of vengeance and anni-
hilation should be banished from our criminal codes, &c.

Mr. N. says,—


‘* We fearlessly assert, that we have as much evidence, in favour
of a principle superadded to matter, called mind,—as we have in
proof, that organized matter is ‘all that is necessary to produce the
phenomena of mind.’ Neither the one proposition nor the other is
susceptible of proof by the ordinary rules of evidence. We can
trace back this function of ‘ cerebration’ a certain distance,—but we
can go no farther:—we can see that the brain is the organ assigned
by nature for the manifestations of mind;—but in what way is this
accomplished? Why is it that the same organ varies so essentially
in every individual? What evidence have we to prove, that the cere-
bral mass exercises the function of thought, ed that thought is de-
pendent upon the movement of its molecules? Besides, we have no
proof, that what we term mind, is not material, only of a finer qua-
lity than that which is detectable by our senses. It is vain to talk
of the non-existence of mind, because we cannot demonstrate its
composition; and we have precisely the same evidence for its exist-
ence, as we have for the moving cerebral molecules which perform
the higher phenomena of thought, and feeling, and reflection, com-
parison, judgment, and resulting moral action.” pp. 386, 387.


This is the first attempt we have yet seen to grapple with
our views, and since the subject has produced a good deal of
discussion at various times, and is so little understood, we


Fact against Fancy. 7


consider that we shall be doing our duty if we endeavour to
place it clearly and succinctly before our readers. The ques-
tion is not whether mind is material or immaterial, for we ask
what right has Mr. N. to use the word at all? What right
has he @ priori to presume that cerebral matter cannot pro-
duce thought? The materiality or immateriality is a question
of no moment; it is existence we wish to be convinced of.
But what is meant by this term mind? Let us consider
for a moment all the manifestations called mental which
any individual may observe in one of his own species.
Cerebral physiologists have grouped them under three heads
—intellectual, moral and animal functions. Now herein
consists the presumed difficulty. Men are conscious that
they exhibit these phenomena themselves, and they witness
them in greater or less perfection in all their kind,—they
allow that the brain is essential for their production, but,
because they cannot detect the modus operandi of cerebral
matter, they leap to the conclusion that the brain is merely
an instrument, and, in the most absurd manner, convert the
results of cerebral properties,—the very intellectual, moral
and animal phenomena they are observing,—into a separate
existence, and call it the mind of man! Having created an
imaginary cause, for there is no proof of the reality of such
a separate existence, they convert the ‘rue cause into a mere
instrument of their imaginary cause, and then they pro-
nounce the results mental manifestations. Is this not a most
unphilosophical proceeding? As we observed on a former
occasion, is it not exactly the course which the untutored
savage pursues? He witnesses for the first time the move-
ments of a steam engine, and in the simplicity of his igno-
rance concludes that the motive power is the Great Spirit.
He does not see the steam—he knows not its expansive power
—he knows not the composition of water, and would laugh
if you were to tell him it is made of two transparent gases
—he cannot be made to understand that this power is per-
fectly under the controul of man, and that to obtain the
movement he has merely to fulfil the requisite conditions.
In what respect does the philosopher differ from the savage ?
He knows not the powers of matter, and, because he is igno-
rant, he lifts up his eyes and talks nonsense, enlists a some-
thing (?) which he cannot see—cannot define—cannot appre-
ciate, and then, forsooth, laughs and sneers at those who are
endeavouring to lift him from the pit of his own digging.

It has always appeared to us that metaphysicians take for
granted what we require to be proved—and assume an evist-
ence which no physiologist has been able to detect. Exactly


8 Fact against Fancy.


so, cries the metaphysician ; we say that sensation, thought,
will, &c., differ so decidedly from the functional manifesta-
tions of any other portion of the body, that we have a right
to conclude they result from a power far different from that
which any mere material arrangement can produce. But
here again is an assumption. If the physiologist considers
thought to be a functional manifestation of cerebral matter,
and if the metaphysician declares that he has no right to do
this because the product does not bear any analogy to the
functional product of other organs,—we say, neither does the
brain bear any analogy to the composition and structure of
other portions of the body,—its composition and structure
clearly point it out as peculiarly appropriated for a distinct
function; and, since we never witness the production of an
intellectual phenomenon, or indeed any proof of cerebration,
except in connection with a brain, and, moreover, since we
invariably perceive peculiar types of cerebration resulting
from certain peculiar combinations of cerebral matter, we
say that we have a right, and a logical right, to declare
all the phenomena which the metaphysicians call mental to
be the result of cerebral composition and structure, and there-
fore that the brain and thought stand in relation to each
other of cause and effect. Because the product is not a drop
of fluid or a piece of bone—is not carbonic acid or sulphur-
etted hydrogen gases—because the resulting product cannot
be collected in a bottle or preserved in a museum, because
we cannot see it, feel it, or form chemical compounds with it
—are we justified in contending that the most beautiful and
elaborate portion of our organism is incapable of producing
the phenomena we are investigating—a portion, be it remem-
bered, bearing no analogy in its formation to any other organ,
and concerning the ultimate structure of which we absolutely
know almost nothing? To say that the brain cannot evolve
thought, is a most preposterous and unphilosophical assump-
tion ; it is a piece of dogmatism resulting from a blind attach-
ment to scholastic rules and formularies ; and any man giving
forth such a dictum proclaims that he has not yet stepped
over the portico of the temple in which true philosophy holds
her sittings. It is at once cutting the Gordian knot,—it is
taking for granted the point at issue,—it is deciding a ques-
tion by arbitrary power, when in truth all the facts with
which we are acquainted lead to an opposite conclusion,—it
is giving the lie to all the labours of the physiologist, and
proclaiming ex cathedrd, that we, the pigmy philosophers of
the nineteenth century, know all that appertains to organized
matter, its mode of formation, its functions and its uses.


Fact against Fancy. 9


Men say matter cannot do this or that! What do we
know of matter? What do we know of inorganic matter?
What do we yet know of the earth on which we tread, of its
powers, of its uses? It is just now only that we are beginning
to make it fully yield its fruits, and let us remember that it
is the philosophy of our own day that is doing this,—the men
are yet alive who are teaching us the proper method of call-
ing forth the hidden powers of our own globe. And shall
we who stand convicted of the grossest ignorance as regards
the means of raising our own food, as regards the composition
and power of the common earths, dare to dogmatize and say
what living organized matter cannot do? We assert that it will
be time enough to decide on what organized matter cannot do,
when we have determined all it can do; and we are not likely
to be in this position till the dealers in facts take the place
of the fabricators of hypotheses—till the untiring workers in
the outskirts of nature’s laboratory—not the sciolists who
appropriate without examination the facts of a new science
which 365 days previously they ridiculed and denounced—
shall have laboured longer, collected more numerous data,
and attempted a careful and philosophic induction.

But we are told by the metaphysicians that notwithstand-
ing we can prove that a certain function is always exclusively
manifested in a certain portion of our organism, that the
function is never observed when the organism is absent, that
the function is inevitably impaired by the destruction of the
organism—that notwithstanding all this, we are nevertheless
in error in supposing the organ to be the cause of the func-
tion. We ought, they say, to refer it to an “ unknown force,”
and that the difference is so great between the idea which we
form of a force and that which we have of a body, that we are
compelled to regard force as incorporeal by nature. They
then complacently tell us that the organ which is visible be-
comes the representation of the cause which is invisible, and
at last these two conditions of the phenomenon are con-
founded and identified. Now we confess that to us this does
appear a step backwards. Physiology is an inductive science.
The intrusion of metaphysical abstractions into physiological
discussions is unwarrantable; and, so far from considering our-
selves open to the charge of ignorance, we conceive that the
enlistment of a fancied power, presumed to exist apart from
the material structure, is merely a cloak to conceal ignorance,
and an attempt to render mysterious what is clear and self-
evident. We entreat physiologists to elevate their science—
to cast off the dress of the mystagogue, and to assume the


10 Fact against Fancy.


more becoming garb of a humble investigator of natural
phenomena.

But then the metaphysician directs our attention to the
phenomena of consciousness. How are these to be accounted
for? What material theory will explain them ?—What is
meant by consciousness? “Our intelligence has two distinct
views ; one, of outward objects, through the medium of the
senses, the other of itself, and of the facts which pass before
the inward tribunal, without any medium whatever. The
former of these two views is sensible observation ; the latter is
internal observation, and is also called consciousness or the in-
ward sense.”* The metaphysician then, it will be perceived,
recognizes not only the physiological or sensible facts,—but
also a second order of facts, the facts of consciousness, which
he says are not derived from sensible observation; and then
he concludes that since there are facts of a different nature
from sensible facts, there must also be a reality of a different
nature from sensible reality, and this he calls mind, soul, the
responsible moi. But this consciousness concerning which the
metaphysicians speak so learnedly is one of the results of
cerebral action. We cannot be conscious without a brain,
and we ask M. Jouffroy :—“ Is it consistent with any sound
principles of philosophy gratuitously to burden science with
an imaginary being, the existence of which is not demanded
for the explanation of a single phenomenon?” Granted, it
is replied, that there is a connection between the cerebral
organism and the production of the phenomena, but then the
connection would still exist, if the organism, instead of being
the principle of the production, were only the instrument,
and it is impossible to assign a reason for preferring the
first supposition to the second. We contend that there is a
very potent reason why we should embrace the first view and
consequently reject the second, and it is this :—“ No more
causes of natural things are to be admitted than are sufficient
to explain their phenomena.” This was an axiom of Newton’s,
given in his Principia, as the first of his Regul Philosophandi,
and we think that all reflecting men will agree with us in the
propriety of recognizing it as a fundamental axiom, and one
from which we should not allow ourselves to depart for an
instant. Matter and its properties are facts: spirit and its
properties are fancies, and unnecessary fancies too.


* We could not select an intelligible definition of consciousness from Mr.
Newnham’s pages, and have therefore copied the above from at Essay On
the Principle of the Phenomena of Consciousness, by M. Jouffroy, Professor
of Moral Philosopy at the Faculté des Lettres of Paris.


Fact against Fancy. 11


But it is urged that, although we may perfectly understand
the material organism, we have no idea of its productive
energy, we have no idea how the cerebral mass is capable of
producing anything whatever, and, therefore, whether we say
that the brain has the power of producing certain phenomena,
or that this power belongs to a distinct principle, we gain no-
thing in point of clearness. Is it then of no consequence that
we arrive at a certain stage of knowledge by carefully advanc-
ing step by step, repeating experiments again and again, in-
vestigating for this purpose not only men but all animals, and
accumulating innumerable facts all pointing to one and only
one conclusion? Does not this process necessitate clearness
of thought and precision of language? Is it not more rational
and philosophic than the method of commencing to investigate
man by assuming the existence of an intelligent immaterial
principle, and then carping at the facts of physiologists because
these facts do not prove how, when, and where brain acquires
its productive energy? Can there be two opinions on this sub-
ject? The fact is that the aggregation of cerebral molecules
into a mass of a particular shape, necessarily and immediately,
causes a series of functional manifestations: the sum total we
propose to group under the general term, cerebration, reserv-
ing to ourselves and others the power of analyzing this as we
proceed, and of adopting such subdivisions as anatomical and
physiological observation shall ultimately warrant. Hear the
conclusion to which enlightened physiologists arrive :—‘“‘ No
reasonable ground has yet been adduced for supposing that if
we had the power of bringing together the elements of any
organic compound in their requisite states and proportions,
the result would be any other than that which is found in the
living body.” * With this opinion we entirely agree. If we
had the power of combining the elements which form cerebral
molecules, and then the power of arranging these molecules
so as to form brain, and of subjecting this portion of brain to
its regular stimulus of blood, &c., we believe a manifestation
of cerebration would be the inevitable result,—the peculiar
character depending on the shape, size, &c., of the portion of
brain. There is no reasonable ground for supposing that we
should have to hunt about for an intelligent principle. The
power which no one can appreciate or form any rational
opinion of, but which does make elementary combinations,
and then aggregations of these so as to constitute organs,—
others may call it what they please, but we deny their right to


* Dr. Carpenter.


12 Fact against Fancy.


personify it,—we say this power necessitates the formation of
the organism, and the function is the inevitable result. It
is power we recognize throughout the universe, but it is the
personification of this power, and the necessarily low and
grovelling notions which such belief produces, that we most
emphatically deprecate.

Our inability to conceive how cerebral molecules by their
aggregation are capable of producing a result, which they
cannot do while separate, is no reason why we should adopt
an hypothesis, which has not even the shadow of an argu-
ment for its suppport. We may never be able to do this.
Why is effervescence and the evolution of a gas the neces-
sary result of the mixture of an acid and chalk? Chemistry
points out the change which has taken place, speaks to us of
certain affinities, &.—but why these affinities? A host of
scientific illustrations crowd upon us, but one is as good as a
thousand. Turn which way we will, investigate which branch
of science we please, the why and the wherefore are questions
incessantly intruding themselves, and prove to man that he is
not endowed with faculties to enable him to grapple with
these perplexing difficulties in philosophic research. Though
we cannot go so far as we could wish, this is no reason why we
should not accept what science offers. Let it be clearly un-
derstood that we have no objection to speculation, but it must
be speculation based on a recognition of facts, and not pre-
ceding scientific research: for in the investigation of vital
phenomena, after the inductive method has done its utmost,
cautious and enlightened speculation may advance truth, and,
in fact, is a legitimate attempt to assist and ripen the la-
bours of the philosopher.*

It is easy now to see the gist of the question—it is this.
Does the brain act per se in consequence of its peculiar
organism? or, is there a special being, of which sensibility,
volition, intelligence, &c., are the specific attributes, con-
stantly compelling certain portions of brain to exhibit peculiar
manifestations ? We are not about to shelter ourselves under
the shadow of a great name, but we will merely quote the
opinion of Cuvier, who, when speaking of the tendency on the
part of some philosophers to recognize a something distinct
from organized matter as the cause of certain phenomena—
says, they do this, “ because the obscurity in which physio-
logy is still enveloped renders it necessary to attribute some


* The work entitled Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation, is a
beautiful example of legitimate speculation,


Fact against Fancy. 13


reality to the phantoms of abstraction, IN ORDER TO PRACTISE
ILLUSIONS ON THEMSELVES AND OTHERS, CONCERNING THEIR
PROFOUND IGNORANCE AS TOUCHING VITAL MOTION.” *

Since the point of departure is so very different, we
naturally expect the course pursued and the conclusions
arrived at to be equally wide. And that this is really the
case Mr. Newnham’s observations abundantly testify. The
materialists appeal to the varied forms of cerebral organism
in animals—the spiritualists appeal to the “phantoms of
abstraction ;”’—the former collect facts—the latter construct
hypotheses ;—the former take man as he is, and would endea-
vour, by obeying the organic laws, to improve him—the latter
will not recognize these laws in their most important bear-
ings, but contend that cerebral matter is controlled by spirit,
and that man is to be improved by the inculcation of abstract
doctrines and moral precepts. Of course the real cause of all
this is to be sought for in the error committed by the meta-
physicians in leaving the region of facts, and in neglecting
the inferences from these facts. Gall did not act thus, and
notwithstanding we run the risk of calling forth another
“ Declaration of Expediency ” from our northern friends,—
notwithstanding they may repudiate the only inference which
can be drawn from the recorded testimony of our great
master, we must quote two passages from his work, to shew
that we are the disciples and that they are a new sect, a non-
conformist band of inductive philosophers !

“ The instincts, the dispositions, the sentiments, the intel-
lectual faculties, the distinctive character of humanity, owe
their existence and their modification to the brain alone.
Without a brain there is no perception, no sensation, no
thought, no enjoyment, no suffering, no se/f (moi). It ought
to be known, that without a brain there can be no psychology,
and no kind of philosophy.”

“ Your understanding, your volition, your free-will, your
affection, your judgment, instinct, &c., will be no longer per-
sonified beings, they will be cerebral functions.” +


* Article Nature, in the Encyclopedia of the Natural Sciences,

+ “* Les instincts, les penchans, les sentimens, les facultés intellectuelles,
le caractére distinctif de ’humanité, doivent leur existence et leur modifica-
tion uniquement au cerveau. Sans cerveau, point de perception, point de
sensation, point d’idée, point de jouissance, point de souffrance, point de
moi. On doit donc reconnaitre que, sans cerveau, il ne peut exister ni psy-
chologie, ne acune espéce de philosophie.”—Sur l’ Organe des Qualités Morales
et des Facultés Intellectuelles, et sur la Pluralité des Organes Cérébraux. 8vo.
tome ii., p. 46.

** Votre entendement, votre volonté, votre libre arbitre, votre affection,
votre jugement, l’instinct, etc. Ne seront plus des étres personnifiés ; ils
seront des fonctions cérébrales.” p. 51.


14 Fact against Fancy.


But to return to Mr. Newnham’s lucubrations.—Listen,
cerebral physiologists !


“In plain reality, the assumption is beyond the truth :—we have
no evidence of the performance of mental operation by the brain: nor
can we in any way detect the moral, and social, and intellectual
brain, from the immoral, and anti-social, and most stupid brain, if
the two are placed before us, separated from their bony envelopes :—
we mention this, because we have no wish to moot the questions of
phrenology in the present place.” p. 388.


Now before dissecting this invaluable specimen of whole-
sale and impudent assertion, we ask our readers to turn to
the previous page (p. 387), and five lines from the top will be
seen the following question,—“ Why is it that the same organ
varies so essentially in every individual?” Really we should
like to know


** What chain can hold this varying Proteus fast ?”’


This, he says, is not entertaining “any very positive
opinions ” or wishing “to moot” the subject of cerebral
physiology! Why the fact that cerebral physiologists are
able to do what Mr. N. states cannot be done, is generally
recognized and acted upon. Cerebral physiology is an esta-
blished science—none doubt this but those who have not taken
the trouble to investigate. Does Mr. N. dare assert that the
brain of an idiot is undistinguishable from the brain of an in-
telligent being? Does he mean to state that his own brain is
of the same shape as the drivelling idiot’s whom he must so
frequently see in his daily walks? Does he mean this? We
scarcely think so, albeit we could wish that the upper portions
of his anterior lobes were a little larger. Did the brains of
Newton, Bacon, and Cuvier, present no distinctive marks ?
Are the brains of our most distinguished living philosophers
not to be known from the brains of the occupants of Newgate
or the Milbank Penitentiary? In No. II. of this Journal
will be seen a plate representing the contrast between Green-
acre and Oberlin, and in No. III., another plate represent-
ing the contrast between Lord Eldon and Basil Montagu
all men of our own day, and whose characters are well known.
Let individuals judge for themselves—let them contrast the
brains of the inmates of their own household, and then say
whether it is possible “in any way to detect the moral, and
social, and intellectual brain, from the immoral, and anti-
social, and most stupid brain.” Mr. N. might just as well
say that we cannot detect the positive from the negative pole
of a galvanic battery, or, the difference between the brains of
a lion and a sheep—a greyhound and a bulldog,—or the


‘act against Fancy. 15


heavy draught horse of the London brewer from the steed of
the huntsman! Positively, it seems scarcely worth one’s
while to combat the ravings of such a man, but there are
many choice specimens yet demanding our attention.


** We insist that the brain is the servant of mind,—that man is
not the slave of his organization ;—but is bound to execute the laws
of the Most High,—and in so doing, so to restrain, and modify, and
govern his organic suggestions, as will keep himself in the paths of
rectitude, and protect all others, within the social circle, from in-
jury.” p. 392.

Now since brain is the servant of mind, and man is not
the slave of his organism, we should much wish to be informed
how these organic suggestions he refers to are produced, and
which, we are told, man is to restrain, modify, and govern.
If organic suggestions result from brain, and brain is the
servant of mind, mind, on his own shewing, must be the cause
of those actions which mind is to restrain, modify, and govern.
Can Mr. N. add, quod erat demonstrandum? O! Mr. Newn-
ham! Mr. Newnham! alas for philosophy, logic, and common
sense, when you attempted to use such weapons for the pur-
pose of upsetting the position of your opponents.

Again,—

“Man possesses a superadded spiritual principle, accountable
for the actions of the body, and destined ¢o govern them, and to con-
stitute man a religious animal. It is not therefore true that molecular
alterations occasion the various changes of ‘ cerebration,”’ but that
the various forms of accountable being, give laws to these molecules,
and employ them as servants to execute the will of the individual—
to control the impulses of passion,—to soothe or silence the cravings
of organization,” &c., &c., pp. 393, 394.

There is no word in the English language that more
forcibly and clearly describes this last specimen than the word
“‘twaddle.” Twaddle, means a series of words placed to-
gether without any definite meaning; sound without sense.
Certainly if the spiritual principle, which is a mere assertion
without proof or reason, governs the actions of the body,
and punishment is ever just, it is but fair that this same prin-
ciple should be accountable for the actions it has produced.
We presume “the will of the individual—the impulses of
passion—the cravings of organization,” &c., are phenomena
resulting from the working of some law. We say, they are
the necessary result of certain species of molecular aggrega-
tions of cerebral matter under certain circumstances; but Mr.
N. says, “that the various forms of accOUNTABLE BEING,
give laws to these molecules, make man a religious animal,
control the impulses of passion, &c.,”—in fact, that this


16 Fact against Fancy.


accountable being, at one and the same moment, produces
two opposite results—both the use and abuse of a faculty,
becomes the cause of good and evil—nay more, he clearly in-
tends the cause to be punished. And all this we are told is the
result “of experience and sound reasoning, and in accordance
with revelation,” which we are also informed we must admit
in argument (7), and if not, Mr. N. says we become “ infidels,
avowed infidels.” We care not what we are called by such a
weak individual. We cannot, no we cannot, give up the little
reasoning power we possess at the bidding of Mr. N. We
are not even afraid of his denunciations. Jf ever we yield, it
will be to argument and on conviction—it will be to a giant and
not to a dwarf. We wish for our own satisfaction that some
more redoubtable champion of these reveries had been our
opponent ; it is so great a waste of time to be compelled to ex-
pose such nonsense. The more our author strives, the more
certainly he hastens his own destruction. He brings to our
recollection a certain animal, possessing two more legs than
Mr. N. to stand upon, which we once saw striving to avoid
death by drowning, but by its very endeavours hastening its
end by wounding its own throat.

We come now to a subject of the most vital importance—
we allude to the necessity of recognizing the laws of Heredi-
tary Descent. We regret the levity with which Mr. N. has
referred to this question. A medical man, claiming a know-
ledge of physiological science, ought to be the daily expounder
of those great truths, which it is his privilege to have become
acquainted with—ought to hold such a position in those fami-
lies whose physical well-being he watches over, as to be able
to protest against any gross dereliction from the path which
the facts of science has laid down—ought to be the guide, the
friend, the faithful monitor, not the slave of his patients—
ought positively, but with calmness, the result of truthful
conviction, to point out those grand but simple laws which
have been discovered by the physiologist, and to explain the
consequences which must ensue from their neglect; not by an
appeal to selfishness, by predicating the results merely as
regards individual comfort, but by declaring it to be the duty
of a rational being so to guide his conduct, that it may be in
accordance with the dictates of reason, and contribute to the
welfare of humanity. Would that we could say the mem-
bers of our profession did this! There are bright examples
—there are men, the aristocracy of the race—men, of whom
it is said that they possess the spirit of martyrdom, which,
being interpreted, means moral courage to assert the truth,
to brave the frown of power and the prejudices of the mil-


Fact against Fancy. 17


lion,—true philosophers, who would consider it a crime of the
deepest dye if they kept back one particle of the truth which
is in them, influenced by the love of worldly éclat or the
low morbid craving to be considered popular men,—there
are such men, but alas! truth compels us to say that the
examples are few and far between. Truth, science, love for
humanity, are sounds which daily greet the ear, but the ex-
pediency of the moment leads men to prostitute the two
former, and the profession of the latter is often the means
used for the purpose of contributing towards self-laudation
or the gratification of still more selfish feelings.

We charge Mr. N. with perverting science—with per-
verting truth—with being an enemy to the progress of his
race. We charge him with this on the present occasion, be-
cause he is not a man we can allow to escape under the plea
of ignorance. He occupies a certain status in his profession
—he is considered by his brethren to be a well-read man—he
is looked upon by his neighbours as a man of science, and we
say, as far as the routine of his profession is concerned, he
ranks high ; but we also say, that his brain is not calculated
for the discussion of purely philosophical subjects. He has
voluntarily placed himself before the public; he professes to
be a moral expounder, one whose code of morals is so high
—so far transcends our own, that our doctrine is said by him
to be “cheerless,” the result of “adisordered organism,”
“folly,” “absurdity,” “ irrational,’ and “ fledged for the
purpose of suiting our own preconceived notions !”


** Secondly, that the human race has the power of modelling its
organism, so as to i by a series of combinations, a high
moral and intellectual character, or decidedly the reverse. We have
here a new principle for the guidance of future generations. Mar-
riages are not henceforward to be contracted between parties, arising
under proper circumstances, and in well-regulated minds, from the
development of affinities which are supposed to form the elements of
happiness in family life:—in fact, they are not to be arranged from
the choice of individuals, (often bad enough it is confessed,) but
from a certain selection of some others, who shall decide this mo-
mentous arrangement, not according to the manifestations of sound
mind, but according to certain organic peculiarities, or presumed
organic peculiarities, so as to equalize the deficiencies of one by the
redundancies of the other. True, that this would be of very little
importance, where every one necessarily follows his own organic sug-
gestions, and where a can be only a ‘liaison de convenance,’
with no obligation beyond the organic suggestion of the hour. But
let us imagine what would be its effect on society as it actually is; —
one individual, for instance, in whom Destructiveness is marked, is
to be married to one in whom Benevolence is supereminent: where

VOL. III. c


18 Fact against Fancy.


Acquisitiveness is prominent, it is to be united to surpassing Con-
scientiousness! Contemplate for a moment the wretchedness thus
inflicted upon immediate society, by such an incongruous aggregation
of molecules; and after all, who is to say what shall be the effect
upon offspring,” &c. pp. 396, 397.


We feel sorrow—we pity an author who writes for the
purpose of ridiculing an important branch of science, and to
raise a momentary laugh from the ignorant and unthinking.
This question of hereditary descent involves opinions and
details which could be more appropriately discussed in a work
on physiology, nevertheless the leading characteristic—the
organic law, under which all organisms are formed, can be
easily and clearly set forth in a very few observations. It is
a truth, and we know not one modern physiologist who has
attempted to disprove it, that living organisms, presenting
certain peculiarities of structure and consequently peculiarities
of functional manifestations, transmit to their progeny in a
greater or less degree the same peculiarities. In a few words,
the law is,—the same causes always produce the same effects.
We are referring now to the great outline, to the striking
features; we do not deny that there may be minute shades
of difference, but there is a cause for these, and that cause
is another law, a branch of the preceding, but which as yet
we know very little about,—the law which governs the minute
combinations of portions only of the two organisms necessary
to form a new being. We are not referring to man alone,
but to all animals. From man to the brute, aye, and lower
still, this law is recognized. It is all important. Although
science has done much in modern times to generalize the
facts accumulated during a series of years by authoritatively
setting forth the law, nevertheless, the truth has always been
acted upon. If we turn to that mine of intellectual wealth,
—dquaint but sensible, old Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy,
what do we read ?

“So many several wayes are we plagued and punished for
our father’s defaults ; insomuch that (as Fernelius truly saith)
it is the greatest part of our felicity to be well born; and it
were happy for humane kind, if only such parents as are sound
of body and mind should be suffered to marry. An husband-
man will sow none but the best and choicest seed upon his
land ; he will not rear a bull or an horse, except he be right
shapen in all parts, and how careful then should we be in
begetting of our children? In former time, some countreys
have been so chary in this behalf, so stern, that, if a child
were crooked or deformed in body or mind, they made him
away. A severe doom you will say, and not to be used among
Christians, yet more to be looked into than it is. When no


«


Fact against Fancy. 19


choice is had, but still the eldest must marry ; it comes to
pass that our generation is corrupt, we have many weak per-
sons, both in body and mind, many feral diseases raging
amongst us, crazed families, parentes peremptores ; our fathers
bad ; and we are like to be worse.”

Why even old Burton, without the aid of modern science,
was a better physiologist than Mr. Newnham. Let us en-
treat him to throw aside his prejudices, and, if he has not time
to make observations for himself, why let him do what he has
just done in the science of Mesmerism, take the facts and ob-
servations of others. Since Mr. N. was nearly writing against
mesmerism, but halted, and wrote a nine-shilling work in
favour of it,* we do not despair, although he has written
against the “laws of hereditary descent ;” nothing but shame
will prevent him from pointing out to his suffering fellow-
creatures the important facts he has so long neglected.

To sum up. Man has power over his fellow-man, but, to
use it, he must conform to the laws presiding over organic
life. Man knows this truth, and acts in accordance with it,
when employed in developing and perfecting other beings:
but as regards himself,—an immeasurably more important
consideration, he wilfully neglects the law he has discovered
—disdainfully turns aside from the innumerable facts daily
presented to him, and thus retards the progress of his race.
High moral and intellectual pre-eminence is now the excep-
tion and not the rule! Man could soon reverse the picture.
The brain of a child is the re-appearance of the two brains of
the parents, with certain modifications, which we cannot yet
with philosophic accuracy predict, but which we can detect.
Let those who doubt, go into the world as we have done—
look, observe, and examine. Is not the tendency to certain
diseases transmissible,—scrofula, gout, insanity, &c.? We
ask Mr. N. whether he does not daily see the son suffering
from the diseases of the father, and the mother transferring
to her daughter the peculiarities of her own organism. And
is not this the result of “organic peculiarities?” Can the
various forms of “ accountable being” produce scrofula and
gout? Do they produce insanity? If organic molecules are
the servants of the several “ forms of accountable being,” in-
sanity is caused by the latter! If parents transmit organic
peculiarities to their children, which, at certain periods of life,
produce the diseases under which they suffered—who would


* “About twelvemonths since, I was asked by some friends to write a
paper against mesmerism. Perhaps in an evil hour I assented to the pro-
posal thus made, but on reflection, &c.”—in fact Mr. N. changed his course,
page 1.


c2


20 Fact against Fancy.


think a priori of limiting the extent to which these peculiari-
ties may be transmitted? If insanity can be passed from
father to son, through a long series of generations, and, if in-
sanity is a disease of the brain, and if brain be composed of
organic molecules, must there not have been something
peculiar as regards the molecules? Why do parents fre-
quently prevent the marriage of a child with the member of a
family in which such a disease has appeared? Do they not
clearly recognize the law in the abstract, but, through igno-
rance, neglect it when it descends to minute particulars? So
far from saying that “marriages are not henceforward to be
contracted between parties arising under proper circumstances,
and in well regulated minds from the development of affinities
which are supposed to form the elements of happiness in family
life,’ we say exactly the reverse ; we say they are to be so
contracted—we tell men and women, most emphatically, that
if they do not attend to the proper circumstances—to the
affinities—to the organic peculiarities—to the fundamental
points for the attainment of happiness, they cannot expect it.
We display the picture of organic life, we prove the formation
of brain, we give them rules for ascertaining the organic pecu-
liarities; and we tell them if they will act like rational beings,
and not like the brutes, they will not only insure individual
happiness, but they will be doing their utmost to assist the
progressive organic advancement of their race. And for
giving the rules which the race neglect, for declaring the
truth, for indicating the results of an appeal to reason, and
telling individuals that passion is to be brought under the
dominion of intelligence, Mr. N. asks his readers “to con-
template for a moment the wretchedness thus inflicted upon
immediate society!” Faugh! We...... But we will
not trust our pen.

We could proceed, and again and again point out that Mr.
N. does not understand the subject he has attempted to criti-
cize. With regard to his remarks on Criminal Legislation,
of course, since he does not admit the premises, he cannot
agree with our conclusions,—since he does not understand
man’s formation, he cannot give any rational opinion regard-
ing his treatment,—since he has not yet arrived at a know-
ledge of the laws which govern man, he cannot legislate for
man, or indicate the course which should be pursued by those
who have power. We might then, if we pleased, dismiss him;
but we will not blink any portion of the subject, or shrink
from the responsibility to be attached to any opinion we have
ever advanced. We say, and we cause it to be printed in
capital letters, that MAN’s ACTIONS NECESSARILY RESULT FROM


Fact against Fancy. 21


HIS ORGANIC CONSTITUTION, AND THE CIRCUMSTANCES SUR-
ROUNDING HIM AT ANY GIVEN PERIOD. If we are now asked
for proofs, and if we have not already afforded enough, we
reply, that it is a legitimate deduction from our science ; for
our science demonstrates that there is a constant and un-
changing series of effects, resulting from recognized and
specific causes. If you will not take the opinion of those who
have laboured hard for the last fifty years, who have collected
thousands and thousands of facts, why, all we can say is, and
we say it in the most sober earnestness, go to nature’s labo-
ratory, observe, but above all, reflect. Mr. N. writes like a
child. All the horrors which he chronicles, and tells us are
to be the results of our doctrine, have been recognized from
the period when human beings congregated and formed com-
munities. Crime does not diminish, it increases, and we tell
him that his remedy has been tried and found wanting. But
it is said, “if your view is once recognized, the only check on
man is removed, and society will become a perfect wreck—a
scene of ruin—a wilderness.” Our opinions are merely the em-
bodiment of factsin words, a real description of an actual picture.
Men act so, because they are formed so. They do this because
of their formation, because of their education, because of the
peculiar circumstances surrounding them. The check which
you apply is a fancied check, for the result proves it to be so.
You appeal to man’s weak fears, instead of his reason, and
you reap your reward—a hypocrite: for, on the first occur-
rence of temptation, he breaks forth, -and you then punish
him, vainly expecting to prevent him from repeating his
offence. You place before him the phantoms of abstraction ;
you decline any explanation; you tell him such conceptions
are above reason, and the natural result ensues; for, since
reason is not satisfied, passion assumes the dominion; crime
is the result, and you then destroy the offender to prevent
further trouble. Vengeance can destroy the being, but will
never reform him; it can destroy the vitality of cerebral
matter, but it will never prevent certain actions resulting
from certain combinations. You give mere words, we give
him facts. You say, do this “in the fear of God, and for the
hope of everlasting happiness ;” we enter not into this ques-
tion, we give him high motives, and say, do this, because it
is right, because it is just, because it is your duty.

We ask for the proof of an immoral sentence in this
journal—for the proof that our doctrine has been injurious.
We want not abuse, but fair argument. We say to indivi-
duals holding Mr. N.’s opinions, if our principles interfere
with your theories and preconceived notions, inquire into


22 The term Organs of the Brain,


the foundation of your own doctrines before you denounce
us. Look at the superstructure you have raised, with all
its attendant pomp, and then look abroad on the world at the
results of your labours. Cast a glance around and about ;
behold the misery, the destitution, the crime ; shudder at the
pestilence, we had almost said, of your own creating ; for you
have neglected the truths which science has freely developed
to you; and you have sneered at and disregarded the means
proposed by the men who are anxious to bring about a re-
formation. And is the denunciation of the physiologist the
best way to assist physiological research ? Ifthe real labourers
are to be called “men of lively imagination,” and by no
means “of sober judgment,” men, “liable to be captivated
by the charms of novelty, and therefore more easily led astray
by some brilliant and unreal phantom,” by the man who has
never laboured at all, by the book-worm who appropriates to
himself the property of others, by the theorist who arrogates
to himself the right and power to criticize and condemn the
collectors of facts, why, then we say, if this be allowed,
Reason and Justice have resigned their seats, and the dealers
in “counterfeit coin” are the men to whom the world must
from henceforth listen.
L. E. G. E.


I1.—The term Organs of the Brain, used before Gall.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—The uninformed opponents of Gall’s discoveries,—
and all his opponents are uninformed, grossly uninformed, of
a mighty mass of the most remarkable of nature’s facts,—have
frequently laughed at him for applying the word organs to
portions of the brain which observation proves to possess
distinct properties, and thus to perform distinct functions,
but which they maintain are not distinguishable from one
another. In the use of the term, Gall made no innovation.
Indeed, like all really great men, he disliked the fabrication of
new terms, unless all those established were inapplicable : and,
while Dr. Spurzheim coined them by wholesale, Gall coined
not a single word, though he might have done so with advan-
tage in one or two instances rather than have employed old
ones—dme for example,—which convey a false meaning to the
uninitiated unthinking world, such as he never intended for
the philosopher and initiated, thereby perpetuating error,
because the world do not perceiye that he wrote figuratively,


used before Gall. 23


poetically, in order to save himself from the persecution of
the bigots of his age.

In Burton’s extraordinary compilation, The Anatomy of Me-
lancholy, first published in 1621, we have the following passages:
—‘ Inner senses are three in number, so called because they
lie within the brain pan, as common sense, phantasie and
memory.” Of “common sense,” “the fore part of the brain
is his organ or seat ;” of “ phantasie or imagination, which
some call zstimative or cogitative,” “his organ is the middle
cell of the brain ;” and of memory, “ his seat and organ, the
back part of the brain.”’*

But in the very city of Vienna, in which Gall first promul-
gated his discoveries in 1796 and applied the word organ to
separate portions of the brain, exactly twelve years before
him, in 1784, a Professor of the University, Dr. Prochaska,
in a work entitled Commentatio de Functionibus Systematis
Nervosi,+ had so employed the word.

“ Daily observation shows that the faculty of thinking is
subject to various changes, and closely corresponds with the
constitution of the brain. Before birth the child neither sees,
hears, tastes, nor smells, and scarcely touches the fluid which
surrounds it; and, being destitute of ideas, it neither judges,
nor imagines, nor remembers. After birth it begins to per-
ceive objects by its organs of the external senses, but cannot
judge correctly of its ideas, and immediately forgets its per-
ceptions, because its semifluid brain is yet unfit for retaining
them, so that we remember nothing of this period,” &c.

“Every person’s consciousness, and indeed a certain feel-
ing in every person, satisfies him that thought takes place in
the brain. But since the brain consists of many parts, vari-
ously shaped, it is probable that nature, who does nothing
in vain, has intended those parts for various uses, so that
different parts of tHoucut seem to require, for their propuc-
TION, different parts of the Brain,” &c., &c. Hitherto it has
been impossible to determine what parts of the brain serve
particularly for this or that faculty, &c. It is therefore pro-
bable that every faculty has its distinct orGan in the brain, so
that there is one orcaAn for perceptions, another for judgment,
another for will, and another for imagination and memory ;
which act wonderfully together, and excite one another to
action. I should think that the orean of imagination must
be very distinct from the orcans of perceptions,” &c., &c.t


* Part i., sec. 1, Mem, 2, Subs. 7.

+ Cap. 5, sec. 2 and 3, 1784. Opera Minora, pars. ii., 1800.

t Si observationes quotidianas consulamus, videmus facultatem cogitandi
Variis vicissitudinibus esse obnoxiam et apprime respondere cerebri constitu-


24 Ophthalmia cured with Mesmerism,


Here was not only the use of the obnoxious term—organ,
but the bold assertion that the powers called mind depend
on the brain, and vary with its consistency at different
periods of life and its composition and condition at all times:
nay, that the different faculties reside in different parts of the
brain, though it was reserved for the genius of Gall to dis-
cover their localities. If Gall deserved his persecution and
banishment from the Austrian dominions, so did Prochaska
before him. But Prochaska delivered the truth in a dead
language to learned men: Gall delivered it to his fellow-men
in a living language to benefit all his race,—and verily he
had his reward. T am, &c.

Joun ELLiorson.


III.—Ophthalmia cured with Mesmerism.


Lymington, Jan. 16, 1845.
My dear Sir,—I have much pleasure in sending you, for
publication in The Zoist, the following statement of facts con-
nected with a case of Ophthalmia, successfully treated by
mesmerism, and I remain, dear Sir,
Your’s most faithfully,
To John Elliotson, Esq., M.D. AvotrHeE Kise.


Miss Martin is the daughter of a highly respectable trades-
man in Plymouth, in whose house I lodged. The family be-
coming aware of the interest I took in mesmerism, wished to
ascertain if it had been applied in cases of inflammation of
the eyes, and they informed me that a member of their family
had suffered much from that complaint for several years ; that


tioni. Fztus in utero matris delitescens non videt, nec audit, nec gustat,
neque olfacit, vix quoque aquas circumjectas sibi tangit; ideis itaque desti-
tutus non judicat, nec imaginatur, neque reminiscitur. In lucem editus
fetus incipit quidem percipere objecta per organa sensuum externorum, sed
ideas recte adhuc dijudicare nequit, et perceptarum statim obliviscitur,
cum iisdem retinendis semifluidum adhuc cerebrum ineptum esse vide-
atur, et propterea ex illo tempore nullius rei recordamur, etc., etc.

Unumquemgue propria conscientia et sensus quidam proprius convincit
cogitationem fieri in cerebro. Cum autem cerebrum utrumque multis et
diversimodis configuratis partibus componitur vero simile est, naturam, quz
nihil frustra molitur, illas partes diversis usibus destinasse, ita ut diverse
cogitationis partes diversa cerebri cerebellique corpora ad sui productionem
requirere videantur, etc., etc. Hucusque determinari nequit quenam cere-
bri et cerebelli partes his vel illis intellectas partibus imprimis inserviant,
etc., etc.

Haud itaque improbabile est dari singulis intellectis partibus sua in
cerebro organa, ut sit aliud perceptionum,'aliud judicii, voluntatis forte etiam
et imaginationis, atque reminiscenti#, que mire invicem conspirant, et sese
mutuo ad actionem incitant. Organum imaginationis tamen inter cawtera ab
organo perceptionum maxime remotum esse crediderim.


by Mr. Kiste. 25


for some weeks they had been worse than usual, and that she
was also subject to frequent attacks of giddiness, palpitation
of the heart, and fainting, particularly after any unusual ex-
ertion or excitement.

I saw Miss M. for the first time on the 30th January, 1844.
She seemed to be in ill health, looked pale and haggard, her
eyelids were ulcerated, and the eyeballs looked red and in-
flamed. Her sister being called in, I desired her to take a
seat in my studio.

Having mentally concentrated all my nervous force, and
thrown it, as it were, into the patient’s system, I produced
the desired effect in about fifteen minutes. She became
somnambule, and in that state manifested the usual mesmeric
phenomena, such as insensibility to pain, catalepsy, attraction,
and community of taste and sensation; the activity of the
phrenological organs was also developed to as high a degree
of perfection as I have ever witnessed by simply pointing to
them ; and after a few sittings the higher and more rare con-
ditions, viz., prevision in regard to her own case and its ne-
cessary treatment, and subsequently clairvoyance, spontane-
ously exhibited themselves.

I shall relate a few facts which are worthy the considera-
tion of the philosopher, strictly as they occurred ; but my first
object is to give a record of mesmerism in respect to its cura-
tive powers, believing that this will be found the surest means
of seeing it placed in its legitimate position amongst men,
and of having it respected as a merciful gift of God.

It was gratifying to witness the patient’s improvement of
health, and her general appearance: after the first day she
was free from pain in the eyes, which were cool, the inflamma-
tion having subsided ; the second day the sores became dry,
and after the fourth and fifth sittings, the scales fell from the
organs like the chaff from the wheat-ear chased by the wind,
—and nothing was visible but a few remaining eyelashes.

After having demesmerised the patient the first time, I
spoke to her sister, and strictly forbad her to mention the
mesmeric treatment to any of her friends, or to speak to the
patient on the subject of mesmerism, and of what had passed
during her trance ; in order to prevent false impressions being
made on the mind of the patient in the waking state ; a course
which ought always to be pursued with somnambulists. These
orders were strictly attended to, and although the patient had
on various occasions (as she afterwards confessed to me) in-
advertently given her reasons to suppose that other persons
had seen her besides her sister, she felt no desire or curiosity
to inquire: and this peculiarity generally exists in somnam-


26 Ophthalmia cured with Mesmerism,


bulists who are not mismanaged,—they feel no more interest
in knowing what occurred the moment before they awoke
than we do while considering the J we are, and the J we were,
after we have entered into this world.

I then cursorily spoke to both the sisters on the subject of
mesmerism, with a view to ascertain the extent of knowledge
they possessed, and was glad to find they merely knew it by
its name.

At the request of, and by directions given me by, the patient
while in the trance, I mesmerised her every day for a week,
and after that once a week for seven weeks following. After
a few sittings the influence became so strong that she was
almost in a constant state of torpor; she could not attend to
anything, and her intellect became inactive; her relatives
although they saw the rapid improvement of her general
health and appearance, became exceedingly alarmed when
observing that her memory for the most common affairs of
every-day life appeared to be impaired, but I removed their
fears by explaining that this effect had been produced in
many of my cases. When she was in the trance her intellect
was as bright as usual, and she declared that this torpor would
gradually disappear after the first week had passed.

A mesmerist should reflect on the responsibility which he
takes upon himself before he undertakes to wield an agent so
powerful. Twice I was prevented by circumstances from
fulfilling my contract ; on one occasion, before awakening the
patient, I requested her to appoint a different day to the
usual one, as I should have to leave Plymouth for a week.
She instantly said, “ You are going on a visit to Mr. —,”
looked distressed, but appointed a few days later. After she
had been awake for some time, I informed her that the next
day I should leave. ‘“ You are going to Mr. —’s,” she said,
a gentleman she had never seen, but who had been present at
one of the sittings. “How do you know this?” I aked; she
looked bewildered and could not tell ; I broke off the conver-
sation, and this was the first and only time she has ever re-
membered any circumstances, proving how deep an impres-
sion had been made on her mind. Before I left I told her
that very likely I should not be able to come back at the
usual time of her sittings, but it would make no material
difference, to which she perfectly agreed. That day came,
and her sufferings were great during the time she was usually
mesmerised ; moreover, I was prevented from returning to
Plymouth the day of my appointment, and on my arrival the
day after, I found, what I feared would be the case, that she
had suffered agonies.


by Mr. Kiste. 27


On another occasion, when I was compelled to be absent,
she requested me to mesmerise a handkerchief and leave it
with her, which I did; I then folded it together in paper and
gave it her, with the recommendation not to open the parcel
except she should feel very uncomfortable. She laughed at
the idea, but on my return I found it had proved of most
essential service to her.

She always appeared most tranquil and happy when my
entire attention was fixed on her; and I believe this the great
secret of performing rapid cures, at least I have found it so;
wherever I have concentrated my whole nervous force on a
case, not merely when the patient was in the state, but con-
tinually, I have succeeded to an extraordinary degree, and
when the mind was less ardently directed to the patient, the
progress has been comparatively slow.

At some of the last sittings my closest attention was ex-
acted ; indeed to such an extent that on one occasion, when
the patient had prescribed that she should remain asleep four
hours, I was compelled to concentrate all my energies on her
during the whole time, and the very instant my thoughts
wandered away she became distressed, and the whole body
began to shake and tremble, nor would she converse during
the time. Her nervous system is delicately wrought, and she
was one of those somnambulists, who, if treated by a weak,
ignorant, or injudicious mesmerist, might be exposed to very
serious consequences; and it is much to be lamented that so
much ignorance should exist on this subject, which is but too
often treated as a mere matter of idle amusement.

I did not at first suffer any one to see her during the
trance, with the exception of her sister, who was always pre-
sent, knowing how detrimental it would be to the object I
had in view ; but after a time I could not withstand the temp-
tation of admitting a few, where I thought it might benefit
the cause. However I had afterwards so many applications,
that I came back to my previous determination not to admit
any visitors, because she was evidently made uncomfortable and
did not derive so much benefit. A mesmerist should, above
all, never gratify empty curiosity, nor his own ill-directed love
of approbation or self-esteem. During the period of her mes-
meric slumbers there came upwards of thirty different visitors ;
she always recognized the same persons again at different
sittings, even before they came into the room or entered the
house, and frequently without my knowing that they were
coming.

Although she desired me to awake her at a certain time,
and pointed out to me the necessity of doing so, she evidently,


28 Ophthalmia cured with Mesmerism,


particularly at the first sittings, tried to resist my endeavours
to arouse her, by stamping with her feet and trying to strike
me. She on one occasion said to me, “I should like to re-
main many hours,—no, no,—for ever !—but you must awake
me in an hour.

When requested to describe her feelings during the time
of going from the waking into the sleep-waking state, she
said, “Soon after you gaze at me, a new, warm, light, and
soothing atmosphere gathers around me, so far as you can
extend your arms, until it quite encircles me, and isolates me
from the outer world—you are my world.” It frequently
made her uneasy when disturbed by questions; on one occa-
sion I said to her, you look so pleased and happy what are
you thinking of? “TI am thinking I do not wish to speak !
don’t you know that the sweetest and most happy thoughts
are enjoyed in silence?” When questioning her about the
possibility of seeing without using the eyes—“‘I do not see,
but J know, I feel. Sometimes it is all brightness and light,
and instantly it is all darkness, at other times it is in a mist
and indistinct.” When asking her why she did not speak
while Mr. , with whom she was not in “ rapport,” asked
her questions, and whether she knew he was speaking to her,
“Yes, I felt it, but it passed from my mind like the reflection
from a glass, it leaves no trace, it excites no interest.”* If I
desired her to perform a certain act, for instance, if I said,
to-morrow, at five minutes past nine, ask for a glass of water,
put it to your mouth but do not drink it, she would at that
very moment obey a blind impulse, provided she resolved to
do so, and considered the request not unreasonable at the
time when in the trance. In fact, she had made up her mind,
as it is vulgarly called.

She contemplated with interest her two existences, when
the mind was directed towards the subject. She knew every-
thing that happened to her in the waking state, as well as
most minutely what had occurred during her former mesmeric
sittings: “ but the moment you wake me, all this is a blank ;
it is most droll.”

As stated before, she was ignorant of mesmeric pheno-


* On one occasion I caused some one to blow a horn into one ear of a som-
nambulist, and another individual blew the shrillest whistle into the other;
the patient’s countenance remained as calm and unmoved as usual, but the
moment a piano was gently played on the other side of the room, there was
in her face an eagerness of expression, she began to beat time, and evidently
enjoyed the music. Many of the mesmeric wonders, as they are commonly
called, are phenomena which, in slighter shades, occur daily in social inter-
course, and are considered sufficiently explained by Terms, such as, absence
of mind, association of ideas, imagination, attention, habit, §c., &c.


by Mr. Kiste. 29


mena in her waking state; but when in the trance she spoke
on the subject like an experienced mesmerist, often directed
me how to proceed, and in several instances pointed out to
me a course which after consideration I blamed myself for
not having followed without her suggestion.

I very soon discovered that she could perceive objects
without using the usual organs. When her eyes were open,
which was often the case, the pupils retreated upwards, and
were not discernible ; otherwise they were tightly closed. I
also observed that sometimes my thoughts were read by the
patient ; on the other hand, I soon found that I also could
read the patient’s thoughts, and not even the most superficial
observer could have misinterpreted the various feelings and
sentiments as they followed each other in rapid succession like
flashes of lightning ; by looking at that index of the mind—
the face. There was a general activity in the different minute
muscles, which performed a quivering action, to be compared
only to the motion of the magnetic needle. This action was
also performed with her body before she entered into the
trance; the head and spine moved backwards and forwards,
right and left, until she entered into the state, when the body
reposed,

Whenever she read my thoughts, there appeared in her
face an expression of curiosity, and after the slightest possi-
ble motion of the head and body, there was the attitude of
listening.

On one occasion I looked mentally at a skull that was in
the room, and merely said, “ How do you like it?” There
came first an expression of aversion, which passed off quickly,
when she said, “ Why should I dislike it? we are so too.”
“What are you thinking about?” “That,” pointing to-
wards the skull. At other times she perceived at a distance,
knew who was coming or what persons were in other parts of
the house. I have never known her to make guesses, and
she always admitted her inability if she could not answer my
questions, declaring it was either dark or indistinct. On se-
veral occasions I have known her defeat me, but in such
cases I could not but conscientiously feel I had deserved it.

One day I was answering a question put to me by some
one behind me. I looked round and perceived a snuff-box.
I made a sign and it was put into my hand; and when ask-
ing, “ Would you like some?” she answered, “ No, thank
you ; I do not want any water.” I instantly observed an arch
expression of secretiveness in her countenance; but without
making any remark I gave it back to the owner, who of
course, as well as all those who were present, would have


30 Ophthalmia cured with Mesmerism,


considered it a failure. But after a considerable time had
passed, I merely said, “ You knew very well what it was.”
“Tt was a snuff-box, was it not?” was her reply, and she
heartily enjoyed the joke.

On another occasion, I took up a card from the table and
held it before her, asking, “ What name is it?” She appa-
rently took no notice, but moved her head towards the gen-
tleman who had sent it before he entered the room. When
he had left, I said, “ Why did you not tell me when he was
here?” And the reply was, “ Because I would not satisfy
him, that’s all.”

I must now relate a fact which will be deemed more strik-
ing than any yet told, from the combination of circumstances
under which it occurred. One day, before I went home at
my appointed hour to mesmerise the patient, I met Dr. T—,
who expressed a wish to see her once more. Having induced
the trance, I commenced with saying, “ Who is coming here
to-day?” After five or six minutes of extreme concentration,
with an expression of eagerness of mind in her countenance,
she said softly, as if speaking with herself, “They trouble
her; he will not let her go; now she is leaving the house,—
she is coming.” ‘“ Who is coming?” I asked. ‘“ Miss R—,
I feel her, I know she is in the street—coming here.” I
never had heard the name of Miss R., and certainly had ex-
pected her to say Dr. T. When turning round, I saw her
sister look much surprized. ‘“ Who is Miss R.?” I asked the
patient. “My friend; she has just returned from Wales.”
“ How long has she been absent?” “Five months.” ‘“ De-
scribe the house she was in just now.” “I cannot—it is not
clear—it is indistinct.” ‘The street where it stands?” “I
cannot.” I wrote on a slip of paper to her sister, to tell the
servant to shew Miss R. in here the moment she should enter
the house. There was a knock at the door, and she knit her
brow ; it was a gentleman who came to see me: and afterwards
the Doctor came in. I did not again recur to Miss R.; in
fact I forgot it, until I was reminded of it by the patient’s
leaning over her chair with her whole body bent in the direc-
tion towards the door, with a smile on her face and her eyes
tightly closed. I then heard footsteps on the staircase; the
door was opened and a lady entered, who, having passed
through the shop, had given no intimation of her coming.
She looked bewildered—no one spoke, until at last I said to
the patient, “‘ Why do you not speak to her, is it Miss R. ?”
She answered, evidently enjoying the confusion of her visitor,
“ She does not speak to me—it is with her to speak.” I re-
quested Miss R. to come over and speak to her friend, which


by Mr. Kiste. 31


she did, but rather timidly at first; and they embraced each
other, and related the best news. The details as to her being
detained at the house, &c., proved to be quite correct. I de-
sired Miss R. not to mention the fact to any one, and parti-
cularly not to the patient. Some time after she had been
awoke, her sister said that Miss R. had been below, but had
left again, not being able to wait; at which information she
seemed surprized and disappointed at not having seen her. I
then ascertained the fact, that Miss R. had been expected to
return to Plymouth in a week or fortnight.

The patient’s organization is a very superior one; the
temperament active. Her general appearance after she had
entered into the trance was strikingly beautiful; but nothing
could be more exquisite than the expression of every feeling and
sentiment, not merely in the face, but in the general attitude
—the natural language which is so little studied and under-
stood,—when excited by my pointing to or touching the va-
rious portions of the head, particularly in the gradual changes
from one feeling to another, for instance, from pride to hu-
mility. Col. B., who was a determined sceptic before he
came and saw, declared he had never seen anything so won-
derful; the changes from one passion to another reminded
him of the impression which the dissolving views had made
on his mind. When under the excitement of Veneration, the
manifestations were truly sublime ; the finest heads of Guido
compared with these are daubs, and the painter himself would
have been enraptured could he have witnessed such a living
image of a Madonna. “It is a holy state,” said Colonel
Hamilton Smith, who is well known for his vast scientific ac-
quirements, and who was a sceptic until that day, when he
accidentally came to call on me, and was shewn into the pre-
sence of the somnambulist.

I was however soon compelled to desist from these experi-
ments, although they were gratifying and moreover instruc-
tive; for in the first place it was observed, that the patient
became very excitable and uneven in her disposition when in
the waking state. I did not at first assign a cause when I
was told of this, but soon she began to complain of peculiar
sensations in her head ; she felt “as if something was moving
from one place to another,” and one morning she told me
that she had felt during the night for a long time “as if a
worm was crawling on the top of the head.” Upon my re-
questing her to point out the place, she put her finger on the
organ of Veneration, which the day before had been fre-
quently excited, on account of the beautiful effect that was
produced. When in the trance again, I drew her attention


32 Ophthalmia cured with Mesmerism,


to the subject, when she declared that those sensations pro-
ceeded from my having made her dream too often, and that
it would hurt her if I were to persist in it.

Having been desirous to ascertain whether I could observe
facts which would confirm the opinion of those who attribute
these phenomena to volition or sympathy, or that of others
who assign the cause to the direct action of the mesmeric
influence on the cerebral organs, I had proceeded with great
caution from the beginning. The patient knew my movements
only when her attention was directed to them; I knew this
by the expression of her face. After having demesmerised an
organ, I asked her could she perceive where my hand had
been. “No.” After a little while, “ Yes, you did so”—mov-
ing her arm over her head, and declared that what she had
been thinking of proceeded from my having done so—she
felt it had. “Explain this to me.” “I cannot ;” but that
she should be able to tell more if she was often mesmerised,
and should then be able to point out diseases in others if she
felt interested in them, and that she was sometimes aware of
the blood trickling within her, but that it was indistinct.
On one occasion, after the excitement of Veneration and
Ideality, she exclaimed in a most plaintive voice, “ You
make me dream such beautiful dreams, and then you disturb
me in them.” “What are you dreaming now?” pointing to
Benevolence. After a little while—‘* Oh! I feel so kind;
so—” The excitement becoming stronger, her mind was no
longer directed towards me: after demesmerisation, “ What
was it?” “Qh! those poor people.” Self-esteem—*“ But
pray do not leave me again.” “I am very high ;” smilingly,
“high and mighty. Ah!—I!—I!—but you left me again.”
“T could not help it, I was forced to do so; I felt very proud,
very indignant.” Veneration—“I felt everything that is
good and beautiful.”

There are still many difficulties to encounter—difficulties
which must force themselves on the minds even of those who
have formed a decided opinion as to the real cause of phreno-
mesmeric phenomena. Certain it is, they are very interest-
ing, whatever may be the true explanation, and it requires
the calm investigation of men whose feelings act harmo-
niously, so that the judgment may not become defective.

It was pointed out to me by some one who felt firmly
convinced that mesmerism did not prove the truth of phreno-
logy, as an objection, that the patient was a clairvoyant. The
following circumstance, which once came under my observa-
tion, may perhaps prove applicable to the whole, and at any
rate may serve as a lesson. On one occasion, a decided scep-


by Mr. Kiste. 33


tic, who considered mesmerism a delusion throughout, when
observing some experiments in community of taste, which
could not be explained away on the supposition of collusion,
in his eagerness exclaimed, “I do not see anything in
that, if she can see through the wall!” And yet this gentle-
man was possessed of good abilities, which were manifested
when his feelings were not unduly excited.

The following is the patient’s own statement of her case,
which was written soon after mesmerism was discontinued.
In respect to her description of the mental journey to the
Isle of Wight, &c., it would perhaps be well to state that
it is a mere vague recollection of the facts as they occurred
when she was in the trance. I have been lately informed
that Miss M. has been in better health ever since, and that
her eyes are quite well.


Sir,—In grateful compliance with your request, I now lay
before you a brief account of my own experience whilst under
mesmeric treatment for inflammation and weakness of sight ;
and of its beneficial results to my eyes, as well as to my -
general health.

For some years past my eyes had been weak and subject
to inflammation, especially in the lids; and doubtless you
remember that when first you kindly undertook to mesmerise
me (January 30th), they were very sore, and the white of
the eye quite red with imflammation. They had been in this
state for several weeks, so that I was obliged to shade them
from the light, and it was quite distressing for me to look
steadfastly, even for a moment, at any object, or to meet
the eyes of any person. For this reason I was much em-
barrassed during the first few minutes by your earnest con-
centrated gaze, and my eyes wandered for relief from one
object to another. Very soon, however, I felt irresistibly
impelled to fix them on your own, and was much surprised
at finding them strong enough to obey this impulse, which
grew more powerful at each succeeding trial, and my eyes
appeared to gather strength by obeying it. I think the passes
had been continued for nearly a quarter of an hour when I
was first thrown into the magnetic sleep, from which I was,
most unwillingly (on my part), awakened as soon as you
judged it necessary. I felt considerably refreshed, and m
eyes had lost much of the hot aching pain which they had
latterly experienced: but during the remainder of the day I
was very excitable, and felt great disinclination to see or con-
verse with anybody. ‘This state of feeling after magnetic
sleep, however, decreased, as the improvement in my eyes

VOL. III. D


34 Ophthalmia cured with Mesmerism,


and general health progressed, until, when thoroughly awak-
ened, I felt nothing of mesmeric influence save an inclination
to remain perfectly quiet and still. After being, by my own
direction, mesmerised for seven days in succession, my eyes,
though not yet strong enough to admit of much reading or
writing, were free from inflammation: and here I should not
omit to mention with thankfulness, that though for some
time I had been subject to violent giddiness, attended with
palpitation of the heart and frequent fainting, which made
me very weak and nervous, during the seven days I had no
return of either; though these attacks had become so frequent,
that even the day before I was first mesmerised I was three
times near falling with giddiness in my head. I have now
great hopes that these unwelcome visitants will soon leave
me altogether. ;

At the end of the term first specified, I desired, with a view
to the perfect restoration of my eyes, to be mesmerised once
a week during seven successive weeks. This also you kindly
consented to; and I am now happy to state that they are
perfectly recovered ; my health and spirits too are so much
improved that I cannot sufficiently express my gratitude.

From the uneasiness I evinced when there appeared to be
any uncertainty of your being here to mesmerise me at the
appointed time, it was feared by some of my friends that I
should feel the want of my accustomed magnetic sleep even
when it was no longer necessary for my eyes. The result,
however, has proved their fears to be utterly groundless ; for
I have not felt the slightest inconvenience, nor even the
least desire to be again thrown into the mesmeric state,
though it is now more than a fortnight since I was last mes-
merised ; and I consider that the anxiety and eagerness I
experienced at those times was the effect of an intuitive
sense of the necessity of your regular attention at the very hour
specified.

Since my recovery I have been permitted to read the
notes taken by my sister during my magnetic sleep; and
whilst reading, I recognise, though somewhat indistinctly,
many of the facts; even as circumstances sometimes recall
the recollection of a dream. For instance, I directly remem-
bered the forcible withdrawal of your hand from mine whilst
walking, and my subsequent anger and distress. It must
indeed have had a most startling effect on me at the time;
for I even shuddered involuntarily as it flashed across my
memory. I have also a dreamy recollection of there being
a crowd of persons in the room, and around me at the time ;
and that their presence and particularly their voices annoyed


by Mr. Kiste. 35


and distressed me; breaking the calm and happy rest which
I was enjoying by the mysterious power of magnetism.

I well remember the sweet tranquil feeling which always
possessed my mind as I passed into the state of perfect and
delicious repose, which is felt the moment that sleep com-
mences. There seemed to be as far as you could extend your
arms, a warm, light, soothing atmosphere, encircling and
isolating me in idea as completely from the outer world as if
I were ever so distantly removed from it; while bright and
quickly passing dreams were constantly flittirig through my
mind; induced probably by the phreno-magnetic experi-
ments which I understand were made. Yet, though the
magnetic sleep is productive of such happy effects, the return
to realities is, at least with me, in an equal degree dull and
depressing ; so that I should never wish to be thrown into it,
unless for the alleviation of some complaint.

When awakened from my last trance, I recollected more
perfectly than had ever been the case before what I supposed
to be a dream, but which may probably be proved to be another
instance of clairvoyance. I remember it, even yet, as if it
were a picture which I had looked on long and earnestly.
You had been speaking of an intended visit to the Isle of
Wight; a spot I have never visited. While I listened to,
and answered, you, there suddenly rose before me a landscape
of most picturesque beauty ; which I gazed on at leisure and
with intense delight. It is growing indistinct in my memory,
and I cannot satisfactorily describe it, but my impression
was that I was looking at some part of that Island. It was
an extensive piece of meadow-land facing the sea; bounded
on the right hand by what might formerly have been one
immense mass of rock ; (immense from its length and thick-
ness, not from its height, which did not exceed twenty feet),
but now cleft into several blocks, almost covered with ver-
dure ; and from these clefts there sprung, as if spontaneously,
bright flowered shrubs and rich evergreens, glittering and
dancing in the sun beneath the heavy drops which fell upon
them ever and anon, from jets of water which gushed brightly
from several fissures in the rocks. On the left I know it was
partly bounded by fine trees; and I think I saw houses at a
little distance, but I do not remember that side so distinctly.
The rich pasturage, terminating in a close hedge of wild
shrubs, extended to the extreme brink of a huge perpendi-
cular cliff, which formed the front of a miniature bay with a
white-pebbled beach on which the clear waves broke with a
low murmuring sound, most pleasant to the ear, and which
seems still ringing on mine. It appeared to me as if I were
d2


)
)


— ea


36 Severe Nervous Disease cured with Mesmerism,


looking on it from a vessel just in front of the little bay, and
it faded from my sight as if the vessel was leaving it.

I have been rather prolix in describing this dream ; in the
hope that if you do visit the Island and the scene which has
made such an impression on my mind, you will recognise it
from the description.

I did not contemplate writing at such a length when I
began this paper; and doubtless you will find it rather tedi-
ous; but you will be pleased to know, as I am grateful to
inform you, that I have written it to-day, and nearly all at
one sitting ; a task I little expected to perform, without great
inconvenience to my eyes, some two months since.

Holding in grateful remembrance your kind and perse-
vering attention to my case,

T am, Sir,
Yours very respectfully,
AvotrpHe Kistez, Esq.* M. T. Martin.


IV. Severe Nervous Disease cured with Mesmerism.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—I beg to forward to you the following account of a remarkable cure
effected through mesmerism by my friend, Mr. Charles Childs, who at my
request has written it for me and allowed me to present it to you,

I will send you as remarkable a cure of a similar case effected by mes-
merism in a few days, after I had tried all the other means that seemed pro-
per in vain for upwards of a year.

I remain, &c. &c.
Joun Extiorson

In the early part of August last I was requested to try
the effect of mesmeric treatment on a lady, whose case was
described to me by her mother as most deplorable, and one
in which every other mode of treatment had been tried and
found unavailing.

She was the daughter of a medical gentleman, named
Larke, residing and practising near Norwich. I ascertained
that he utterly disbelieved in mesmerism as a reality ; that
the lady and her family knew nothing more than the common
reports on the subject, and had no particular expectation of
benefit from its employment ; but that they proposed to try
the experiment as they would almost any other harmless
quackery where the suffering was so intense and the resources
of the medical art afforded no relief.

I learned from the young lady herself, that for above two
years she had been entirely out of health, suffering acute and


* With this case compare Mr. Atkinson’s cure of Ophthalmia, No. VI,
p. 239.—Zoist.


by Mr. Charles Childs. 37


capricious pains in the head, teeth and face, after the slight-
est exposure to cold, and pains at the pit of the stomach after
every meal: that about six months previously she had had an
attack of brain fever: that from defective capillary circulation
she was always shivering with cold, and her countenance had
assumed a perfectly exsanguineous aspect : that she suffered so
much depression of spirits as rendered life a burden : and that
for the last fourteen weeks she had been attacked every night
by a pain extending over the right side of the head down to
the shoulder, lasting for about five hours, and so acute as
nearly to deprive her of reason.

Whatever the best medical skill could suggest had been
perseveringly adopted. Relief had been sought not merely
from change of air, diet, occupation, and topical applications,
but from alteratives: yet up to the day on which I saw her,
the disease had steadily persisted, or even increased in
violence.

The whole of Miss Larke’s knowledge on the subject
amounted to this only,—that people were reported to be sent
to sleep, and in some unaccountable way to be cured, by
mesmerism. In order therefore to place her mind in a neu-
tral state, I withheld all information, assuring her I could
form no opinion whether she would derive any benefit, and if
she did, it was by no means a necessary condition that she
should sleep. She was thus, as she has since assured me,
completely ignorant what would be the mode of treatment,
or what result might be expected, and the imagination there-
fore could have no share in producing the result.

The mesmeric phenomena of the case have been very strik-
ing. At the first trial, and in a quarter of a minute, Miss
Larke sank back insensible: at the second, the true mesmeric
sleep, or sleep-waking, was produced. On the third day, she
prescribed for herself mesmerised water (indicating the exact
quantity, and mode and time of charging it): and regularly
afterwards described the means which I must successively
adopt, the phenomena which would be elicited, the sequence
in which they would arise, and their effect on her condition ;
not one of which she had ever seen or heard of in her life,
but in precise analogy with what I have practised and ob-
served with other highly susceptible patients.

I need not detail the various manifestations, which were
more numerous and more distinctly marked, than in any other
case within my own experience—but there is one fact, of
some value, which I may mention. I found the lady knew
very little of phrenology beyond the term, the names of but
two or three organs, and the position of only one. I care-


38 Severe Nervous Disease cured with Mesmerism.
fully avoided mentioning their names, or allowing others to do
so, in her presence, either awake or asleep, and once, when I
intended to touch the seat of combativeness, having never
before tried that region of the head, my attention being at
the moment called off by a friend who stood by, I found the
lady was violently tearing her dress, and that my fingers had
undesignedly been placed on the seat of destructiveness.
Another set of facts was exceedingly interesting, viz., the
effect on the physical system produced by a command given
immediately before waking. If, for example, I directed her to
be insensible to pain, it was impossible, until I altered the
condition, to produce any sensation. I have tried every mode
which an honest desire to elicit truth could suggest, and I
have not the slightest doubt that any surgical operation
might be performed, the patient being fully awake and per-
fectly conscious, but feeling no pain. And, taking the con-
verse, if I directed her to experience pain when any given
object in the room was touched, although neither she nor the
operator saw the object, nor could possibly know it was
touched, immediately, and by whatever person, this was done,
she shuddered and complained of annoyance.

The physical effect was most decided, and almost instan-
taneous. After the first sleep, the lady experienced a sense
of warmth which she had not felt for months,—the first night,
the agonizing pain, which had never once intermitted for
fourteen weeks, wholly ceased, or was superseded by only a
slight uneasiness, continuing but five minutes instead of five
hours. After two days this disappeared—and to the present
time no sign of it has ever returned. The general improve-
ment of her health is manifested by every indication of bodily
and mental vigour—at the end of six weeks the dull heavy
languor of long disease had given place to the natural buoy-
ancy of youth,—a colourless, lack-lustre complexion was re-
placed by the genuine hue of health,—the hair, which had
nearly all fallen off, not only grew rapidly in length, but
sprang up thickly over the whole head,—the appetite became
perfectly good and the digestion complete,—I .may not say
how much the lady gained in weight. The case presented a
complete transformation from disease to health, and the whole
character and appearance were so entirely changed, that, on
returning home, an acquaintance who had known her for
years spent several hours in her company, at her father’s
house, without recognizing her, but supposing she was a
visitor in the family.

I have been favoured by Mr. Larke with a communication
on his daughter’s case, which I annex, and which, although I


Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c. with Mesmerism. 39


am sure he would refuse to accept commendation at the ex-
pense of his brethren in the profession, I am constrained to
present as a rare instance of ingenuousness from such a
quarter.

Bungay, March 17, 1845. Cuas, Cuixps.


My dear Sir,—I am anxious to afford you every informa-
tion relative to the state of my daughter’s health prior to her
being mesmerised. * * * * * Her general appearance
was such as to create alarm and apprehension as to the result,
and under this impression I caused her to consult the heads
of the profession at Norwich. She was advised to take large
doses of steel, arsenical solution, to apply lotions, blisters, &c.,
&c., and to try change of air and scene, but all without effect.
Every function of the body appeared to be in a state of disor-
der. She suffered most acutely from violent nocturnal pains
of the head and face,—she was losing strength both of mind
and body,—and in every way was gradually declining. At
one time, threatening symptoms of arachnoidal inflammation
or pressure on the brain, alarmed me; and at subsequent
periods, lassitude, indigestion, and the whole train of nervous
affections.

I am now most happy to state that her recovery is com-
plete—that she enjoys perfect health and equanimity of
spirits, and is everything I could wish her to be. This bless-
ing I attribute to you, and I think I should be wanting in
every proper feeling, if I hesitated to withhold my testimony
to the case. Dear Sir, &c., &c.

Brooke, March 13, 1845. R. N. Larke.
Mr. Chas. Childs.


V. Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, Somnambulism, &c., with
Mesmerism. By Dr. Ex.iotson.


Miss , residing with her parents near University College,
had, when seven years of age, without any known cause, what
was termed brain-fever: and was bled, leeched, blistered, &c.
From that time she had constant head-ache, frequently “dread-
ful,” for eighteen years, till she was five and twenty years
old and consulted me on the 17th of December, 1842. She
never rose in the morning without it, but it lessened towards
evening. It was chiefly at the sides of the back of the head,
about midway between the summit and base, in the situation
of Gall’s organs of Friendship, and more in the left half than


40 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c. with Mesmerism,


the right. She frequently suffered also from a sense of great
weight and throbbing at the top of the head.

There had been from the same date frequent pain of the
left side; and for the last two or three years frequent palpi-
tation Her feet were very cold and her bowels very costive,
but the uterine function healthy ; and she had no thirst, fla-
tulence, or dislike of meat, though her appetite was not good.

For the last four years she had been subject to sleep-wak-
ing in the form of somnambulism. She would rise in her
sleep in the dark, no light having access to her room, dress
herself completely, lacing her stays and boots, and fastening
the back parts of her dress. Once she took out and put on
a new boa, which was locked up, and the lock had been so
spoiled that she had tried in vain to unlock it when awake.
She sometimes took out clean linen, which she must have
picked out from a quantity, and did various things which her
mother is perfectly certain she could not do with her eyes shut
when awake.

She thus often found herself dressed on the bed when she
awoke in the morning, though she had undressed and got
into bed and gone to sleep at bed time. Now and then,
though rarely, she would wake when only half dressed. Not
unfrequently she walked down stairs,—one, two, or three
pairs. Sometimes she would walk down undressed, and was
often awakened by the coldness of the painted sides of the
stairs beyond the carpet on either side, or of the floor-cloth
in the passage. She often was observed to strike herself
against the corners of places, and once she went down the
fourth pair of stairs, and struck her head so violently against
the kitchen door-posts that she was knocked down and had
a black eye but did not awake, having put on her boots and
so not felt the coldness of the stones. This sadly contradicts
the superstitious assertion of Mr. Colquhoun,* that “so long
as a somnambulist is left undisturbed in his proceedings, he
acts fearlessly and is safe’”—“ that he is protected from in-
jury by other means and guarantees of security than those by
which his conduct is regulated in his ordinary waking state.”
In sleep-waking, a musician at Bath got out of the window
and broke his leg: and this I mentioned in my Physiology,
p. 692, as well as the instance of Negretti, an Italian sleep-
waker, who once struck himself against a door, and once hurt
himself severely against a wall, and of Galen, who was once
awakened from somnambulism by striking against a stone.

On waking she never recollected anything of her somnam-


* Isis Revelata.


by Dr. Elliotson. 41


bulism. For days afterwards she was very weak. She had
walked in her sleep once two nights before I saw her, and
once earlier in the same week. The somnambulism habitually
occurred several times in a short period, and then not for
months. The day before the night of sleep-waking she al-
ways had very severe head-ache ; and seldom had very severe
head-ache in the day without somnambulism the next night.
If awakened by her friends in the sleep-waking, she suffered
greatly from pain in the head; and once fainted and was very
ill for a week after being awakened by a person shaking her.
It is in truth highly improper to use violent means to
rouse persous in sleep-waking, whether spontaneous or in-
duced by the artificial process of mesmerism.* The mere
state is free from danger, and expends itself sooner or later.
If the patient is still, the repose is harmless; and if he is
moving about, he will at length be still or awake, and care
should only be taken that he do not hurt himself. The mis-
chief of waking a person forcibly by common means in mes-
meric sleep-waking is strikingly exemplified in the case which
occurred at Bridgwater and has been sent for the present
number of The Zoist. To wake persons suddenly and roughly
from common sleep is improper—sometimes injurious, and
always annoying. If the sleep or sleep-waking is mesmeric,
and for some reason of convenience, or because the protrac-
tion of the state has been found of disservice to the individual
patient, the gentle means of demesmerising should be em-
ployed. It would be curious to ascertain whether these
means would take effect in spontaneous sleep-waking ; and,
if they do not, it is probable that in many instances a few
mesmeric passes would render the state mesmeric and en-
able them to take effect. In convulsive fits of all kinds,
epileptic, hysteric, &c., violence is improper: they almost
always end spontaneously, and the best course is simply to
loosen all things about the neck and trunk, to let the patient
lie with his head raised against the chest of a person sitting
at his head, and to put a piece of cork or Indian rubber be-


* “One evening, about twelve or eighteen months ago, at Dresden, a
young lady was observed walking upon the top of a house. The alarm was
given, and a considerable concourse assembled. Every precaution was taken
to prevent her from receiving injury in case of falling: the street was
covered with beds, mattresses, &c. Meanwhile, the young lady, apparently
unconscious of danger, came forward to the edge of the roof, smiling and bow-
ing to the multitude below, and occasionally arranging her hair and her dress.
After this scene had continued for some time, and the spectators were in the
utmost anxiety for her safety, she at length proceeded towards the window
of a room from which she had come. In their alarm, some of the family
had placed a light in it, which the somnambulist perceived, and in conse-
quence suddenly awoke, fell to the ground, and was killed on the spot.”—
Isis Revelata, vol. 1, p. 320.


42 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c. with Mesmerism,


tween the teeth to save the tongue. To hold the patient so
as to prevent the movements is mischievous, for the nervous
excitement is best allowed to discharge itself; and there is
perhaps a degree of consciousness without memory, and of in-
voluntary volition which is irritated by attempts at restraint.
In a few instances, but very few, the congestion in the head
and constriction of the throat may render bleeding in the arm
or neck advisable on the spot. So in attacks of sudden in-
sensibility or coma, to which epileptic, hysterical, and other
nervous patients are liable, and to which we shall find the
present young lady was liable, and which those unacquainted
with medicine term fainting, whereas the action of the heart
is unimpaired and the affection is in the brain, we have only
to lay the patient down, with his head not raised at all, un-
less there are signs of congestion, and allow him to remain
quiet. Indeed this state is sometimes, like fainting, a service-
able effort of nature to withdraw the patient from the know-
ledge of circumstances which were annoying or from some
injurious influence. In fainting, which is a deficient action
of the heart, so that there are all the signs of want of blood
in parts distant from it,—paleness, perhaps coldness, and
debility—and the pulse is rapid and feeble, or slow, or ir-
regular, and the head loses its power in consequence of the
want of blood,—we see persons apply all sorts of stimulants
and almost choke the patient, and keep him upright:
while all that is required in general is to lay him perfectly
flat, his head not raised at all, so that the blood may not be
opposed by its gravity in finding its way from the legs and
trunk to the heart, nor in reaching the head from the heart.
Fresh air and fanning, all persons but one or two withdraw-
ing to a distance, is all that can be required, except in ex-
treme cases, such as those of great loss of blood or other
fluids. Fainting is often serviceable, not only by withdrawing
a person from some disagreeable or distressing object of sense
or thought, but as a means of arresting disease. If fainting
is induced by opening a vein or artery, by leeches, cupping,
&c., in inflammation, far less blood need be taken away, and
the patient has a far, very far, greater chance of benefit : and
yet many practitioners bleed without any reference to this
effect, and are surprised that their bleeding has done no
good, and perhaps go on half bleeding the patient to death,
and lose him at last of his disease. But, what is still more
common, when a patient is bled to faintness or fainting, the
bystanders exert themselves to restore the patient instantly,
ignorant that his safety lies in this effect.


by Dr. Elliotson. 43


Besides the attacks of somnambulism, this young lady
talked a great deal in her sleep.

About seven years before she applied to me, she became sub-
ject to violent fits without evident cause, after a few days of un-
usual severity of her head-ache. Their character was frightful,
shrieking, attempts to pull off her cap, tear everything, and
bite every body within her reach; violent convulsions, and
insensibility, which lasted many hours after the convulsions
were over, and in which there was, from time to time, delirious
talking. She cried and sobbed in coming round, but never
laughed. These fits were generally preceded by increase of
the head-ache, and sometimes by great disturbance of the
temper; though there was no immediate warning. They
were generally preceded for a few hours by the severest head-
ache and heat of the face and head; and for a few days by
aggravation of the head-ache, and by great moroseness of
temper, which at other times was excellent : and the severity
of head-ache, with general illness, usually remained for three
or four weeks after the attack. They returned every two,
three, or more weeks, and she then usually had several for a
week or two. Besides these violent fits, she had very frequent
short attacks of coma, such as I have said are commonly called
faintings, and they were so called by her family. In warm
weather, for whole months, she seldom rose in the morning
without falling down senseless before she was dressed, and
sometimes this would happen almost every half hour during
a very warm day. When her head-ache was extremely severe,
she would sometimes discern nothing for a quarter of an hour,
but seem in perfect darkness, though able to speak and move;
and, if she stood up, her head would swim.

Dr. Roots had attended her during the original illness, but
did not relieve the subsequent head-ache. For six months,
nine years before I saw her, she had been under Dr. Stroud,
the gentleman who, for three or four years, in vain treated
the case of extraordinary fits, detailed in No. IV., p. 453, of
The Zoist. He bled her in the arm five times, and cupped her
or applied leeches once a week for a long while, till she became
blanched and her ankles swelled ; and he ordered many blisters,
and great quantities of tartar-emetic ointment, causing extreme
suffering from the extent and severity of the sores produced.
But she was no better in any respect, and her head-ache grew
worse. In spite of those repeated losses of blood, she grew
stout, and the catamenia returned regularly, though pale and
scanty.

For a whole year she was under Mr. Kennedy, of Tavi-
stock-square, one of the untiring scoffers at mesmerism: but


44 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerism,


he did her no good, though he gave her numerous drugs, and
applied numerous leeches. She was also under Dr. Theophilus
Thomson, Mr. Robarts, and Mr. Wakefield of the New-
road, successively, without the least advantage. The loss of
blood always relieved her head, but only for a day or two,
though hundreds and hundreds of leeches were applied by
these practitioners. Among the various medicines which they
gave her unceasingly, was iron: but, though it strengthened
her, it always made her worse; for the weaker she felt the better
was her head-ache, and the stronger she felt the worse it was.
Beer aggravated it, and made her heavy; a little wine, or a
teaspoonful or two of brandy in water, did her no harm.

Her head and whole frame were well formed, and her in-
tellect excellent; she looked sound, but languid and pale.
She had a brother of stunted growth, with very defective fore-
head, and, indeed, head in general, idiotic and epileptic; but
no other member of her family was known to have had
nervous disease. The brother’s case was necessarily irremedi-
able. He had been mesmerised under me in vain for some-
time, and in 1842 had fits very violently and died in them, at
16 years of age.

I was too much engaged to mesmerise her, and therefore
gave her medicine, a twelfth or a sixth of a drop of croton oil
every night, just enough to obviate constipation, and creosote
and iodide of potassium, three times a day,—one minim and
one grain, gradually increased to three,—the latter being, in
small doses, an excellent tonic, and often very serviceabie in
pains not inflammatory; the former an excellent stimulant,
without the ill effects of alcohol, and frequently lessening pain
and morbid irritability unconnected with inflammation. I
allowed her animal food, but no fermented or distilled fluids.
Her strength and spirits improved, and she felt so revived by
the creosote that she often asked for it. But her head-ache
was unabated, and the somnambulism and the attacks of in-
sensibility continued as before. Though only one convulsive
attack had occurred, there had been several just before ; and
they sometimes had ceased for a few months and then re-
turned with violence.


On May the 29th, 1843, I began to mesmerise her by downward
passes before her face for half an hour every day.

She began to sleep a little the second day, and slept more and
more daily, but still waked from time to time while I was mesmeris-
ing her. Her upper eyelid used to descend, and at last the eye
suddenly rolled a little upwards and the lids were squeezed strongly
together.


I have often seen the eyes élose thus forcibly in the mes-


by Dr. Elliotson. 45


meric sleep-waking. It is usually thought that in sleep the
eyes close from relaxation of the muscles of the lids, exactly
as the head drops and the whole body ceases to support itself.
But I believe that they close from contraction of the muscles,
just as the iris somewhat contracts at the moment of falling
asleep, or of shutting the eyes, and remains contracted, and the
raising muscle of the eye (levator oculi) contracts at this
moment, rolling the eye somewhat upward, and remains con-
tracted :—two circumstances proving that sleen is not a purely
passive state, but active in regard to the muscular portions of
the eye itself. In falling asleep and on first waking we feel,
not a weakness, but a stiffness, of the lids; the lids appear
to close actively; and the under lid ascends a little at the
moment of final closure, and this cannot be the effect of re-
laxation, but must result from contraction, and the case of the
upper lid cannot be supposed to be different from that of the
lower, which conspires to the same purpose with it. When
mesmerism closes the eyes without sleep, or if the mesmeric
sleep has ceased and the eyes remain closed, inability to open
them is clearly from contraction, not relaxation, and the eye-
lids feel contracted to the patient; if the upper is raised b
any one it descends again forcibly, and the lower, if depressed,
ascends forcibly; and the eyes are mesmerically opened by
breathing, pointing, or touching, precisely as the locked jaws
are opened by the same means employed over their muscles
which are felt and seen to be swollen with the force of
contraction.


On the 7th day she remained asleep a quarter of an hour: and
on the 8th day (June 5) she slept half an hour, after 1 had left off.


Her spirits and temper were by this time already much im-
proved; her healthy look struck every body; her strength
uniformly increased, so that soon she walked all the way to my
house, whereas previously, if she was a little stronger one day
she was weak the next, and had never been able to walk to
my house, but always came in an omnibus. In six weeks
from the first, she walked to my house and back, and fre-
quently took a walk in the evening. Only half the amount
of aperient, every night, had been required for some days.
The creosote and iodine were discontinued. She had a con-
vulsive fit in July, 1843, six weeks after mesmerism was
begun : she walked in her sleep two or three times only during
the first month: and her attacks of insensibility soon ceased.
But her head-aches continued after all other signs of disease
had ceased, till a seton, by her own direction, given in her
mesmeric sleep-waking, was introduced into the back of her


46 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, §c., with Mesmerism,


neck in August, and it was kept there for six months accord-
ing to her mesmeric orders. But they greatly declined before
it was taken out.

She was mesmerised till February, 1844, a period of nearly nine
months; daily, till January 13, and then, by her own spontaneous
directions when in sleepwaking, three times a week for a fortnight,
and never after. She was allowed to sleep from half an hour, to one
or two hours.

She married on the 5th of April; gave birth, after a very
easy time, to a bouncing boy in January, 1845, which she
suckles ; has never had an hour’s illness of any sort, ex-
cept head-ache, for above a year; and is the picture of robust
health.


The phenomena which mesmerism displayed in her were of
the most interesting kind. She walked and talked, always
rationally, but at first as in a dream, and afterwards in full
knowledge of persons and places ; she could be stiffened and
relaxed ; there was insensibility of feeling; various cerebral
organs could be mesmerised and demesmerised ; she prescribed
well and successfully for herself; and accurately predicted the
termination of her diseases. She was one of those patients
whom it is a pleasure to attend: well educated, very intelli-
gent, free from all affectation, perfectly true, straightforward,
frank, and independent.


At first her sleep was short, and so light that speaking to her, or
any other noise or other excitment of the external senses, awoke her,
and I had to renew the process; but after a week nothing of this
kind awoke her, and soon after she answered questions and was a
sleep-waker.

The lowest degree of sleep produced by mesmeric processes
I am unable to distinguish from ordinary sleep. It is readily
disturbed, and broken off by common causes ; and the patient,
if spoken to or touched, and not quite awakened, gives signs
of annoyance and mutters precisely like a person disturbed
in common sleep. In some this degree never occurs, but
usually it does occur at first, and passes sooner or later into
a higher, so that the mesmeric process at length induces
a higher at once; in some it never passes into a higher;
in some sleepiness only is experienced ; and in some not even
sleepiness. But happily, neither sleep nor sleepiness is re-
quired for cure. I have recorded in The Zoist many cases of
cure without any, or the most trifling, sleepiness ; and, on the
other hand, I have three cases of epilepsy at this moment un-
cured, even very little mitigated, though for a long time they
have been assiduously mesmerised, displaying the highest


by Dr. Elliotson. 47


state of sleep-waking, and numerous most exquisite phe-
nomena, short of even the slightest clairvoyance; one for
two years, and two for three years. A higher degree of
sleep, however, is not always of the same intensity, and may
sometimes be broken off by commen causes, especially while
coming on, and just before it is going off. For, though it
may take place and end suddenly, it may establish itself
by degrees, and this even after we desist from the mesmeric
— on seeing its commencement ; and it may go off rather
slowly.


The number of passes required to send her to sleep gradu-
ally diminished, till a single pass was sufficient to plunge her at
once into it, and she remained asleep for several hours, once for
nearly six, if not awakened; and pointing had almost instantly the
same effect; and looking at her produced it quickly. Mere imagina-
tion was at length sufficient. For I one day told her and two others
that I would retire into the next room and mesmerise them through
the door. I retired, shut the door, performed no mesmeric passes, but
tried to forget her, walked away from the door, and busied myself
with something else—even walked through into a third room; and
on returning, in less than ten minutes from the first, found her
soundly asleep, and she answered me just as was usual in her sleep-
waking condition.


It has been said that we hear of imagination keeping per-
sons awake, but never of its setting them to sleep. Here,
however, was an instance of it. Nay, we read that persons
have gone into the sleep of death by imagination.

“Some have been wounded with conceit,
And died of mere opinion straight.”*

In Dr. Z. Grey’s notes to these lines, the Athenian Oracle
is quoted for an account of a malefactor who was told he was
condemned to be bled to death. They


** Accordingly blindfolded him, tied up his arm: then one of
them thrust a lancet into his arm, but purposely missed the vein :
however, they soon began to describe the poor man’s gradual loss of
blood, and of course a gradual faintness occasioned thereby; and
just before the supposed minute of his death, the surgeons said una-
nimously, Now he dies. The malefactor thought all this true, and
= by mere conceit, though he had not lost above twenty drops of

ood.”

Of Britton, the small-coal man, who, though a good man,
was called by some enemies an Atheist, by others a Presbyte-
rian, and by others a Jesuit, so easy is it for Pharisees to
give a bad name to those they hate, we read that


“One Honeyman, a ventriloquist, was introduced into his com-
* Hudibras, p. ii., b, i., 201-2.


48 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, §c., with Mesmerism,


pany by a Justice Robe, who played at the concerts: this man, mak-
ing his voice appear to come from a distance, announced to Britton
his approaching dissolution, and bade him prepare himself by re-
peating the Lord’s Prayer on his knees. The poor man did so, and
such an effect had the affair altogether upon his imagination, that he
died in a few days,—a victim to the heartlessness which so commonly
characterizes the practical joker.” *


To ascribe all mesmeric effects to imagination would be
as absurd as to ascribe all deaths to imagination: or, because
sometimes when a bread pill is given to a patient, and he is
told it is opium or calomel, and sleep or cathartic effect re-
sults from his imagination, to deny the respective powers of
opium or calomel, and ascribe their daily effects to imagina-
tion. Once when visiting a dangerous case late in the even-
ing at the North London Hospital, I observed Elizabeth Okey
fast asleep, and made a few passes at a short distance from
her: her head rolled on the pillow, in the deeper sleep of
mesmerism, and she presently passed into her mesmeric deli-
rious active sleep-waking and chattered away to me. Mr.
Townshend mentions that Egide Aertz, the Belgian flute-
player, who so certainly saw with his eyes fully covered, one
evening returning from a party fell asleep in the carriage.

“I made,” says Mr. Townshend, “the mesmeric passes over
him without contact and in silence. After about the usual time for
mesmerising him when awake, he began to stir and testify uneasiness.
Soon after he spoke and upbraided me for taking him at a disadvan-
tage, and for changing his natural sleep into the mesmeric. There
was as marked a change in his condition as if he had shaken off
slumber.” +


In The Zoist, vol. ii., p. 199, I have already recorded
Miss Rosina Barber’s falling asleep the first time I mesmer-
ised her, though for the first fortnight of my daily mesmeris-
ing her she despised and defied mesmerism, and resolved I
should never put her to sleep. The power of imagination is
great in health and disease, and still greater in the mesmeric
state ;{ but endless phenomena occur in which imagination
can have no more place than in the operation of the endless
causes and remedies of disease.


For a long while any one could mesmerise her to sleep; and any
body wake her, whoever might have sent her to sleep, by a few trans-
verse passes at a short distance from her or with contact on her eye-
brows; though others could not send her to sleep or wake her with so
small a number of passes as I did. When I left town in September for


* Penny Cyclop., Feb. 1841, p. 71. + Facts in Mesmerism, 2nd edit., p. 86.
t Zoist, vol. ii., p. 197-9.


by Dr. Elltiotson. AY


two months, I advised her in her waking state, in conformity with in-
structions given me by her in her sleep-waking, to allow some one
to mesmerise her twice a week. This was done; but, from the time
her betrothed mesmerised her, neither father nor mother, nor any
one but him and me, could produce any effect upon her. Even I
never could affect her afterwards till I had made about twenty passes.
From this time also, no one could awake her at home but himself
after he had sent her to sleep: whether I could awake her there
was no opportunity of trying; and whether he or any one else could
wake her after I had sent her to sleep, was not tried.

She was in general readily awakened by rubbing the thumbs out-
wards upon her eye-brows; after a time a single rub awoke her fully
from the most perfect sleep-waking. Sometimes it was necessary
also to blow in her face, and sometimes there was some diffi-
culty; but I had then only to allow her to sleep longer and then
try again, when the means presently succeeded. But if I tried too
soon, though she might wake, she relapsed again into sleep in a few
seconds.


This is the proper course to adopt when the demesmer-
ising measures fail,—to allow the sleep to expend itself some-
what before you try again ; for success is certain sooner or
later, and at last indeed the patient is sure to wake spon-
taneously.


It was charming to see her instantaneously open her eyes and
smile at you, fully awake, on once brushing along her eye-brows,
while she was lying back in her chair talking to you with them shut
and at her ease without any of the lady-like reserve which charac-
terizes her natural state, and in a moment ignorant of all that had
passed in her mesmeric state. Like most other sleep-wakers, she
knew in her mesmeric state the whole that had passed in her waking
state, with which therefore it was continuous; but in her waking
state remembered, and up to this moment remembers, nothing that
ever occurred in her sleep-waking state.

After a time, the readiest way of waking her was to breathe on
her temples, as she herself pointed out.

Most persons can be mesmerised and awakened by others
no ‘less than by their ordinary mesmeriser. Nearly all my
patients have been affected by others as well as by myself:
but in the far greater number of instances the process has re-
quired to be continued longer by others before sleep began.
I conceive that much depends upon the patient’s feelings. If
a great dislike to the process by all other persons, or by a
particular person, exists, all others, or the particular person,
may find success difficult or impossible, with the patient’s
knowledge of the attempt. The patient may endeavour to
overcome this dislike, and actually wish to be mesmerised by
another while still unconsciously possessed with a reluctance,
E


50 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerism,


and success still be prevented. Even when this reluctance
does not prevent success, it may occasion the mesmerism to
be less beneficial than usual or to produce discomfort and per-
haps great irritation.

I have known this reluctance completely removed, and
then others succeed who had previously failed; and in the
present instance success at length ceased to others, probably
from a reluctance beimg generated which had not before ex-
isted. When her betrothed had mesmerised her at home, I
presume that the pleasure caused the process by all others
than myself, to whom she looked for her cure, to be more or
less a cold contrast. When susceptibility exists, I have ge-
nerally been able to refer the exclusive or superior power of
one person to produce the effect to a disinclination, conscious
or unconscious, of the patient to be mesmerised by another.
The susceptibility of the party and the power of his feelings
may be in various relative proportions ; so that a great suscep-
tibility may prevent a great reluctance from hindering the
effect, and a small susceptibility cause a slight reluctance to
prevent it. Sometimes insensibility or severe attacks of con-
vulsions have ensued upon a new mesmeriser operating: or
upon another person touching the patient, or attempting to
make passes, or otherwise interfere, in the mesmeric state.
I suspect that all this is in general ascribable to the feelings :
the person being annoyed in the mesmeric state at finding
himself with another than his habitual mesmeriser. He may
have willingly consented to be mesmerised by the stranger, but
felt annoyed in the mesmeric state: for in it many feelings
are often more acute than in the natural state, and the power
of restraining them much lessened. I have heard of such
results in M. Dupotet’s patient Sophy, an excellent girl at
Tottenham, cured by mesmerism of severe fits, when she
once mesmerised herself, which her great susceptibility ren-
dered possible. I imagine the mischief arose from her find-
ing herself alone on passing into the sleep-waking state.

There may be an occult unsuitableness of one person to
mesmerise another. It has sometimes happened that a parti-
cular person has always failed, and another has succeeded,
perhaps the first time, and the first has succeeded ever after-
wards. The stronger and healthier a person, the greater,
other things being equal, is his mesmeric power. The Okeys
were very mesmerisable by persons in general; and by all
persons directly, and indirectly through the intervention of
some inanimate bodies. This rendered experiments upon the
connection of health and size with mesmeric power very
satisfactory.


by Dr. Elliotson. 51


** By means of chargeable metals, I devised a mode of showing
very accurately the influence of health upon the mesmerising power.
I took one of the sisters into a female ward in which she had never
been, and respecting the inmates of which she and I were perfectly
ignorant. Every ticket with the name of the disease on the head
of the bed was removed: every patient had the clothes drawn com-
ory | over her. A sovereign, which had lain long untouched, and

ad therefore no mesmeric charge, was taken up by her, and we
proceeded to the ward. She put the sovereign under the bed-
clothes into the hand of each patient in succession, and at the same
number of moments by my stop-watch took it out again and kept it
in her hand. I noted the period in which the effect began, the
length of time it lasted, and the amount of it,—whether it caused
spasm in the hand only; of the hand and arm; or spasm and stu-
pefaction. So we went round the ward, and in one bed, at the re-
quest of a certain student, I repeated the experiment. As soon as
each experiment was finished, the bed-clothes were turned down and
the ticket examined. The effects were in every instance precisely
proportionate to the strength of the patient in whose hand the sove-
reign had been placed. Those in consumption or worn down with
paralysis produced little or no effect: those who had complaints not
impairing the health and strength produced full effect: and all the
intermediate degrees were exquisitely proportionate to the condition
of the patient. One patient had produced a great effect, who, the
student said, was continually bled and kept constantly on low diet,
But I found she had not been bled for some weeks, had been for
some time on full diet, was taking bark, looked in capital condition,
and had only some cutaneous disease not interfering with her strength,
Of the two experiments made at one bed, the first had produced a
full effect proportionate to the strength of the patient. The second
experiment produced only a moderate effect: the clothes were then
turned down, and it proved that a nurse said to be in good health,
and to do all the work of the ward, had been laid in it. The wo-
man, however, looked very sickly, and I found that she had just
lain in, and had come back to her place very weak, and long before
she was competent. The experiment was triumphant, and an apo-
logy was the next day made to me by the student who had so misre-
presented to me the state of those two patients, and at whose request
I had willingly made the experiments in this his wise uncle’s ward,
because the results in the case of both sisters, perfectly accordant in
every instance up to that time with the strength of each patient,
though modified like all results in their form in each sister, had
been made in my own ward, where they and I knew every patient.

‘Another beautiful set of experiments was made with brutes.
If their hand was brought in contact with a brute, the rapidity and
intensity of the effect was always proportionate to the size of the
animal. If their fingers were > a under the wing of a perroquet,
the effect was much inferior to what it was if they were placed under
the wings of a cockatoo. If placed on the nose of a small deer, the
effect was inferior to what'it was if placed upon a lama or a large

E2 -


52 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerism,


deer:—a mere rigidity and contraction of the hand in the first in-
stance, stupefaction and at last perfect insensibility and relaxation
in the latter. Contact of the ends of the fingers with the dry rough
trunk of the elephant had no effect upon the elder; but, the instant
she touched the soft moist mucous membrane of the trunk of this
immense beast, she dropt senseless and snored loudly, and did not
become sensible for ten minutes.”—Human Physiology, pp. 1175-6.


I am inclined to believe that, besides the difference of
health, strength, activity, and bulk, very little difference of
mesmeric power exists among us: and that the great differ-
ence of effects is referrible to the person mesmerised. When
an individual is susceptible of the influence of any one, and
exhibits certain phenomena, however high, a person, though
he never met with such phenomena in his own patients, how-
ever numerous, will find them display themselves on his
inducing the mesmeric state in that individual. Still there
appears to be a difference in the character of the mesmeric
influence of different persons: for some patients experience
comfort from one mesmeriser, and discomfort, head-ache, &c.,
from another.


She exhibited in the sleep-waking no attachment towards her
mesmeriser; and was contented to be left alone, and allowed others
to talk to her and even take her hand.


The attachment of the patient to the mesmeriser is one
not of invariable but occasional occurrence, like every other
phenomenon which presents itself in the mesmeric condi-
tion. It has various degrees—from a mere satisfaction with
the company and proximity of the mesmeriser, to such
intensity of affection that he will not allow him to move an
inch away, perhaps not to withdraw from actual contact,
not to speak to others, perhaps not to speak of others; and
at the same time the proximity of others may be distressing
and the contact of others absolutely maddening. I havea
patient who is greatly pleased if I remain with her, and often
asks me to sit by her; or complains that I have not gone to
her or spoken to her for some time, and begs me at any rate
to shake hands with her; but she can be left alone all the
time of her sleep-waking, remaining perfectly still in her
chair, though it will last for several, sometimes eight or
nine, hours, if not cut short mesmerically. She talks freely
to others, and allows them to take her hand. She follows
any one who makes tractive or beckoning movements to her,
but if the mesmeriser does so at the same time she follows
him in preference. The servant of Captain Valiant, whose
case I have mentioned in my pamphlet on Surgical Operations


by Dr. Elliotson. 53


without Pain, and in my letter appended to Dr. Engledue’s
pamphlet on Materialism, was distressed at the proximity or
contact of others, and not contented,—unless the mesmeriser,
whoever it happened to be, was in contact; yet to touch
her shoe with the point of his boot completely satisfied her.
I have one who, though always in a silent sleep without
speaking, becomes uncomfortable and wakes if 1 cease to
hold his hand; and will not bear the touch of a stranger, nor
the contact of metals previously touched by another; and,
though he often grasps my hand, he lets it go if I converse
with or touch others: nay, each half of his brain experiences
affection distinctly; for he often grasps one of my hands
with one of his while the other continues perfectly indifferent.
When both halves of his brain are experiencing affection,
his right half has an affection for only my right half and
his left for my left, as shewn by his grasping my right with
his right and taking no notice of it with his left, and my
left with his left, but taking no notice of it with his right ;
nay, by his withdrawing his right angrily from my left if I
touch it with my left, and his left from my right if I touch it
with my right; and, what is more wonderful, his right hand will
not endure the contact of gold first held in my left hand or
his left hand, nor his left endure the contact of gold first
held in my right hand or his right hand. If, while his hands
are grasping each of my corresponding hands, another per-
son touches me any where, or if I bring my two hands in
contact at the smallest point, the end of a finger for example,
he lets go my hands with angry indifference. All this I may
remark happens equally when such care is taken as to render
his seeing or hearing by any of the five ordinary senses
what is done absolutely impossible. No. V., p. 53; No. VI.,
p. 215, 216.

I had one patient whose attachment in the mesmeric
state was so violent and so exclusive, that she always insisted
on holding my hand; was displeased, when even apparently
in a very deep sleep, if I spoke to others ; appeared to hear
nothing said by others, though what was said might be calcu-
lated to render her unable to restrain herself from showing that
she heard it; appeared not to hear any noise, however loud,
sudden, or disagreeable, made by others, unless she mistook
it for a noise made by me; would allow nobody but myself
to be at a short distance from her, nor more than two, some-
times not more than one, besides myself, to be in the room ;
nor allow any other animal, even a bird, to be near her; nor
allow me to mention any other person, nor even a living brute.
She was angry if I mentioned her father or sister, both


54 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c.; with Mesmerism,


whom she dearly loved when awake ; if I mentioned a dog,
bird, fish, a fly, or even the mites of cheese, as alive: but if
I spoke of birds or fish as dishes, and therefore no longer
alive, she experienced no annoyance. Jealousy could not be
carried to a higher pitch. The usual happiness of the mes-
meric state frequently creates a disinclination to be awakened;
but, when this affection to the mesmeriser occurs, the disin-
clination is much heightened, and the patient often entreats
you not to wake him. It is usual for the touch and proximity
of the mesmeriser to give a pleasant sensation of warmth,
and of the person repelled to create a wretched feeling of
coldness. Even sensible warmth and coldness are respec-
tively induced in the patient. The youth whose two halves are
in such opposite states, feels his half nearest me more warm
for some time after waking, and the remote half cold; and,
when he has once or twice accidentally not awakened soon
after my leaving him, he has at length awakened shivering,
and remained cold for hours.

If there is any dislike to an individual in the waking
state when the mesmeric attachment to the mesmeriser oc-
curs, he is far more repulsive than others in the mesmeric
state, and gives a far greater sensation of coldness. But the
dearest friends of the waking state become repulsive. An
amusing circumstance lately occurred. The patient whose
remarkable case I related in No. V., p. 42, has since married,
and after a few weeks was greatly indisposed and not relieved
by the ordinary means. Her medical attendant begged me
to see her, and consult on the propriety of mesmerism.
held my fingers towards her eyes, and for an instant only,
and instantly, as by magic, though she had not been mes-
merised for the greater part of a year, her eye-lids were
fixed, sleep and rigidity began and, without my doing any
more, pervaded her, and in a few minutes her whole frame
was rigid and buried in deep sleep. I advised that her wi-
dowed sister should thus mesmerise her daily. This was
done, though the pointing required to be continued a short
time by the sister to produce effect. This patient always
was attached to her mesmeriser and withdrew from others ;
but was contented to be left alone. Her sister left her; and
soon her husband went to bed. She moved from him, and,
on his toe happening to touch her foot, she instantly moved
from him still more, so that he could not help feeling hurt ;
her sister ran up stairs, and, between her repulsion from her
husband and her attraction towards her sister, she moved
nearly over the side of the bed upon the floor before her sis-
ter could awake her. On her being awakened, the attraction


by Dr. Elliotson. 55


to the sister and repulsion from her husband were at an end,
and he was happy again. And this isa fine illustration of
what I have invariably observed, without a single exception,
in all my mesmeric experience, from the time of the Okeys
in 1837 to this very day,—that the mesmeric state has, even
if characterized by affection, and the most intense affection
too, apparently nothing sexual in it; but is of the purest
kind, simple friendship, and indeed exactly like the love of
a young child to its mother,—for it seems characterized by
a feeling of safety when with the mesmeriser and of fear of
others. Those who think they have seen anything else, must
have seen with the eyes of a prurient impure imagination,
unless the unjustifiable experiment of mesmerising Amative-
ness has been made. When this excitement of attachment
is strong, it may remain till the patient is quite awake ; and
recur after waking, if he falls back into the sleep-waking.
The young lady whose exclusiveness extended even to the
brute creation was often awakened with great difficulty, and
remained long lost between sleeping and waking. In this
state she would run about the room after me, and if [I left it
force open the door. On one or two occasions I thought I
had fully awakened her, but a degree of heaviness returned,
and she felt drawn, and ran to the side of the house,—a
corner house, corresponding with the street in which she
thought I was; and has gone to the window inclined to throw
herself out after me: but the remains of sleep soon went
off, and the feeling then completely subsided. Another
young lady with strong attachment, who for a time always
went to sleep again twice in a minute after I had awakened
her, and had to be awakened a second and a third time, at
length fell into the habit of falling asleep again but once.
When with her one evening, I was sent for hastily to an old
lady in a fit of apoplexy. I awoke her, let her fall asleep
again, and awoke her the second time and left her I pre-
sumed in safety, because for weeks she had fallen asleep again
but once, and especially as she told me she was quite awake.
However, that evening she chanced to fall asleep a second
time as soon as I had left the house, and with her sleep came
back the attachment. Finding me not with her, she became
agitated fearfully, and would have rolled on the floor in
her attempts to go after me, for in sleep she could not stand
at that period, but for the care of her maid and others.
Their proximity and contact, however, though preventing
mechanical injury, excited her so violently that on my return
I found her in a sad state of agitation and insensibility.
That the attachment is purely mesmeric, I shewed above in


-


56 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerism,


Nos. V. and VI. No oue but myself had ever mesmerised
my patient Rosina Barber during nearly three years, when
Mr. Atkinson, a gentleman whom she did not know, sent her
to sleep, and she smiled whenever he touched ber hand, and
frowned when I did. After she had awakened I sent her
to sleep, and she then smiled whenever I touched her hand.
I also shewed at No. V., p. 60, and No. VI., p. 216, that the
attachment may last in some degree even when another
person mesmerises; for when I had sent Rosina to sleep she
allowed Mr. Atkinson, who had just before mesmerised her,
to touch her hand and did not frown, but smiled, though
she did not grasp his hand and the smile was faint.* It will
be remembered that Rosina was always in a dream, and
never recognised me; but always mistook me for some one
she liked in her waking state, and recognized nobody what-
ever, invariably fancying persons to be others than they were.
When the Rev. Mr. Moffatt, whom she had not known but
by reputation, mesmerised my patient Miss Critchly, she
moved towards him and sat all but touching him; but, on my
entering the room and sitting on the other side of her, she
removed in my direction, and sat quietly half-way between
us both. Like all the phenomena of mesmerism, they are
liable in every case to changes of degree and form. The
patient whose intense and exclusive attachment to her mes-
meriser is mentioned at p. 53, will now allow me to talk of
any one to her, and to talk to others in her presence. The
other who was so agitated on relapsing back into sleep and
not finding me near her, will now allow various persons to be
at her bed-side and will talk to them.

It is not unusual for some occurrences of the mesmeric
state to continue for a time after it is over. The eyes fre-
quently remain closed ; and, if the jaws close in the mesmeric
state, as they often do, and did in this patient, though
they were readily opened, they may remain closed after
waking. I have patients in whom if I stiffen a part,—an
arm or leg, or indeed the whole body, in the mesmeric state,
—and leave it in this condition, the stiffness remains when
the patient is awake, and requires local demesmerisation.
The present patient often on awaking could not open her
eyes ; often, not her jaw; and it was amusing in the latter cir-
cumstance to see her awake and putting her fingers to her
mouth, shaking her head in silence and smiling. Sometimes
eyes and jaws remained closed at the same time. The eyes were
always easily opened by breathing slowly upon them, laying

* The words, “ the first time,” are accidentally omitted in this account.
it should be thus,—June 23, the first time for nearly three years.


by Dr. Elliotson. 57


the points of the fingers on them, or making outward passes
with contact upon them with the ends of the fingers, or
pointing at them with the end of a finger, or applying some-
thing cold to them. The occurrence was very common with
the Okeys, and a successful mode was to hold a pointed
metallic substance towards them, especially of iron or brass.
I generally used the points of two pairs of brass snuffers.
Generally relaxation is not instantaneously complete, but every
little relaxation is followed by a relapse of contraction, so
that the eyes wink more or less before the lids are finally
relaxed. The jaws were often in the present instance rather
troublesome to relax; but slow breathing, the steady impo-
sition of the ends of the fingers, or passes with contact, at
the angle of the jaw, and when other things failed the appli-
cation of a cold body, usually succeeded. At one time there
was so much trouble in opening the jaw, that I consulted her
in her sleep-waking upon it, and she desired me to breathe
behind her ears, and this at once succeeded. But after a
time its efficiency was less rapid, and sometimes very slow,
though it never failed. I frequently relaxed the muscles of
one side of the jaw, before I relaxed those of the other; just
as often happens in the case of the eyes. See No. V., pp.
72-73.

Whatever local effects remain when the general mesmeric
state is over, or whatever unpleasant circumstance has been
induced in the mesmeric state by mismanagement, I have
always known it ultimately cease. I am acquainted with an
instance of the eyes remaining often closed for many hours,
even till the next day ; and once of one remaining closed for
above a week, but it opened at last. I have known persons
violently excited and delirious, after over-excitement in the
mesmeric sleep-waking, annoyance in it, or great activity in
it with too frequent repetition of the state; or rendered
vacant and lost, with great depression of spirits and feebleness
of body, especially after the excessive application of mes-
merised metals or water. But they have all sooner or later
perfectly recovered, though, till the state had consider-
ably declined, they were perfectly insusceptible of mesmeric
influence, and not percipient of the mesmeriser’s presence,
or perhaps repelling him and every one else. But all has at
length come right. In the extreme debility which some-
times occurs, it may be advisable to give wine, cold water,
and allow the free access of air. In the case of mere over-
excitement the patient must be treated with all kindness, and
be allowed to recover spontaneously ; a trial being made from
time to time whether he is susceptible of mesmeric influence


58 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerism,


or not. When he is, the mesmeric production of deep sleep, and
retention of him in it by assiduous mesmerising, with passes,
slow breathing on the face or breast, or contact of the hand
with the forehead, or some other part, are the best modes.
The deeper and longer the sleep, the better is the recovery.

When a local effect in mesmerisation, such as closure of
the eyes or jaws, cannot be readily surmounted, the same plan
is then good ;—to send the patient to sleep again and awake
him afresh, and the local effect sometimes does not recur.
However, such is sometimes the disposition to over-mesmeric
effect in particular parts, that the same result may continue at
every waking. A good plan is, to ask the patient in the sleep-
waking what you shall do to obviate the inconvenience; and
he frequently tells you of a plan which is all but sure to
prove successful, though you sometimes have to entreat him
again and again, and even insist before he will tell you.
I knew a young lady whose eyes often remained obsti-
nately closed after waking, even for the greater part of
twenty-four hours, and all means failed. She at length
told her mesmeriser that if, instead of breathing on her bare
eyelids, he were to lay writing-paper upon them, and then
breathe upon it, he would succeed. He did so, and they in-
stantly opened. Success, however, after a time was not so
ready. This circumstance is very curious,—that means which
perfectly succeed at first, fail at length to effect what you
want in mesmeric cases, even though first indicated to you by
the patient. They may indeed completely wear out: and we
have to try other plans in succession. This, like the mass of
phenomena which I have witnessed in the mesmeric cases
which have come under my observation during the last seven
years, was very striking in the Okey’s. I used first to send
them to sleep: on their opening their eyes, and becoming
active again, they were in a wild, merry, and mad state, most
waggish, and full of ungovernable fun, caring for nobody. *
To bring them out of this, or any other form of delirium, we
had to send them to sleep again, and from this second sleep,
though each sleep might not last for more than a few seconds,
they usually awoke in their natural state. But sometimes
they awoke up into the delirious state again, and the only
plan to awake them into their natural state was to keep them
asleep, sometimes several minutes, and sometimes even much
longer. This might be no easy matter: and I was compelled
to inquire of them what plan must be adopted. They would
direct me to place my hands upon certain parts of their head
in a certain manner: or my hands and those of another at

* See an account of this in my Physiology, p. 628, &c., 1165, &c.


by Dr. Elliotson. 59


the same time. Their direction always succeeded,—deep
sleep was produced, and they awoke in their natural state:
but at length each plan invariably wore out, and I was ina
difficulty till they devised another. I have been struck with
the same thing in all diseases of the nervous system :—many
patients will receive the greatest benefit at first from every
rational medicine or other measure, nay, from many trifling
measures, you adopt, and each measure in succession, after a
time, lose its effect.


She was perfectly insensible to mechanical injury throughout her
body, except the face, and even in it, for the breadth of half an
inch of its circumference, where it joins the ears and hairy part
of the head; so that any surgical operation could have been per-
formed upon her, even while conversing most rationally with us, and,
except upon the face, not been noticed by her: and a seton was in-
troduced into the back of her neck, and I on two subsequent occa-
sions used great violence to the wound in order to make it discharge,
without giving her the least sensation; as I described at length in
No. V., pp. 108, 9, which account I must request the reader to

eruse, as it contains several interesting particulars. Yet, as I
hove noticed in so many cases of recep to mechanical injury,
she was highly sensible of temperature, and cold things centiel any
where annoyed her greatly.


The same may happen in common palsy: but scarcely any
medical men are aware of the fact; and many who are in
handsome practice, and looked up to as oracles by their
patients, scout the idea of a patient not feeling a prick or
cut and yet feeling cold or heat. They have never thought
of the matter, and therefore never made the easy trial
whether it is ever the fact in cases of palsy of touch. I
refer the reader to what I have said on this point in No. VI.,
pp. 209, 10; a patient may thus not feel the wounds of an
operation, and yet be affected by the coldness of the metal in-
struments if they are not warmed. Her sensibility to tem-
perature must have been at least unimpaired in her sponta-
neous somnambulism, because she woke when she walked on
the painted sides of the stairs without her shoes, as men-
tioned at p. 40.

The insensibility to pain from mechanical causes extended inwards,
as it does in some cases of spontaneous loss of the sense of touch
(anesthesia), and I have mentioned this in my pamphlet on Surgical
Operations without pain in the Mesmeric State, p. 29, &c.; for, on
waking with her jaw locked, though this gave her no pain, she always
suffered great pain while it was relaxing under my demesmerisation :
and I therefore was begged by her, in her sleep-waking, to relax it
before waking her if ever it became locked. This I of course did, and
she then suffered no pain from the process. As well as sensibility


60 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerism,


of temperature, she had the sense of weight or pressure : for the least
pushing against her hand was felt by her: aud very light substances
placed upon her hand she complained of as a weight, and could not
raise her hand while one was upon it.


I have noticed this in other instances of mesmeric loss of
feeling, so that no pinch, prick, or cut was felt, but the least
pressure with the end of a finger was noticed; and certain
physiologists have considered the sense of weight to be dis-
tinct, just as others have that of temperature, as I have re-
corded in my Physiology, pp. 525, 6,7. The explanation of
these and so many other diversities of mesmeric phenomena
in different persons, is the great principle upon which Gall’s
discoveries were established,—that different nervous functions
are performed by different portions of the nervous system.


Mesmerised gold, wiped or not wiped, after being held in the
hand of myself or any other person, and placed upon her hand or
face, gave her a strong feeling of burning, as it does to so many mes-
merised persons. The sensation being one of temperature was felt
by the parts which had no feeling of cutting, &c., &c., as well as by
those which had perfect sensibility. Mesmerised water had no effect
whatever upon her surface.

—— her jaws often firmly closed in her sleep, and they and
her eyes frequently remained so after waking, I could not artificially
stiffen any other part of her than her left arm, till I at length mes-
merised the alleged organs of muscular strength in the head, as I
shall soon mention,—a means by which many can be stiffened in any
part and throughout their frame at pleasure. When stiffened, her
arms could of course be relaxed by contact, breathing, or trans-
verse passes. The left side I heard had not been so much convulsed
in her fits as her right.


I have not remarked in my patients that the more mes-
merable side was that most affected in their convulsions.

I never was able to draw any part by tractive movements.

These facts harmonize with that of her always lying motionless,
and her limbs dropping if she were raised.


Many patients are flaccid in their mesmeric sleep-waking
(No. V., p. 63), while a very few are rigid (pp. 42, 74), and
some can be made rigid artificially (pp. 64, 67). Many are
much stronger in their sleep-waking; some say they have
a great desire to be quiet, and perhaps feel their limbs
heavy and powerless whether they actually go to sleep or
not (No. III.). But a strong emotion may give full mus-
cular action, when there is this inertness and apparent
powerlessness.

For, one night, while, having been mesmerised by her father, she
was sitting in silence at home, some relatives expressed their total


by Dr. Elliotson. 61


unbelief in the humbug, and, as she disdains to argue with such
blockheads when awake, so her impatience in her sleep rose to such
a height that, though she had never stood in her mesmeric state, she
at length suddenly dashed out of the room and ran up stairs to her
bedroom. This she told me in her mesmeric state. Her uncle, not
wiser than many medical men, had said he would not believe a per-
son could hold a conversation in sleep; and, when he found she
spoke, he would not believe she was asleep.


Instinctive, as it were involuntary, effort, often effects what
mere reflecting volition, however strong, cannot: and indeed
an attempt at volition often prevents the effect which mere
emotion would produce. I have a patient whose arms are so
rigid in her sleep-waking that she cannot move them in the
least by the strongest will; yet make her violent by touching
over Destructiveness, and she strikes out with them: make
her religious by touching over Veneration, and she meekly
raises them together in the attitude of prayer (No. V., p. 61).


She was always much stronger after being mesmerised, as is common
(No. V. 60—62), and she was always stronger the more I made her
talk in her sleep-waking: so that, after having learnt that she talked,
she could always tell on waking by the degree of strength she felt
whether I had made her talk much or not. ‘A great perturbation in
nature,” as Shakspeare felt, ‘‘ to receive at once the benefit of sleep
and the effects of watching:”” but most of the phenomena of mes-
merism, though true and all possible to occur without mesmerism,
seem equally great perturbations in nature.

I cannot abstain from quoting Shakspeare’s few words, which
almost place a somnambulist before our eyes. Macbeth, Act V.,
Scene I. “I have seen her rise from her bed, throw her night-gown
upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, write upon it, read
it, afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this while in
a fast sleep,” Shakspeare makes the doctor an example to the pro-
fession—a rational man, for he admits the evidence of his senses—
an honest man, for he says, ‘‘ This disease is beyond my practice.”


Many patients have told me in their sleep that, although
quiet might seem better for them than talking, it really was
not, though I believe that in some it is. The rigid patients
mentioned in No. V., were not the weaker for being kept in
invariable rigidity and strong muscular exertion for hours—
but refreshed (pp. 61—76); nor the young lady mentioned
in No. VI.,—though I often kept their muscles above an
hour in the most forcible action, they actually were greatly
refreshed and strengthened by what had passed.

At first merely mesmeric sleep was produced in her: but after


three weeks she began gently to answer questions in this state, and
at length talked on as loudly and as fast as when awake; still, how-


62 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerisin,


ever, remaining in her chair with her eyes shut; and rarely speaking
unless spoken to.

Sleep-waking, a word translated from the Latin expression
somno-vigilium, used by some continental writers, accurately
describes the condition, for it is a mixture of sleeping and
waking—of “ the effect of watching and the benefit of sleep.”
This patient’s eyes were always closed. Some patients open
them occasionally for an instant or two, and see with them :
some have them slightly and some staringly open, seeing little
or nothing: though the eyes may keep open, “ their sense is
shut :” others may keep them open as in the natural state, but
this I have noticed only when the state was rather a new waking
state than a sleep-waking state,—the waking portion prepon-
derating and the only character of sleep being that certain
cerebral faculties shewed an impaired activity or none. On the
other hand, there is sometimes no waking manifestation, and
the state appears all sleep of the deepest kind.* But even
here there is frequently, I believe, a degree of waking. For
often, when patients have seemed in the deepest coma, they
have after coming into the active form of sleep-waking, or on
waking sooner or later, shewn that what had been said in their
hearing had impressed their brain. They have acted or spoken
in a manner evidently resulting from a knowledge of what
was said by others when they were believed to be uncon-
scious: and, yet I am certain that they have not been aware,
in the more active or in the waking state, of the things having
been said in their deepest state. Their words and actions
have been, without concealment or reserve, in conformity
with what had been said before them—no disguise was
attempted: yet they have never betrayed for a moment an
indication that they were conscious of having learned any-
thing from others. The impression and knowledge are thus
from an unconscious source. No. V., p. 70; VL. p. 211.
The same will of course happen in a similar state inde-
pendent of mesmeric agency. I have at this moment a
mesmeric patient who, long before I treated her, had, be-
sides violent convulsive attacks, fits of apparently perfect
coma,—neither moving nor giving any sign of conscious-
ness. Yet on coming out of this into an active state, still
however, not her natural state, but a sleep-waking condi-
tion, she would detail most minutely everything that had
been said in her presence. Nay, in the depth of her coma,
she would manifest her consciousness by recognizing the
voice of one particular person—her kind physician ; just as in
the depth of mesmeric sleep, but when the patient talks and

* See my Surgical Operations without Pain in the Mesmeric State, p. 35


by Dr. Elliotson. 63


is active, no voice or noise but that of the mesmeriser may be
heard, or is consciously heard ; and I believe the patient can
shut himself out completely, or abstract himself, so as consci-
ously, in all truth, to notice nothing: and yet, though really
aware of nothing, that the impression may be made upon the
brain, and manifest itself at some distant time. Hence the
propriety of saying nothing in the presence of a patient in the
deepest mesmeric sleep, that he ought not to hear. If you men-
tion what experiments you propose making, what phenomena
you expect, &c., the patient may appear to know nothing of
it at the time, and even afterwards really know nothing con-
sciously of it, and yet many phenomena result which create a
suspicion, perhaps a proof, that his brain must be at work in
consequence of being unconsciously impressed with what was
said. I have known great distress on waking to the natural state
after conversation which had been careless upon the presump-
tion that nothing was heard ; the patient not knowing why he
was distressed, though perhaps guessing it must be through
something that had happened in the mesmeric state, just as we
often wake in unhappiness or agitation, probably from a dream,
but of which we can remember nothing. Sometimes I have
known the occurrences of the sleep-waking state fully dreamt
of in the natural sleep of the next or subsequent night: so
that the whole of a conversation became known to the patient,
though he only suspected that his dream referred to an actual
conversation which had passed in the mesmeric state. It is
not very uncommon for patients to dream in their sleep-
waking state (so strange are all these matters), and then to
remember their dream on waking to their natural state, though
they remember nothing else of their past sleep-waking.
While touching on these relations of different states to
each other, I will relate a curious circumstance which oc-
curred in one of her fits of somnambulism. At a period of
the darkest nights, no light as usual burning in the room,
the chamber once appeared to her, while dressing in her
somnambulism, as light as at noon-day; the minutest object
on the floor being visible to her. The phenomenon never oc-
curred again, and nothing else occurred at the same time.
This she mentioned to me one day in her mesmeric sleep-
waking: but knew nothing of it in her waking state. Wish-
ing afterwards to learn more of it, I began asking her respect-
ing it another day when she was awake, forgetting that she had
mentioned it in her mesmeric sleep-waking. She looked
astonished, and had not the faintest idea of the matter. Thus
the state of spontaneous sleep-waking had a relation to that
of the artificial in her. This is not the only case of the kind


64 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerism,


which has happened to patients of my own. Fits of extraor-
dinarily clear vision and light have happened to another pati-
ent, a youth whom I am mesmerising for epilepsy, and many
particulars of whom, both before and after mesmeric treat-
ment was begun, I have given in former numbers. No. V.,
pp- 52,53; No. VI., pp. 210, 211—215, 216. He informs
me that he has occasionally in his waking state, immediately
before an epileptic fit, for half a minute, seen minute and
distant objects with unusual brightness and clearness, and all
the room has seemed illuminated, so that he discovered the
minutest object, even better than if he had put on the spec-
tacles which he occasionally uses to aid his sight.*


When she first became active in her mesmeric sleep,—
became a talking sleep-waker, she was in the very condition
in which my patient Rosina, as described in No. V., pp. 219—
221, invariably was to the last and is now whenever she is
mesmerised.—Perfectly rational, but in a dream, never re-
cognizing the person who spoke to her, nor knowing the
place or time, fancying some past or future scene elsewhere,
and maintaining she was not asleep, that her eyes were open,
though they were invariably quite closed and incapable of
being opened by her, and denying everything true of herself
at the moment that did not harmonize with her dreaming
fancy. She usually mistook me for one of her brothers, at
one time always for this brother. Having no attraction to
me or repulsion to others, she heard every body and allowed
every body to touch her; but, whoever spoke to or touched
her, she often fancied him to be the same person she had
the moment before fancied me to be,—the course of the
dreamy state continuing, and she being so absorbed in the
idea of her brother that she did not distinguish the voice or
touch of others from my own previously perceived.


On the 13th of July I allowed her to sleep three hours and a
half, and after it her jaw remained locked in spite of breathing and
all demesmerising means with the hand to the jaw and below the
ears, but instantly relaxed on my applying the head of the cold
poker to it at the angle of the jaw. The following day I pulled her
up from her easy chair against her will to see if she cquid stand;


* Dr. Brachet relates that, when he was interne at the Bicétre, in 1841,
the infirmier of the surgical ward one day astonished him by the extent which
his vision had acquired since the day before. The man could distinguish the
most minute objects at an enormous distance. Five hours afterwards he felt
a slight head-ache, and in a few hours more was seized with a thundering
apoplexy (une apoplexie foudroyante), and died the next night. A fresh
coagulum was found in the right optic thalamus. The inflammation which
had preceded this effusion had irritated, by its proximity, a part of the brain
concerned in vision.— Recherches Expérimentales. Paris, 1830.


by Dr. Elliotson. 65


and, though unable to stand, her legs bending under her, she soon
did so on Mr. Atkinson pressing with the points of his fingers
against the lowest part of the occiput, and as long as he did this
she stood and even dragged a walk with a little support. I then set
her down; and she passed into the deeper stage of sleep-waking,
knowing that she was asleep, who every body was, and the place
and time, and perfectly rational; but, like others in this state, so
perfectly at her ease as to form a marked contrast with herself in
her ordinary state.* From that day her sleep-waking was invariably
of this higher description. I do not recollect her ever falling again
into the inferior.


It is not uncommon for the inferior to return occasionally
after the higher has taken place. In some instances those
relapses are distant, in others frequent.


In this higher state, she ascribed it to the long sleep of the day
before, and to my pulling her up and making her stand and walk.


The youth already alluded to, who had always been in only
the inferior dreamy sleep-waking, went into the higher one
day on my drawing him up by tractive passes from his seat
towards me, and never relapsed into the dreamy state. A
patient of a friend of mine was always in the dreamy state
till, on account of some uneasiness, he placed his flat hands
upon the pit of her stomach, when she instantly passed into
the higher state, but remained in it no longer than his hands
were there; and all this was ever afterwards invariably the
case; and the rapidity and completeness of the change was
most striking.

Sometimes in the higher state a little dreaminess remains,
and the patient invariably calls one or more persons, even
the mesmeriser, by some name not his own.


Her faculty of Time was heightened in her higher sleep-waking.
On the 6th day of July I asked her how long she had been asleep,
and after considering she answered quite accurately two hours and
three quarters. I then awoke her and repeated the question, and


* Mr. Eliot Warburton told me that, one evening at a visit to a house in
Damascus, he at the request of his host mesmerised a tall black slave, who
like his master was totally ignorant of the subject. Suddenly, to his surprise
and their astonishment, a shudder passed over the kneeling slave’s gigantic
frame, and he sunk upon the ground, huddled like a black cloak that has
fallen from a peg. After atime, with a fearful howl, he started to his feet,
flung wide his arms, threw back his head, seized a large vase of water, and
dashed it into fragments on the marble floor; he tore up the divan, smashed
the lantern into a thousand bits, and rushed about the court-yard. Gradu-
ally he came to himself, looked puzzledly round at the devastation, and
resumed his meek attitude, standing with his arms folded on his breast. He
was quite unconscious of all that he had done, but described his sensations
as having been delightful—that of perfect freedom,—of a man with all his
rights—such as he had never felt before in his life. See most of the parti-
culars in The Cross and the Crescent, vol. ii., pp. 320—322.

VOL, III. F


66 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerism,


she guessed two hours. On the 7th, I asked her in her higher
sleep-waking, which had lasted three hours and forty-one minutes,
how long she had been asleep, and she replied three hours and three
quarters, but considered and corrected herself, saying no, it wants
four minutes. I awoke her and repeated the question, and her
answer was two hours and a half.

After she had been long accustomed to fall into the higher state
only, she once (September 21, 1843) at home when awake tried
to mesmerise a cousin, and, instead of sending her to sleep, fell
herself into the sleep-waking. Some one of the party had just
remarked that he had heard of such a thing; but she had replied
that it could not happen to her, not believing it could, and re-
solved to leave off if she felt even a little sleepy; but suddenly
without previous warning she was gone. The sleep-waking was the
dreamy, and she mistook her cousin for her brother, as she had
been accustomed generally to do; but, on her brother blowing in her
face, she passed into the deeper state, and recognized him and
others, oat knew she was asleep.

I have a patient who, if she attempts to mesmerise others in
her sleep-waking, but in that only, soon becomes perfectly insensible
and unimpressible by mesmerism, but goes on for a short time; and
the same was the case with the Okeys. She soon drops down: they
would go on mesmerising mechanically for a considerable time, with
their eyes open and fixed, because their eyes were always open in
their usual active mesmeric condition, but at length in general they
fell powerless, and their eyes closed; though sometimes the state
would go off with a sigh, and, instead of falling, they were fully
sensible again, not having discontinued the mesmeric action for a
moment.


She was clairvoyant in that lower degree which enables
persons to foresee the course of their complaints and prescribe


remedies. The Okeys and many of my patients have pos-
sessed this.*


On the 21st of July, when in the dreamy sleep-waking
and not fancying me to be somebody else, she said she should
have no more fits, nor walk again in her sleep, only talk, and
not much; but that she should always have some head-ache.

On the 14th of August, after I found she had passed into
the higher sleep-waking, I made the same inquiries which I
had made of her on the 21st of July, in the lighter sleep-
waking: and she again declared she should neither have any
more fits nor walk in her sleep, and should talk in her sleep
but very little: that mesmerism would only relieve, not cure,
her head-ache; and added that I should henceforth find
it more difficult than ever before to wake her. This she said
in the most positive manner several times: with a positive-
* See No. IIL., p. 326, &c. and No. IV., p. 433 to the end, p, 457 to the end.


by Dr. Elliotson. 67


ness which I have never yet seen err in clairvoyants. Her
manner too was abrupt and severe: as though my asking her if
she were quite certain was disagreeable. I then asked her if
she should ever see with her eyes shut, have internal know-
ledge of distant places and circumstances, past or future
events, be able to tell the diseases of others, or point out re-
medies for them, or be affected variously by various mes-
merised metals; and she answered in a short and positive
manner, No! None! No! Imade the same inquiry on other
occasions, always with the same answer. She was truth itself:
disdained all affectation. She evidently had clairvoyance
as to the exact amount of clairvoyance she could possess, and
clairvoyance as to the course of her disease and what was
proper for it. She spontaneously added that a seton in the
back of her neck for three or four months would greatly
relieve her head-ache: and that a seton which some of her
medical attendants had put in would have benefited her if it
had been allowed to remain longer. In her waking state she
dreaded a seton, having suffered so much before from one ;
and, when I proposed it to her, seemed taken by surprise and
exceedingly sorry, but consented.

When I was going out of town in the autumn for a few
weeks, she told me on the 27th of August she must be mes-
merised twice a week in my absence: and, when I inquired
who should mesmerise her, replied that she would find some
one, but did not tell me whom. It turned out that she meant
her future husband. When, on taking leave of her, Sept. 7th,
in her natural state, for my journey, I told her she must be
mesmerised twice a week till my return, it appeared quite un-
expected instructions; and, on my asking who would do it,
she replied that her mother would. I quizzingly advised her
to get some one else.

One day I found, after waking her, she had a severe tooth-
ache, which I took away presently by passes with contact
along her jaws from the outsides,—the angles, to the centre. It
returned in the evening ; and, the next day, I spoke to her in
her sleep (the higher) of extraction. But she told me I could
take it away. I rejoined, “ but not permanently.” “Yes,” she
replied, “if you do not take it away in my waking state as
you did yesterday, but in my present state of sleep.” I
therefore took it away in the mesmeric state, and it never
returned.

Towards the end of the time I was longer in sending her
off and much longer in waking her. In fact, everything she
foretold of herself was realized to the letter.

F2


68 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerism,


In rather more than a month after I began to mesmerise her, I
found that I could always mesmerically excite certain of the cerebral
organs discovered by Gall. These were the same that I could affect
in the cases recorded in No. V., pp. 72—78; No. VI., p. 222—
Destructiveness, Self-esteem, Friendship, and Benevolence, and in
addition generally Veneration, and sometimes Music and Wit, but
only to the degree of making her think of mirth and drollery. They
could be affected by contact only, and the effects were instantaneous
on the touch of the finger. I have a patient in whom, like those
three whose cases are recorded, the four first-mentioned organs only
can be mesmerised, but, though I have done so for above a year, the
effects come very slowly—sometimes not for almost a minute—work-
ing up from the faintest manifestation to the fullest, and die away very
slowly on the removal of the finger, even though an antagonist organ
be also mesmerised: and this slow manifestation is certainly more
satisfactory to strangers than the instantaneous. But here the sud-
denness of effect was extraordinary, though its intensity increased.
While declaring in a loud violent manner that she would hang Dr.
Puzey and all his Puzeyites if she could, because my finger was on
Destructiveness, or most scornfully despised them if it was over
Pride, I no sooner removed it to Benevolence or Friendship than her
countenance in a moment became sweetly placid and kind, her voice
low and gentle, and she declared she would hang no body, hurt no
body,—she would try to reclaim all people from their errors kindly:
by removing the finger to Destructiveness, her asperity and violence
in a moment returned. And thus the changes might be varied from
Benevolence or Attachment to Destructiveness or Pride, and back
again,—might be rung as rapidly as the changes of notes by striking
different bells or keys.

The expression, the tone of voice, the attitude, were as
exquistely natural as the language and sentiments; yet she
was ignorant of phrenology. Such acting Mr. Macready
would find it difficult to teach the most apt pupil till after a
course of careful drudgery : and yet this exquisite naturalness
is observed in all patients whose cerebral organs can be mes-
merically excited.

Her character completely altered according to the portion of brain
excited: and we had, as in all such cases, the mechanism of man’s
mind, as it is called, thus laid bare.

The mesmeric excitement of the distinct cerebral organs
is, to my view, the grandest phenomenon ever brought to
light by man.

If an antagonist organ were not mesmerised, the effect continued
for a considerable time after the removal of the finger: and it con-
tinued also in proportion to the length of time the finger had been
previously applied, whether an antagonist organ were afterwards
touched over or not. As she was brought up religiously, and was one


by Dr. Elliotson. 69


of the hearers of that excellent man Mr. Baptist Noel, the excitement
of Veneration took a religious turn, and always made her raise her
hands in the attitude of prayer and begin to say her prayers. The
organ was not particularly large in her; and, in the patient men-
tioned in No. V., in whom I have never been able to excite it in the
least, it is really very large, but then, though very good, she is not
very religious. Veneration, however, is not always so readily excited
in the present patient as the other four. In my notes I find that,
while I could excite all those readily, I one day could excite it only
for a very short time at all; for several days very moderately, and
no longer than my finger was over the organ; and some days not at
all. The expression of Veneration was sometimes not so strong as
to cause the hands to be brought together extended and elevated, but
to be clasped and only a little raised from her lap.

The usual extreme excitability of those four organs sometimes
caused them to be excited by the contact of anything over their seat—
the corner of a book, the end of a piece of sealing wax, or anything
else lying on the table: and previous mesmerisation of such objects
was not required. Their excitability was sometimes so extreme that
the slightest brush of the surface was enough. Mechanical irrita-
tion thus brought out their activity in the mesmeric state.


Whether this would have happened if originally they had
not been mesmerised with the finger, I cannot say. Certain
mesmerised metals produced strong action of the muscles when
applied to the hands, for example, of the Okeys. Now, if the
effect had died away, it could be renewed, and, if the effect
of the metal were slight, it could be heightened, by rubbing
the part with any inanimate unmesmerised substance.* The
excitement of the very excitable cerebral organs by the con-
tact of inanimate substances with the surface over them is
perfectly analogous: and now and then occurs in the case
mentioned in No. VI., p. 227. But the inferiority of me-
chanical irritation to genuine mesmerism was shewn in her
when the organs were not very excitable: they evidently could
be far more excited by the fingers than by inanimate sub-
stances: and, if their excitability happened to be declining,
the possibility of exciting them by inanimate substances would


* “ Friction has no power alone, but, if a part first touched or breathed
upon by another person, or touched with anything as far as I have hitherto
inquired, except iron, which has the breath or perspiration or saliva of an-
other person upon it, or with gold, silver, or nickel which has been influ-
enced by another person’s contact, though wiped, is well rubbed with an
indifferent and uncharged substance, even with iron, the friction augments
the effect of the previous cause ; it will re-excite the effects for a long time
after they have ceased ; and, when they have not begun, and may be thought
not likely ever to take place, will excite them. Even contact has far more
effect if united with friction. Thus the point of the finger on the nose will
produce an effect much sooner if it is rubbed upon the nose, instead of being
held still.” —Human Physiology, p. 1178.


70 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerism,


lessen much faster than that of exciting them by the fingers :
sometimes inanimate substances scarcely excited them at all,
while the fingers succeeded well. Mere pointing with any
inanimate substance over the cerebral organs never in the least
affected them; nor pointing even with the fingers, however
long continued, though pointing with the fingers so affected
the cerebral organs of my three other patients (Nos. V. VI.):
nor had gazing intently on them, nor breathing slowly, nor
blowing cold over them, nor holding a cold substance near
them, and willing their excitement the least effect ;—facts
proving that not the will, nor sympathy with the mesmeriser’s
state of brain, nor a knowledge of the mesmeriser’s wish ob-
tained by some occult power, excited the organs. She once
told me she was conscious that pressure excited the organs,
but pressure with the fingers more than with anything else.
I could not excite the present patient’s organs by placing
the ends of her own fingers upon their seat, guided by mine.

Mr. Prideaux, in the last number of the Edinburgh Phre-
nological Journal, has considered my arguments in favour of
genuine mesmeric influence, independent of will, sympathy, or
suggestion, or common causes, being capable of exciting dis-
tinct cerebral organs, any of which doubtless may sometimes
excite them in the mesmeric state and lead mesmeric experi-
menters to very wrong conclusions as to their seat and charac-
ter,* to be overthrown by my contending that, when tractive
movements are made with reference to a patient in the mes-
meric sleep, they are discovered through some occult sense and
thus involuntarily responded to by the patient. The case of
mesmeric excitement of cerebral organs by pointing is, how-
ever, totally different. The patient frequently knows nothing
of the seat and character of the cerebral organs, and thus
cannot know by an occult sense what you are aiming at, as
when he observes by an occult sense that you are making
beckoning or drawing movements : and, if he were a phreno-
logist, I do not see how he could will himself into a real
fexecious rage, out of it into the most humble and fervent
piety, out of this into the haughtiest pride, out of this into
the tenderest affection or benevolence, as quickly as you touch
over the organs. But if this were all done, through perception
by an occult sense of what the mesmeriser was manipulating
for, it ought to occur in those patients in whom pointing is


* See my remarks in regard to will, No. III., pp. 242, 243; No. VL.,
pp. 231, 232: in regard to suggestion, No. III., p. 239—241: as to sym-
pathy, I can excite a patient to a frightful rage by the finger on Destruc-
tiveness, while I am full of fun, and make him haughty while I feel brim-
ful of kindness and humility. .


by Dr. Elliotson. 71


sufficient equally whether the finger be covered by a thick
glove or not, and whether the fingers point to the organs with
a paper-cutter, pencil-casé, &c., or only by themselves. If
the patients know what you are aiming at in the one instance,
so must they in the other. But, whereas tractive or beckon-
ing movements take effect if the hands are covered with thick
gloves or if anything is held in the hand while it makes the
movements, no effect coming only when the tractive move-
ment is made with an inanimate substance the connection of
which with the person who moves it is concealed ; the cere-
bral organs have never been excited in my experiments when
the pointing fingers were covered with gloves, or when they
pointed with an inanimate substance held evidently by them
over the organ. I stated in the paper to which Mr. Prideaux
refers, No. VI., p. 214, that—


«A tractive movement with one finger would signify the wish of
the experimenter often just as well as one with the whole hand or
both hands. The result would equally ensue whether he wore gloves
or not; nay, if tractive movements were made with a pencil-case,
a paper-cutter, &c., she obeyed, provided care was taken to make it
evident that it was moved by the experimenter. If the pencil-case,
&c., was moved with a careful concealment of all motion of the
hand, or an empty loose ~~ was —— for traction with the
same care, no effect followed. It was just the same with the Okeys.
The power of traction with them was intense even at a great dis-
tance. One of them has been placed with her back against a board,
and I have concealed myself behind it, and put forth one hand and
made tractive movements outwards near one of her hands, and her
hands moved outwards: but, when afterwards I kept my hand behind
the board, and made the tractive movements with a piece of wood,
&c. her hand was unaffected,—there being no reason for her to
believe that any one was ordering a movement from her.”


But, in regard to pointing over her cerebral organs, I
said (p. 227), that “pointing over the organs with thick
gloves on the fingers prevents all effect ; nor does any effect
come if the parts are pointed at with anything else, as a
paper-cutter, the corner of a book, &c.:” nor can I excite
them by breathing over them.*


* Mr. Prideaux says, ( Edin. Phren. Journal, No. XXIX., pp. 15, 16,)
that he has “‘ on every occasion, when speculating on the probable cause of
phreno-magnetic phenomena, referred to sympathy and volition conjointly.”
I cannot see how sympathy or volition had any share in the facts which I
mentioned in No. III., pp. 242, 243, and No. VI., pp. 232, 233. I may add
that Mr. Aglionby, the Member for Cockermouth, mentioned to me last week
that, knowing scarcely anything of phrenology and producing the most dra-
matic effects upon acountry girl perfectly ignorant of it, he thought he had his
finger on Constructiveness, and expected in vain the usual manifestation of it;


“J


2 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerism,


Mr. Atkinson read a paper at a meeting of the Phreno-
logical Association, in 1843, in which he announced that a
sleep-waking patient on whom he could depend had informed
him of certain new facts in regard to the cerebral organs.


“That portion of the cerebellum nearest the ear gives the dis-
position to muscular action; next to which, and about half way
between the ear and the occiput on the top of the cerebellum, is
muscular sense,—a power conveying the sense of resistance and the
state of the muscles; beneath which is muscular power,—giving force
and strength; and in the centre are what may be termed the physico-
functional powers—a group of organs, giving the sense of physical
pain and pleasure; temperature; and having relation to the general
condition of the body, and its secretions, amativeness, &c. The
part nearest the centre giving the sense of pain; the sense of tem-

erature being nearer to the ear, and amativeness beneath.”’—No.
IL., pp. 249, 250.


I stated to the meeting that—


* About ten days ago, when I had several patients sleeping,
Mr. Atkinson came in, and without previous intimation or speaking,
touched over some part of the cerebellum of one of the patients,
and the arm immediately rose, became rigid, and the fingers closed,
and that by simply breathing on the spot which he had touched, the
arms were instantly relaxed. There could be no suggestion or sym-
pathy in this. The patient had never manifested any other pheno-
menon whatever than simple mesmeric sleep, and was quite unim-
pressible in every other respect. Mr. Atkinson then tried another
patient, and a similar result ensued, only that the arm rose, and
became cataleptic, without rigidity. From that day these patients
have been cataleptic. Mr. A. tried a third patient, a somnambulist,
and who also exhibited some points in mesmero-phrenology, and ob-
tained a similar result on the muscular power. In this case, there
was a total insensibility to pressure, whether the pressure were on
the head or the hand; but on pressing over another part of the cere-
bellum (muscular sense), she it the pressure, on that or any other
part, instantly; he removed his finger from the organ, and she was
again insensible of pressure.””—No. III., pp. 252, 253.


The present patient had full sensibility to mechanical in-
jury, brought on by Mr. Atkinson touching over the seat of
what he considers the organ of the Sense of Pain, and never
by putting the finger anywhere else (No. V., p. 109): full
sense of weight or pressure, whenever it happened to be ab-
sent in her, which was sometimes the case, by touching over
what he considers the organ of Muscular Sense,—because it is


when all she would say was that she was thinking of her dinner. He looked
and found his finger not on Constructiveness, the situation of which he knew,
but on some other spot where lay an organ of the function of which he was
ignorant: so he went to his bust to learn what orgon lay there, and found
it was Alimentiveness. 2


by Dr. Elliotson. 73


by this, as Dr. Wells* originally pointed out,t and not by mere
feeling, that we judge of weight,—and never by putting the
finger anywhere else. She never stood till the points of the
fingers were placed over what he considers the organ of Mus-
cular Strength; but touching there gave her ample mus-
cular power to walk, exactly as was the fact in Rosina’s case
(No. VI., pp. 228—230).

When her jaw was rigidly closed, I could generally relax
it by breathing behind the ear, or ears, for it often relaxed on
the side only at which I breathed. This she had indicated to
me herself.

She told me, Aug. 14, in her higher sleep, that she had
been enabled to walk, because her organ of Muscular Strength
had been touched over by Mr. Atkinson. On the 19th she put
her finger on the exact spots of the organs of the sense of Pain
and Muscular Sense and Muscular Strength, saying what they
were, and adding that she should be able to tell me more next
week: and the next week, Aug. 27, she informed me that I
could now make any part of her rigid,—and this turned out
to be the fact,—and that she felt muscular strength and had a
sense of pain as soon as the alleged organs were touched over.
She was so truthful and independent that I was bound to be-
lieve her every word. She said that she could not tell me how
she knew what she asserted ; but that she did know. She said
there were distinct organs at the back of the head, on each
side for common sensibility, muscular sense, and muscular
strength: and she indicated the precise seat of each with her
finger supported by me, as accurately as Mr. Atkinson could
have done. Still 1 must mention that experiments upon other
patients and conversation had more than once gone on between
my most estimable friend and myself in her presence, while
in the mesmeric sleep, and she might have unconsciously
learnt all from what she heard him say, and possibly might
have become in this way enabled to put her finger upon the ex-
act spot of each. But her eyes had always been firmly closed.
The matter requires, however, much more investigation.

On the 27th of August, 1843, I thought of ascertaining
whether the two sides of the brain could be affected differ-


* Essays, p. 70, 1813.

+t In my Human Physiology, pp. 527, 528, I have set all this forth and
done justice to Dr. Wells: who was followed by Dr. Thomas Brown, Dr.
Spurzheim, and last of all by Sir Charles Bell, who delivered these opi-
nions to the Royal Society, and this body published them in the Philosophical
Transactions, without mentioning the name of any one of those three phy-
sicians ; and the British Association published the report of Dr. W. Henry,
of Manchester, on the nervous system, in which Sir C. Bell only was referred
to on this point and the original promulgator and his two followers were
not mentioned,


|


74 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerism,


ently; and found that both those of Gall’s organs which
were susceptible in her and Mr. Atkinson’s organs could be
affected on either side at pleasure. The most striking me-
thod of ascertaining the fact respecting the former is to
mesmerise antagonist organs on each side at the same time.
The beautiful facts in Rosina’s case are detailed in No. VL.,
p. 225, &e. I have a patient who is in the higher mesmeric
sleep-waking and knows every body and the place and time,
—the patient whose organs are excited so slowly,—in whom I
never thought of trying it tillthe other day. But, on mesmer-
ising Friendship on one side and Pride or Destructiveness on
the other, as she knows all around her, she was not made as
Rosina was to mistake the person who addressed her on one
side for one she loved, and the person (perhaps the same hav-
ing changed his place) on the other for one she dislikes: but
she liked me, as myself, on the side of her brain where Friend-
ship is touched over, and disliked me on the side of her brain
when Pride or Destructiveness was touched over,—grasping my
hand and putting it to her heart with the hand of the former
side and speaking affectionately, and repelling my hand with
the hand of the latter side and speaking disdainfully or vio-
lently if I attempted to touch it. While squeezing my hand
with one of her’s, if asked to take it with the other also, she
refuses firmly, though kindly ; and if I attempt to touch the
other, she will on no account allow me and falls into violence.

In answer to an enquiry which I now made, she replied
that each side could be affected separately, and that she was
conscious of the organs of either side being affected sepa-
rately, and experienced the feelings—the passions, on the side
only on which I touched over.

The facts of the separate action of the two halves of
the brain, will, I am persuaded, be found common. The se-
parate action of the corresponding organs indicated by Mr.
Atkinson, was shewn by muscular power or sensibility being
acquired by that half of the frame to which the organ be-
longed that was touched over. I do not see in my notes that I
made the experiment with the rest of Mr. Atkinson’s organs.


The announcement of this splendid class of facts,—more
splendid, I have already said, to my view than any others in
nature, since they embrace at the same time the operation of
the mighty agency of mesmerism and the functions of the
several portions of the greatest wonder of nature, the brain,
—has created dismay among those who fancy such facts may
accelerate the upset of the fancies which they possibly im-
bibed in childhood and have never had the intellectual and


by Dr. Elliotson. 75


moral energy to see the nothingness of and to shake off, and
have perhaps found useful in their prudential efforts to ac-
quire the praise and patronage of the still miserably educated
world.

Mr. Newnham, in a work recently got up, considers these
different states of the two sides of the brain to be very ex-
traordinary if true (p. 376). Now I should think it very
extraordinary if they were not true. We can mesmerise other
individual parts, a single finger of the hand for example, and
it would be strange if we could not mesmerise separately the
several portions of the brain. It would be equally wonderful
and contrary to all analogy, if each intellectual and moral
power had not a distinct portion of the brain for itself, and
if when the portion were mesmerised the function were not
affected.

He politely says, “if true;” regretting that they had
not been made known by persons of “ less lively imagination
and more sober judgment” than Dr. Engledue and myself,
who, he thinks, are “ too liable to be captivated by the charm
of novelty, and therefore more easily led astray by some bril-
liant and unreal phantom.” He says that we have such
“strong attributes of insanity” that he has “ reason to fear
we demand his pity and require all efforts to cure,” p. 38.
I shall leave Dr. Engledue to defend himself if he thinks it
worth his while to notice Mr. Newnham’s Christian charita-
bleness. As he writes with inveteracy and a mean omission
of justice, which, through the odour of sanctity that he gives
off, will, he knows, tell with the religious world, whose favour
is so profitable, I shall notice him at more length than he
himself merits.

Mr. Newnham has not the shadow of a reason for writing
thus of myself. I have all my life sought for facts only,
and never felt inclined to frame hypotheses. Mr. Newnham,
as a reading man, knows this to be the case. He knows
that all my papers in the Transactions of the Royal Medical
and Chirurgical Society; all my clinical lectures published
in the Lancet, and all my lectures on the practice of me-
dicine published in the Medical Gazette; and the whole of
my notes to Blumenbach’s Physiology, were characterized by
devotion to facts only :—that not a single hypothesis is to be
found in them. He knows that I have advocated the truth of
phrenology only as far as I have ascertained the facts by care-
ful observation: and have not defended, nay, have greatly
doubted, much that passes current among phrenologists. He
knowsthat on mesmerism I have never speculated :—never gone
beyond the plain facts which I carefully observed. The same


76 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerism,


love of fact has made me advocate materialism. I see that
the living brain thinks and feels; and I have never indulged
in the hypothesis that, not it, but a something altogether
imagmary, called soul or spirit, thinks and feels and does
all that our experience plainly tells is done by the brain,
while we are being completely deceived by our fancied expe-
rience. The spiritualist is the man of lively imagination and
predilection for hypotheses. He knows that I have quoted
Locke’s-words, “that God can and doth give to some parcels
of matter a power of perception and thinking, or that all
animals have immaterial and consequently immortal souls as
well as men; and to say that fleas and mites, &c., have im-
mortal souls as well as men, will possibly be looked on as
going a great way to serve an hypothesis :”* and that I care-
fully shew that a materialist may believe in God and a future
state, and that the evidence of the latter must be revelation
not philosophy: and quote great divines of this last opinion.
He knows that I never show a love of novelty: that of all
the new remedies which have been brought to notice I have
not investigated the properties of more than half a dozen,
though I was an hospital physician for one and twenty years.
It was long before I used the stethoscope : but, when I began
and found it of use, I boldly taught its advantages ; and now
it is in general use. I first heard of phrenology in 1807, at a
supper given to the Edinburgh Club by Sir Astley Cooper,
when a skull marked according to Gall was handed round,
and heartily laughed at by Sir Astley himself, Dr. Farre, Dr.
Roget, Mr. Travers, and the whole party: but it was not till
1815 that I turned my attention to it, and then my course
was to inquire into it, by observing skulls, casts, and living
heads: and I have never yet defended an organ which per-
sonal observation has not proved to me to be established. In
the article Mesmerism, in No. I. of The Zoist, I have stated
that Mr. Chenevix showed me some mesmeric experiments in
1829; but, so far from being satisfied, I drew no conclusion,
“T might be deceived and I drew no inference,” p. 82: at length
he showed me some facts in an hospital patient of my own
which satisfied me that there was some truth in the matter.
But I paid no further attention to it, till, by mere accident, I
witnessed facts under the hands of M. Dupotet in 1836. The
slowness of my admission of the several mesmeric phenomena
from that time to this Mr. Newnham perfectly well knows.
He speaks of the “enthusiasm of my character,” and feels it
right to “to allow a liberal discount for this infirmity.” Now


* Second Reply to the Bishop of Worcester, p. 466.


by Dr. Elliotson. 77


I defy Mr. N. to adduce an instance of my enthusiasm. I am
laboriously industrious : never give up anything when I see my
way and feel that I am right. But,so farfrom being enthusiastic,
Mr. N. knows that I have never advanced a fact or opinion which
I have been obliged to retract : that I never was sanguine as to
results: was always remarked by all my pupils for cautious-
ness of statement and have ever been by my patients for
cautiousness of opinion, so that I am sanguine and enthu-
siastic in nothing ; though not a reed to be shaken by the idle
wind. Mr. N. sneeringly calls Dr. Engledue and myself
great men. I trust we are both humble men: conscious of
the little we know—of the little we ever can know—and
of the little good we do compared with what we might:
and,—if Dr. Engledue has, in the words of Mr. Newn-
ham, “ great talents and perfect honesty and integrity!”
and if we both deserve the “ highest respect” which Mr. N.
professes to have “ for our talents;” if, as he declares, “no
one who knows my history can at all doubt the truthful-
ness of my report, my cases affording prima facie evidence
of sincerity and truth,” so that he has ascertained from per-
sons “ prejudiced against me that more than one of my re-
ported cures are substantially true ;—and, if so, entitled to
belief for the rest;” if I merit the place he gives me in the
list of those witnesses whose fidelity is established, upon whom
the breath of suspicion cannot exhale its withering blast, or the
clouds of ignorance or deficient information encircle with an atmo-
sphere of doubtfulness, p. 245,*—I trust that we are conscious
that we have not made ourselves and have no merit whatever.
The charge of want of sober judgment, of the infirmity of
enthusiasm, and liveliness of imagination, comes badly from
Mr. N., who, while confessing he has no positive opinion upon
phrenology, ranges himself with its opponents, p. 374: who,
not having made a single experiment in mesmerism, promised
but a year ago, when a host of recent facts had been published
by observers of good faith in proof of it, to write a book
against it, and now does not hesitate, still without appear-
ing to have made an experiment or seen more than one
case, to write a book upon it, and advance the most positive
opinions. I could never have possessed an opinion of my-


* In this list he puts but three English writers, and no other of the me-
dical profession than myself: placing me between Mr. Colquhoun, a lawyer,
who, by the way, is only a compiler like himself, and Mr. Townshend, a
divine,—both ardent spiritualists, and the former so wild that Mr. N., with-
out mentioning his name, cannot adopt his German views of the flights of
the spirit, but connects all clairvoyance with cerebral action, pp. 218, 236,
240, 242, 269, 292, 299, 315. Some of these passages imply the truth that
the brain thinks and feels.


78 Cure of Hysterical Epilepsy, &c., with Mesmerism.


self so high as to do this. Though I have devoted a few
hours daily for above eight years to experimental enquiry
into it, I have not felt myself qualified to yield to the
pressing entreaties of booksellers and mesmerists to write a
work upon the subject,—no, not even a manual. Happy in-
deed would it have been for Mr. Newnham had he not writ-
ten a book; for every informed mesmerist sees that more
error, contradiction, absurdity, and petty feeling, were never
assembled in so small a number of pages.

The question of the excitement of distinct cerebral organs,
and of an organ of one side without its fellow, by mesmeric
agency, must be settled by observation. If Mr. Newnham
doubted, he had only to ask me to shew him my facts, and
he should have received every attention from me. He says
Iam no friend or favourite of his. I am not sure that.I
ever saw him, and certainly never had the most indirect
intercourse with him. But, though I cannot respect him, I
shall be happy to shew him proofs of everything I have
advanced, and particularly the effect of mesmeric influence
upon the separate organs of the brain, and upon opposing or-
gans of the two sides, when no will of the operator or any
other person, no sympathy with either, no suggestion, no
occult means of knowing what is taking place, is possible.
Indeed Mr. N. knows, for his book contains matter from
The Zoist though he never alludes to the work, that I have
published facts which prove there is mesmeric excitement
of the individual organs without “co-identity in the feel-
ings, the thoughts, and the opinions of the magnetizer and
his patient, without clairvoyance on the part of the patient,
and his thinking and feeling with the brain of the magnet-
izer.” pp. 378-9. He knows well the facts recorded in No.
IIL, pp. 242-3-4; No. VI., pp. 231-2-3. He contends that
the mesmeric excitement of the cerebral organs must cause
us to “give up the idea of personal identity and moral re-
sponsibility.”” How presumed consequences can upset a
fact, I know not. The facts are facts: and why the simulta-
neous excitement of two opposite feelings destroys identity,
why the excitement of a distinct faculty by the mesmer-
iser’s finger proves that we never possess a controlling will, I
cannot comprehend. An inflamed, drunken, or mad brain
might just as well be thought to prove that we never have a
controlling will; or the mesmeric rigidity or involuntary
traction of an arm or leg that we do not possess the power
of voluntary motion. Without the employment of the finger,
the ordinary process of mesmerism may stupify or excite
distinct intellectual faculties er feelings, so that we are no


Cure of agonizing Pain with Mesmerism. 79


longer master of them. This Mr. Newnham allows; and
what is the difference between this and local cerebral effects
induced by the points of the fingers over particular spots ?

With all earnestness I would advise Mr. N. to act according
to the motto of his title-page: “In studying magnetic phe-
nomena, not to be contented with saying—that is false ; I
don’t believe that ; that is impossible ; that is not conformable to
the laws of nature ; but to descend to the depths of his con-
science :”—to remember that he declares “ obstinate unbelief
without examination to be the evidence of an unsound mind,”
p. 6: and that he has written that other truths of mesmerism
have been “attempted to be undermined by an unsupported
denial of its facts, by all the acts of jesuitical sophistry, of
mendacious representation, of uncandid statement, and of the
suppression and sophistication of truth, and by all the sinister
artifices to which ignorant hardihood lays claim when assault-
ing scientific caution.” p. 10.

I entreat Mr. Newnham to remember that religion is not
the easy and perhaps profitable holding of opinions, but to do
justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly.

Joun EL tiortson.


VI. Cure of agonizing Pain with Mesmerism. By Mr. Bauvock.
Communicated by Dr. Ex.iorson.


7, Terrace, Dock-yard, Chatham,
19th March, 1845.

Dear Dr. Elliotson,—In a recent conversation that I had
with you relative to the case of Robert Flood, you thought
publicity ought to be given to it, and I therefore place it in
your hands for you to do what you may think fit with it. I
am aware that, as a private individual and not a medical man,
I shall not be able to give so clear an account of the symp-
toms as I could wish. It is however satisfactory for me to
know that he is now quite well. When he applied to me he
was suffering excruciating pain, he was almost incapable of
following his occupation as a tailor, and he looked the epi-
tome of poverty and wretchedness. And, to use his own
language when he came to me, “ his life was quite burthen-
some.” He came to me on the 5th February, 1843. He
was, as he told me then, in very great agony in the region of
his left kidney. He told me he had been a patient at Guy’s
Hospital, and they could do him no good. He said he had
been under the treatment of several of the medical men of
this neighbourhood, but that none of them seemed to know


80 Cure of agonizing Pain with Mesmerism,


what was the matter with him; and he said his pain was so
acute that almost every day he was compelled to lie down on
his bed and writhe in agony. I got him to sleep in about five
minutes, and he almost immediately passed into deep sleep.
I placed him sideways in a chair, and made strong passes
from his head, down the spine, and then made cross passes
from the left kidney, over his abdomen, and then downwards.
I kept him asleep for an hour. And again on the 8th. On
the 10th February, when I was making passes over the region
of the left kidney (without my touching him), he writhed
with pain. I told him to tell me when he was free from pain,
and in a few minutes he said he was quite well. And, at the
expiration of an hour, when I woke him up, he said he had
no pain, but felt a numbness where his acute pain used to be.
On the 12th of February, in his sleep, the expression of pain,
when the passes were made over his kidney, was quite terrific;
he groaned and shrunk away from my fingers as if they were
hot iron. On the 21st of February, when he was mesmerised,
when I made strong passes over the kidney, tears flowed
down his checks, and he appeared in much pain; but at the
expiration of a very few minutes he said he was quite well,
and he awoke free from pain. Thursday, 23rd February,
when I mesmerised him, he told me that “ he had had a very
curious feeling. He was getting up, and felt an odd sensa-
tion, like something tearing, just by his left kidney; that
something appeared to move there, for about four inches, to-
wards his belly, and that the pain he formerly felt over his
kidney was removed to that spot.” For about ten minutes he
felt most acutely every pass that I made over the new part
affected, but then said, “ It is quite gone, and I feel free from
pain, and am well, and I feel convinced I shall soon be quite
a man again.” Monday, 27th February, when mesmerised,
he told me “that the pain he had felt over his kidney was
quite gone, but that on Friday, the 24th, he had felt a second
tearing, as it were, of something in his inside, and that for
some time he felt a similar pain to what he used to feel in his
kidney near his abdomen ;” I of course made passes over that
part, he writhing with pain, for ten minutes, but when I
woke him he was free from pain.

On the 2nd of March, 1843, he was mesmerised ; I made
passes, and he did not writhe; he told me he was and had
been free from pain since I last put him to sleep. From that
time he got better, and his general health improved. I mes-
merised him very frequently, but he never had any return of
his pain. Flood was then about 26 years of age, and I have
seen him run and jump after the 2nd March, quite free from


by Mr. Baldock. 81


pain. I know that when he came to me he was scarcely able
to walk. He told me he never took medicine of any kind
whilst under my care. I had the pleasure of seeing him, by
mesmerism alone, quite cured. He soon after that time re-
moved from here to Caistor, in Lincolnshire, and I inclose
you a letter received from him a week ago, and although two
years have elapsed, you will see by his own account how very
ill he was, that he was cured by mesmerism, and that he now
continues well.
Any comment upon such a cure is superfluous.
I am, dear, Dr. Elliotson,
Yours sincerely and truly,
Tuos. BaLpocg.


Bowstead’s Cottage, Caistor.

Dear Sir,—I received your kind and welcome letter, and
was very glad to hear that you and all your family was well.
I am in good health and spirits, having a good year’s work
before me; we are doing very well here. In compliance with
your request I here send you an account.

I think it is now about twelve years since I received a
very severe blow in my back, inclining to my left side, some-
where about the region of my left kidney. I remember that I
fainted away for a long time. At that time I thought no
more about it, still I always complained of a pain thereabouts.
I very frequently used to take spirits of nitre to give me a
little ease. I continued to get worse, and, I think for three
years before I first came to you, I was always taking medicine
of one or more surgeons’ prescribing, until at last I could not
work. I could scarcely eat or move ; there was a very visible
swelling in my back, near my side at this time; my pain was
all round. There seemed to be something that tied my
stomach and my liver down to my back. When I took my
food there did not seem room enough in my body to contain
it. It nearly all came up, excepting when I eat, as I may
say, a crumb. I am sure I did not eat enough for a babe,
and when I walked there was something, which I thought
was my stomach, used to strike my back and cause me a deal
of pain. If I attempted to run it moved up and down, still
bearing on my back. I tried for every advice that I possibly
could get ; even I went to Guy’s, and they could do me no
good. After I had been discharged from Guy’s, I came to
you, as you can testify, a poor emaciated being, looking like
death, and very soon after I only felt like a numbness in the
part affected. It afterwards gradually left me by degrees,


until one morning, after I had been mesmerised the preced-
VOL. III. G


82 Cure of Uterine Disease with Mesmerism,


ing evening, when I felt a pain which I cannot describe no
better than by saying I felt it like one pulling or tearing my
plaster, which I had on my back, off it, and all the flesh of
my back with it; and then I voided blood and matter. I,
after being mesmerised again, felt the same, but much lighter,
and again until I had four sharp tearings in my back, extend-
ing from side to side, partly taking in my front ribs, and then
I got better very fast. I am now in good health, and can
work as hard and as long as any man; I have worked from
four till nine without fatigue often.

I return you many thanks for your kindness to me in re-
lieving me of pain, and for the stamps. Mrs. Flood desires
to be remembered to you and your family. We hope you
will soon write again.

I remain, your very humble servant,
Rr. Fioop.


P.S.—I will answer any question that Dr. Elliotson may
wish to ask, if he should want any, by his writing to me.
I was entered in Guy’s under the impression there was a
tumour or abscess formed on my spleen.


VII. Cure of Uterine Disease with Mesmerism, by Mr.VERNon.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


March 14th, 1845.

Sir,—The following cure of uterine affection is equally as-
tonishing with Miss Martineau’s, but of course ascribable
entirely to imagination. The only plaguy part of the matter
is, that when the poor patients, in full faith and hope, are all
busy with the pills, potions, and lotions, sent them by their
anti-mesmeric doctors, imagination does not think proper to
lend her helping hand and cure them, as she does when the
mesmeric doctor begins his operations. She ought to respect
orthodox established practice, however futile, and not favour
unprofessional absurdities—out upon her.

On the 28th of last November, I received a’ letter from
the mother of the lady whose case is about to be related, re-
questing to know if I thought mesmerism would be service-
able. I replied that mesmerism could not be expected to
cure mechanical injury, but that it would probably lessen
the pain and invigorate the system; and ought certainly to
be employed.

Another letter arrived, requesting to know if I could re-


by Mr. Vernon. 83


commend a mesmeriser; but before my answer was sent, a
mesmeriser was found in Brighton. The detail has been
written by the patient and placed at my disposal.
I am, yours, &c.,
Joun ELLiorson.


Sir,—The following account of a long and painful illness,
from which I have been cured by mesmerism, will, I trust, be
found useful, not only in persuading others to apply to the
same agency, but in inducing them, when they shall be re-
lieved, to make similar statements for the benefit of their
fellow-sufferers. For five years and a half I have been suffer-
ing from a complaint in the uterus, partly in consequence of
a severe and rapid accouchement. I was, however, considered
to have recovered the effects of my confinement, until about a
year after, when a severe fall, attended with several circum-
stances of an afflicting nature, caused so much suffering that
I was obliged for a time to abstain from all exertion. Not-
withstanding every precaution, my complaint increased to a
most distressing extent. About three years ago I was attacked
with violent spasms in the limbs, side, and stomach, to which
I continued subject up to the time of my being mesmerised.
These spasms returned every week or ten days, and latterly
much more frequently, the fits lasting five or six hours. No
medicine seemed to have any effect in checking their violence,
and I only obtained relief when my strength was exhausted,
or I was stupified with opiates. I returned to England in
in May, 1843, and my general health was much benefited by
the sea voyage; but in consequence of bad weather in Sep-
tember and October of the same year, my malady became
much aggravated. I was at this time attended by Mr. H.
Browne, surgeon to Her Majesty’s household at Windsor.
He assured me, as many others have done, that he never met
with so distressing a case in a person of my age (24). Under
Mr. Brown’s very judicious treatment my complaint was
somewhat ameliorated; that is, I was able with difficulty to
walk about the house, but I was never entirely free from pain,
and the spasms continued to attack me with their usual vio-
lence. I now come to the period of my greatest suffering,
namely, since March last, when I removed to Brighton, where
I unfortunately slipped in going down stairs, and received a
severe blow in the lower part of my back. I became very
rapidily worse after this accident, and at length was totally
unable to walk or move without great pain. I was attended
by Mr. R. Taylor, of 27, Old Steine, and Dr. G. Hall, 14,
Old Steine. Mr. Taylor satisfied himself that there was much

G2


84 Cure of Uterine Disease with Mesmerism,


enlargement and irritation of the uterus, with a fissure or
rupture at its cervix, as well as another, which rendered any
support impracticable. Under his directions I kept as quiet
as possible, and leeches were applied every fourth day for
many months. From the state of the uterus there was no
relief of any kind. I suffered the most excruciating pain,
darting downwards as far as the knees. These pains never
left me night or day: they could only occasionally be dulled
by opiates. I believe that Mr. Taylor did all for me that
medical skill could do: but he at last declared that he knew
not what more to prescribe ; that I must trust to time, and
to the advantages of my age for relief. But sleep and appe-
tite had completely forsaken me, unless indeed the stupor
produced by morphia or laudanum could be called sleep.
By the persuasion of my mother, I determined to apply to
mesmerism ; not, however, without great reluctance from the
prejudice I found everywhere against it. My mother wrote
to you, and received your opinion with regard to mesmerism.
After the receipt of your answer, advising my trying it, Mr.
Vernon arrived in Brighton; and after a night of intense
suffering, I consented, from pure desperation, to seek Mr.
Vernon’s aid as a mesmeriser. Two days before, I saw Mr.
Taylor, who again satisfied himself of my actual state. He
appeared anxious to keep up my spirits, but said I was in a
miserable condition, and again declared to my mother that
he knew not what more to do. The pains were so violent that
I could with difficulty refrain from screaming. Such was my
suffering that I positively could not bear my clothes, and the
fleurs blanches were profuse and continual. My functions
had been very irregular for years, and had ceased for three
months, although I took many medicines. I was just able,
with very great pain, to get from my bed to the sofa, unable
to lie on my left side, and my left leg, from the hip downwards,
was generally numb and cold. I was in the constant habit
of taking large doses of morphia three or four times a day,
and sometimes much more frequently, which, together with
the incessant and violent pain, produced such a distressing
effect on my mind, that I am sure if it had not been for mes-
merism, I should ere this have been the inmate of a mad-
house: in truth, I frequently could not be considered in my
senses. Not very long before I was mesmerised, upon my
complaining to Mr. Taylor of pressure upon any attempt to
stand, he ascertained that this was in consequence of the
cause before alluded to. Such was my state when my mother
asked Mr. Taylor’s permission to try mesmerism, which he
gave, with a laugh, saying, it would neither do good nor harm.


by Mr. Vernon. 85


Mr. Taylor has frequently told me that I could never ex-
pect to walk again, except about the house.

I was mesmerised by Mr. Vernon on the 4th of Decem-
ber, and very soon lost all consciousness. I am told that I
remained asleep nearly an hour. I was better during the
night—felt more quiet. I was regularly mesmerised up to
the 21st, with the exception of one evening, when a restless
night was passed. After the fifth time of mesmerising, more than
half the doses of morphia were discontinued ; yet I slept nightly
better, without being disturbed by dreams, which had been of
so distressing a kind that they were a positive source of the
bitterest affliction. After the tenth time the opiates were
entirely discontinued, and my nights were passed in sound and
refreshing sleep. I was able in a fortnight to get up to break-
fast, to walk about the room with very tolerable comfort, and
even to attend to various occupations which had long been
given up. The periodical attacks of spasms were twice allayed
during these most violent paroxysms by Mr. Vernon, who
produced the mesmeric unconsciousness at one sitting in
tifteen minutes, and at last in about seven.

I have had no attack of spasms for more than a month.
Mr. Vernon left Brighton to go to Bristol for a fortnight,
during which period I anticipated a return of my pain; but
from the good I had experienced from mesmerism, I felt
strength to bear anything until Mr. V.’s return to London,
at which time it was proposed by my mother to remove me
there, if possible, to continue the treatment. The day after
Mr. Vernon left Brighton, a gentleman (Mr. Parsons, of the
Marine Library) attempted to mesmerise me. When partially
asleep, for he did not render me unconscious, I experienced a
strange shock, and my body, from the waist downwards, not
only became completely senseless, but my hearing was so
painfully acute, that I distinctly heard what was said by
people in the street, in the next house, and in the kitchen.
For some, to me, unaccountable reason, Mr. Parsons could
not remove the effects he had produced. My head became
very painfully affected, so that I have no recollection of the
two days. When I awoke, as it were from a deep sleep, I
found Mr. Vernon standing by my side: I was told that I
had been in a state of delirium, and that Mr. Vernon had
been sent for from Bristol. After being again mesmerised, I
felt quite easy; and on the following day, as I believe, by my
own direction when in the somnambulic state, I was taken to
London in the mesmeric sleep, without being at all aware that
I had left my own room in Brighton. The treatment has
been continued daily ever since, except during short periods


86 Miss Martineau and her Traducers.


when my mesmeriser has been absent from London; and I am
not only entirely free from all pain, but am even able to walk
out with every comfort and pleasure to myself; in fact my
health seems to be entirely restored, a result which could
never have been anticipated by me, and directly contrary to
the opinions of the medical men who were attending me up
to the time when I was so happily induced by the firm and
kind persuasions of my mother to try mesmerism. I believe
myself to be entirely cured. Symptoms, which were feared to
indicate organic disease, have entirely disappeared ; indeed
Dr. Hall assured me that Mr. Taylor had found ulceration to
have begun: my appetite is good, my sleep undisturbed,
my mental powers fully restored, and a short time only
appears to be required to restore me to the strength I pos-
sessed before my long-continued, distressing, and apparently
miraculously cured sufferings. I will conclude by saying, that
I believe my rapid recovery is owing, in a great measure, to
the indefatigable and unremitting attention Mr. Vernon has
paid to my case ever since he undertook it.
Yours obediently,
To Dr. Elliotson. * * *


I will only add that, though I have not publicly put my
name to this letter, I gladly authorize you to answer any pri-
vate inquiries respecting me that you think proper, and like-
wise to give my name to such as are anxious and yet fearful
of appealing to mesmerism.


VIII. Miss Martineau and her Traducers.


How extraordinary are the changes in the world of thought !
The subject which the critic a few months since would not
condescend to notice, has been elevated to a commanding
position,—it is the topic with which the daily papers and the
weekly periodicals are filled ; in fact, all classes are moved as
by one common consent, and mesmerism from the palace to
the smallest town in the united kingdom, is the scientific
question absorbing public attention. Even Mr. Wakley, who
impudently declared that he had exposed the “humbug” of
mesmerism, is obliged to yield to the pressure from without,
and to enable him “to wheel about” in a becoming manner,
he has purchased the cerebral property of a Dr. Radcliffe
Hall. By this means he has placed the Lancet in a transition


Miss Martineau and her Traducers. 87
state, and when he thinks the time for the “jump” has arrived,
like Mr. Newnham, he will embrace the truth with all its
wonders. We hope that the public voice will wring from
Mr. Wakley some expression of regret that he should have
been so unfaithful to literature and science, as to have made
his journal the instrument for disseminating such gross slan-
ders and such unfounded statements,—we are constrained,
however, to say that the history of his rise and progress
leads us to the conclusion, that if left to himself, he will
very quietly settle down, regardless of the injuries he has
inflicted, and caring little for the truth of mesmerism, beyond
the power which its advocacy may afford to increase the sale
of his periodical and the returns to his exchequer. Dr. Rad-
cliffe Hall will gain great notoriety, for he stands accused of
having falsified historical facts, and of garbling to serve his
own purpose important documents,—he has hired himself to
Mr. Wakley, and proved to the world that like his master he
is not possessed of sufficient accuracy to cause him to quote
fairly the documents of a past age or chronicle the facts of
the present.

The immediate cause of all this activity is the publication
of the case of Miss Martineau, who, after five years incessant
suffering and confinement to her couch, is now well; and
we, knowing the particulars from the first day of her illness
to the last day of her continuance of pills and mixtures, and
from this period onwards day by day, during the mesmeric
treatment, as medical men, unhesitatingly assert that this
cure has been accomplished by the aid of mesmerism alone.
But Miss M. is not the first person cured by this plan of
treatment. Hundreds and thousands have received health
and strength—have been raised from the couch of suffering
and restored to their friends and society—have recognized the
power by means of which they have been healed, and promul-
gated again and again their thanks; but their tale has not
been heeded, or, if listened to for a moment, it was soon for-
gotten, and they were ranked in the same category with the
nervous, the visionary, or the insane. It is then in a great
measure to the publication of Miss M.’s case that this sudden
change is to be attributed. From every quarter we hear of
extraordinary cures. We understand that even medical men,
some of them belonging to the London phalanx of opponents,
are daily requesting from Dr. Elliotson interviews for themselves
or their friends. Yes, the medical butterflies are again begin-
ning to be attracted towards that centre which on former oc-
casions afforded them light, and contributed in no small de-
gree towards the elevation they now enjoy. And when they


88 Miss Martineau and her Traducers.


hear that Royalty has given an opinion regarding the facts
they have so long neglected*—when they hear that Royalty
recognizes a method of cure which they have for so long a pe-
riod sneered at, why then we shall really dread the conse-
quences ; for the sudden change from a state of wilful igno-
rance to an ardent desire for knowledge—from the employment
of promulgating calumnies, falsehoods and misrepresentations,
to the practice of the science they have so long ridiculed, must
be considered a great revolution. May they in their new po-
sition be guided by the dictates of conscientiousness, and
strive manfully to overcome the petty promptings of mere
animal impulse.

If it were possible for us to place before our readers the
details of the prolonged sufferings endured by Miss Martineau,
unalleviated by ordinary treatment, but speedily and effectu-
ally cured by mesmerism, we feel convinced that no unpreju-
diced medical practitioner could entertain a doubt regarding
the result or the means by which it was accomplished. We
are not about to dress up a case for the public gaze, we are
not about to make any ad captandum statements, we have to
deal with a great medical fact—a physiological phenomenon,
and our duty is to endeavour to place this before our readers
in simple, truthful language, in order to incite them to the
use of that power which they all possess, and which they are
called upon to use, under judicious authority, for the allevia-
tion and cure of disease. There are many interesting points
for consideration in the history of this case, and if this were
a medical journal we should not shrink from a full discussion.
On the present occasion, however, we shall confine ourselves
to a simple statement of the following outline. Let it be dis-
tinctly understood, that what we are about to state is authen-
tic; we repeat this, because we are now using the lady’s
notes, furnished to us by herself, and for our present purpose.
We regret that we are compelled to adopt the following course,
but a sense of justice to the cause of mesmerism forces it upon
us, and all we can do is to publish the details in a language
which will confide them to the keeping of two parties—medi-
cal men and the educated and refined.

Miss M. was in America in 1834, and while there sud-
denly experienced the first symptoms of her distressing ma-
lady. From this period till the autumn of 1838 her health
gradually gave way. She was not only conscious of this her-


* Prince Albert stated before a large party at the Palace, only a
month ago, “ That the medical men of this country were conducting them-
selves in a very improper manner, by refusing to investigate the facts pre-
sented to them by the science of mesmerism.”


Miss Martineau and her Traducers. 89


self, but her delicate appearance alarmed her relations and
friends, and one in particular, without converse with the suf-
ferer, suspected the nature of her disease. In April 1839,
not knowing the exact nature of her disease, for her brother-
in-law, Mr. Greenhow, was unable to give a positive opinion,
she undertook to convey an invalid cousin to Lucerne. During
the journey her travelling companions were painfully struck
by her depression of spirits, and she became conscious of an
increasing inability to enjoy everything; in fact, the whole
party became so alarmed, that on their arrival at Venice, Dr.
Nardo was consulted, and a letter was dispatched to Mr.
Greenhow containing a full detail of all her symptoms. After
the consultation with Dr. Nardo, an immediate return home
was determined on. The journey was made as easy as possi-
ble, and by the end of July 1839, Miss M. was under the
immediate care of Mr. Greenhow. We shall take this gentle-
man’s own description of the state of the case at this period.
He says that there was no difficulty in referring the whole
train of symptoms to some organic or functional derangement
of the uterus.

“Uterus major erat, retroversus, et profunde in vagina
fixus: os cum cervice partem vagine anteriorem, corpus cum
fundo, os sacrum fere attingente, posteriorem, occupabant ;
ita ut comprimerentur urethra, vesica, et rectum inferius,
unde szepe multum doloris et incommodi. Pone pubem, an-
gulo fere recto, deorsum flectebatur cervix, atque ab ore pen-
debat polypus parvus, cujus facilis ablatio nil profuit. Carnem
qu Venetiis sese ostenderat hoc multo majorem et omnino
diversam fuisse, asseruit egra: et quamvis os uteri digito
aperiri nequibat, et tam deprimebatur ut aliquid extrudi vix
permitteret, diu sperabam alterum et majorem polypum sese
ostensurum esse.”

We shall now take the sufferer’s own account of her state
from this period, July 1839, till September 1841. Miss M.
continued to take daily exercise till the middle of October
1839, when her sufferings from sickness, breathlessness and
pain in the back, made it too painful to be worth the cost.
In January 1840, all the symptoms had increased. It was for
some time impossible to raise the right leg more than suffi-
cient to permit walking, and throughout the whole period she
could bear none but a recumbent posture from the intolerable
sinking which attended every effort to sit upright. She could
not sleep at night till she devised a plan of sleeping under a
basket, for the purpose of keeping the weight of the bed-
clothes from her body, and even then only in a prone position.
She was scared by horrors all night, and reduced by increas-


90 Miss Martineau and her Traducers.
ing sickness during the day. This sickness increased to such
a degree, that for wo years she was extremely low from want
of food. A very small breakfast and tea were nearly all she
could take, and these only through the operation of opiates,
to prevent the vomiting. At the earnest desire of Mr. G. and
her family, she repeatedly (four times) attempted to take gen-
tle exercise, but the pain, sinking, and especially the vomit-
ing that ensued, were such as clearly to shew that the cost
was too great for any advantage gained.

Fere ad ostium vaginz descendit uterus, tam retroversus
ut vesicam et intestinum premeret et dolores cieret. Magno-
pere indurescens, os sacrum contingens, dolorem lumborum
perpetuum, atque haud raro magnum, commovebat uterus ;
et dolor, alvo per plures dies non reddita, se remittere, alvo
autem reddita, acerbissimus fieri, solitus est.

Bene notandum est, quod ante omnes examinationes pre-
ter unam, alvus plene subducta fuisset. Die autem 2°
Aprilis, 1844, alvo per biduum non reddita, inopinato venit
chirurgus et exploravit.

In September 1841, Sir C. M. Clarke, at the request of
Mr. Greenhow, saw Miss M. The following is his own writ-
ten statement to Mr. G., dated September 30th, 1841 :-—


** It was my intention to say that I perfectly agreed with you as
to the nature of the complaint, that the disease was an enlargement
of the body of the uterus; that the neck of that organ was perfectly
healthy; that although the majority of these cases of enlargement of
the body of the uterus did not yield to external applications or to in-
ternal remedies, that nevertheless the disorder produced mechanical
symptoms only, and did not lead to any fatal result, to which ter-
mination disease of the neck of the uterus did lead. Farther, I
mentioned that in an instance or two I had known such complaints
as Miss M.’s subside, and that I would suggest the employment of
certain means for this desirable purpose.” — Mr. G.’s pamphlet,
page 15.


This is more cautiously worded than the opinion given to
Miss M. by Sir C. Clarke himself. On the occasion of his
visit he declared that nothing could be done but to palliate
symptoms. He distinctly used the word “ incurable,” saying,
that he had never known an instance of cure, and only one,
and that an exceptionable case, of great relief. The case re-
ferred to was treated at Paris, by the use of iodine ointment,
but Sir C. Clarke said that he had tried iodine “in an infinite
number of such cases and never knew it avail.” Again and
again he was interrogated by Miss M. regarding the future
progress of her case, and he avowed “that the disease was to
his knowledge incurable.”


Miss Martineau and her Traducers. 91


From this period the patient was placed under the influ-
ence of iodide of iron, and this remedy was continued for
THREE YEARS. The general health improved, but the disease
remained. In January 1844, Mr. G. expressed his regret at
being compelled after so long a use of iodine, to give up all
hopes of its affecting the complaint, or of anything beyond
alleviation being henceforth practicable. This opinion he
again expressed in April, and again in June, 1844.

On the 2nd of April, 1844, Mr. G. states :—

“Die 2° Aprilis, 1844, primo uteri statum paulum mu-
tatum inveni. Fundum paulum levare potui.”

To this statement Miss M. gives the following very satis-
factory explanation :—

Alvo nunc per biduum, ut antea dictum est, non reddita,
dolor ob uterum sic suffultaum minor erat, quamobrem chi-
rurgo dixit egra eum non accurate judicaturum esse. Ni-
hilominus tamen examinavit. Omnia in pristino statu erant,
nisi quod “ uterum fortasse nonnihil (a /eetle) magis mobilem
putaret chirurgus. “ Hoc autem non omnino certum est,”
aiebat.

On her again explaining, he appeared to acquiesce, but
Mr. G. says he did not. At all events, he said, that if differ-
ence there were, it was so slight that he could not be sure.
Miss M. says she is convinced that all her local symptoms
were the same as they had been for a long period ; nay, more,
that in June every bad symptom connected with the com-
plaint increased, and with this statement Mr. G. coincides.

About this period, the beginning of June 1844, the pe-
riod be it remembered of Miss M.’s greatest suffering, several
friends wrote to her to suggest a trial of mesmerism; and
while her thoughts were engaged on this subject, lo! Mr.
Greenhow himself made his appearance on the 20th of the
same month—a fact, by the bye, which he most carefully
avoids stating in his pamphlet. They conversed on the sub-
ject of mesmerism, and he promised to bring Mr. Spencer
Hall, who was then lecturing at Newcastle. On the 22nd of
June, Messrs. Greenhow and S. Hall visited Miss M. At
this interview such phenomena were produced, that Mr. Hall’s
visit was repeated on the following day. On Monday, the 24th
of June, Mr. H. was prevented from keeping his appointment,
and Miss M. had recourse to passes made by her own maid.
We refer our readers to the letter in the Atheneum of Novem-
ber 12th, for the detail of the future progress.

We must here remark that our intelligent and benevolent
friend, Mr. Atkinson, from henceforward directed the course
to be pursued, and after a few weeks, fortunately enlisted the


{
t
q
,
i


92 Miss Martineau and her Traducers.


sympathy of his friend, Mrs. Montagu Wynyard, jun., who
immediately proceeded to Miss M.’s residence. Miss M. says,
“In pure zeal and benevolence this lady came to me, and has
been with me ever since. When I found myself able to re-
pose on the knowledge and power (mental and moral) of my
mesmerist, the last impediments to my progress were cleared
away, and I improved accordingly.” We really want words
to express our admiration of this lady’s benevolence. We
know from abundant experience the amount of labour, the
fatigue and anxiety, which such a case as Miss M.’s must
have caused ; and when we say that this lady travelled to a
distant part of the country, to devote her health, her time,
and her energy, for the purpose of mesmerising an individual
she did not know, but solely influenced by a desire to allevi-
ate human suffering, we are sure that we shall be more dis-
creet if we do not attempt the use of laudatory language, but
simply leave the act to be judged of by those who are capable
of appreciating what is so truly grand and benevolent. The
language of panegyric is offensive to the intelligent and good,
and prolonged allusion to this topic cannot strengthen our
admiration. We say to the medical scoffers, and to Mr.
Greenhow in particular—go and do likewise.

As we have just said, the entire course pursued by Mrs.
Wynyard was indicated by Mr. Atkinson. He received notes
describing the progress made and then gave directions accord-
ingly, which were implicitly followed. On September 4th,
just ten weeks after the commencement of the mesmeric
treatment, Mr. G. furnishes us with another report.* He
says :—

“Uterum iterum bene examinavi, et que ac die 2°
Aprilis, partes ejus posteriores minus quam antea adherentes
inveni. Fundus retroversus recto atque ossi sacro contingens
magis mobilis sentiebatur et digito in vaginam intromisso le-
vari poterat.

“ Uteri substantia minus solida est; os nonnihil magis
quam olim digito cedit ; ab eo, duo quedam, non ita magna,
tanquam lumbrici, pendebant : a quibus liquor rubellus inter-
dum exprimebatur.”

It was at this interview that Mr. G. said to his patient,
“1 think we may ascribe this beneficial change to the iodine.”
A conclusion from which Miss M. very properly dissented.
Innocent and weak Mr. Greenhow! Your patient had taken


* Mr. S. Hall says in a letter to the Atlas: “‘ But, so fur as I remember,
Mr. Greenhow did not on that or any other occasion give me the slightest
idea that a cure of Miss M.’s disease had already commenced (as his pam-
phlet now states it had) two months before.”


Miss Martineau and her Traducers. 93


iodide of iron for three years, without the least beneficial
effect on the disease,—on the 22nd of June, 1844, you re-
gretted that the remedy had failed,—on the 4th of September,
1844, after the mesmeric treatment had been pursued for fen
weeks, and your iodine pills discontinued for four weeks, you
find your patient very nearly well, and you disingenuously
attribute the improvement to the iodine pills!! We say that
this is most disreputable conduct. If on the 22nd day of
June, 1844, your patient had commenced the use of a new
medicine given by yourself, and a like improvement had been
observed in the following September, would you have attri-
buted the change to the iodine pills or to the new medicine ?
We are ashamed of you. There is a want of honesty here—
there is a glaring defalcation from the dictates of conscien-
tiousness—a low attempt to exalt your manifestly useless re-
medy, and to make the public believe that mesmerism was of
no avail. We much doubt whether the doses you exhibited
were calculated to have any other effect than that of a very
weak tonic. We think that there was a lack of medical skill
in permitting a patient to continue such a medicine for three
years and in such minute doses. If we wish to attempt the
removal of a tumour, we are in the habit of exhibiting a
more energetic preparation of iodine, and then increasing the
dose till some specific effect is produced. We fearlessly ap-
peal to your unprejudiced medical brethren, and ask them if
it is fair, honest, or just, to attribute the improvement and
ultimate restoration to perfect health in this case, to the effect
of a medicine which had been taken for three years without
any result, and which had been discontinued for four weeks,
before you could positively say that there was improvement ?

On December 6th, 1844, Mr. G. says :—

“Tterum bene exploravi: uteri fundus minus inherescit,
et altius levari potest; semper enim minus minusque ab
Aprilis 2°¢° die inhzsit. Uterus adhuc angulo fere recto re-
troversus magnus et durus est. Pediculi duo membranacei
ut antehac pendent.”

On this date Miss M. states, that there was no pain in
her back, that she had nights of unbroken sleep, walked se-
veral miles daily and led a busy life without fatigue, had
gained flesh and spirits, and believed herself in better health
than in any part of her previous life. In a letter to Dr.
Elliotson, dated Dec. 6th, 1844, she says, “I am quite well,
feeling no traces of my long disease. I never have the slight-
est or most transient pain, and my strength seems inexhaust-
ible ;’—in fact, the sufferer for five years was cured by mes-
merism in five months !


94 Miss Martineau and her Traducers.


But now we come to a very melancholy portion of this
subject,—we mean the course which Mr. G. thought proper
to pursue. After the publication of Miss M.’s letters in the
Atheneum, it was to be expected that there would be nume-
rous enquiries regarding the nature of the disease under
which this lady had so long suffered. This lady’s writings
have won for her more than European reputation, and we do
not know another patient whose cure could by any possibility
cause a greater sensation, or produce more anxious enquiries
from the intelligent. Medical men—albeit, it takes a great
power to arouse them and to turn them from the comfortable
jog-trot routine of writing prescriptions and accepting fees—
became interested. Many erroneous statements were promul-
gated, various diagnoses were attempted, but of course they
were all incorrect, because the real medical facts of the case
had not been presented to them. Some supposed that Mr. G.
had been mistaken. This was a dreadful blow, and Mr. G.
could not bear it. For the purpose, therefore, of removing
these aspersions on his medical skill, he adopted the novel,
the—what shall we say ?—the unpardonable course of publish-
ing a shilling pamphlet, containing the most minute details
of a distressing female disease—details, which we feel no
hesitation in saying the majority of his medical brethren un-
der similar circumstances would have hesitated long, ere they
displayed with the name attached, in the pages of their own
periodicals. There is no excuse. We would shelter a medi-
cal brother if we could, but we cannot; and the honor of the
profession compels us to state in the most forcible language
we can employ, that he has not only offended against good
manners, but that he has violated the precincts of professional
confidence and delicacy. To our view, it matters little whether
he had the sanction of the patient or not.* Under any pres-
sure from external circumstances, a shilling pamphlet ought
not to have been published, for there were other, surer, and
more legitimate means at the command of an educated medical
man. With this, our deliberate opinion, we would leave the
subject, if we had not noticed that the members of our pro-
fession conducting the periodical literature, instead of rally-
ing round a defenceless female and protesting against the
course adopted by Mr. G., have caught at his vulgar produc-
tion, and held it up as affording proof, and most convincing


* On this question there seems to have been some serious misunderstand-
ing. We can throw no light on this part. Both Miss M. and Mr. G. have
published the correspondence which passed between them, and the public
must form their own opinion. If Miss M. had seen Mr. G.’s manuscript,
and she ought to have done so, she must have protested against the publication.


Miss Martineau and her Traducers. 95


proof, that mesmerism had nothing to do with curing, what
their own high authority pronounced to be “ an incurable dis-
ease ;” and that as regards the long train of distressing symp-
toms we have enumerated, and which their medicines could
not alleviate, “that the time had arrived when a new and pow-
erful stimulus only was required to enable the enthusiastic mind
of the patient to shake them off”’ Write on, pervert and
shuffle, most truth-despising, antiquity-loving brethren, such
will not be your verdict by and bye. We like to prophecy,
and we will do so now, because our last prophecy has been
fulfilled, aye, in this very month too!* We therefore predict
that in less than two years, the case of Miss M. will be quoted
by medical men to their patients as affording a most convinc-
ing proof of the power of Mesmerism over a disease consi-
dered hitherto most intractable. Let us chronicle the date of
this prophecy—April, 1845. Short-sighted men! You have
not commenced to quote the cases published in this journal.
But you must. Pray, however, hold out as long as you possi-
bly can, your previous obstinacy will dignify the grace of
your concession when it comes, and the dates of your jour-
nals will record, for the benefit of posterity, the period when
you first ventured to suggest the propriety of treating diseases
with other appliances than drugs, and to teach the possibility
of removing limbs without inflicting pain and hearing the
cries of the tortured patients.

We presume that Miss M.’s letters which first appeared
in the Atheneum and are now published in a collected form
by Moxon, Dover Street, are in the possession of all our
friends. After a careful perusal of them, we must say that
we doubt whether these letters were submitted to the inspec-
tion of Mr. Atkinson before publication. This precaution
ought to have been taken. Such an intelligent and practical
mesmeriser would have suggested the propriety of suppress-
ing a good deal that was published, and we also think that
Miss M. weakened her own case by not inserting in her first
letter many points of interest which an experienced mesmer-
iser would have prompted. We are quite sure that Miss M.
will accept in good part this little remark ; for we, who for
many years have been laboriously investigating this intricate
subject, feel that it is no inordinate manifestation of self-
esteem, to state that the experience of a few weeks cannot
entitle any individual to become an expounder of mesmeric
science. We respect the motives which prompted Miss M. to
take the step she did—we admire the moral courage, but


* See our notice of Dr. Forbes’s company’s pamphlet in the present number.


96 Mesmerism ; or Facts against Fallacy.


still, caution, and very great caution too, is abundantly requi-
site. Observations require to be repeated again and again
before they can be permitted to take their place in the cata-
logue of facts, and in the present state of our science, one
false step on the part of an enthusiastic friend, may be more
injurious to its progress, than all the weak, malicious, but
puerile attacks of Wakley and Forbes, with their legion of
blind coadjutors.
L. U. G. E.


IX. Mesmerism ; or Facts against Fallacy. In a Letter to
the Rev. George Sandby, by Apotrne Kistz, Esq.
London: Bailliére. 1845.


Mr. Kiste has not only presented to us the history of a very
interesting case, but he has exposed the very discreditable be-
haviour of Dr. Fluder, a gentleman residing at Lymington,
and the former medical attendant of the Hon. Mrs. Hare.

This lady has related her case in a very clear and instruc-
tive manner, confining herself to a simple statement of facts,
which everybody can understand. For eighteen years she
suffered from neuralgia of the heart, and was successively
under the care of Dr. Warren, Sir C. Bell, Mr. Abernethy,
Dr. Maton, and Dr. Elliotson, but the various remedies which
were suggested did not in the least relieve her. At this pericd,
1834, she was taking forty grains of opium a day. Her suf-
ferings continued unalleviated till the end of last year, 1844,
when she was fortunately introduced to Mr. Kiste.


“On the 16th of Sept. last we had some friends to dinner,
amongst whom was Mr. Kiste, who is an amateur mesmerist, and
has been successful in curing diseases which had baffled the skill of
medical men. He expressed a wish to try his power; but as our
friend Mr. B., Mons. Lafontaine, and Dr. Ashburner had failed to
produce the sleep, I sat down with the idea that I could not be
affected by mesmerism; he sat before me earnestly and steadily gaz-
ing in my eyes. In a few minutes I felt a most unusual tranquillity
of mind; the objects in the room seemed to lose their outline; and
the last thing I remember having seen were my mesmeriser’s eyes.
I was afterwards told, that in eight minutes I sank down in the arm-
chair, and that Mr. K. pronounced me to be in what is called mes-
meric somnambulism, a peculiar state of the nervous system. After
nearly two hours’ sleep, Mr. K. awoke me, and I felt tranquil, but
very sleepy.

“That night, for the first time after having had paroxysms every
night for three weeks previously, I was not only free from an attack,


Mesmerism ; or Facts against Fallacy. 97


but slept soundly till late in the morning, when I awoke quite re-
freshed.

** Since that day, Sept. 17, I have been entirely free from these
attacks, with the exception of having several times felt the symptoms
when I had taken cold, or when Mr. K. was not with us; but it has
not come to anything more than a little faintness. I know nothing
of my former agonies except by memory. My general constitution
has changed. I am much thinner; and in the course of three months
I have twice had occasion to have my dresses much diminished, and
I am now able to walk five or six miles without the least fatigue.

‘* Having been for nearly two months free from my usual suffer-
ings, Mr. Kiste proposed to me to diminish my doses. Although I
thought this an impossibility, I made the trial, when I found I did
not as formerly feel the loss. I continued by degrees to lessen the
quantity, and from having at that time been in the habit of taking
from sixty-six to upwards of eighty-six grains daily, I have now re-
duced it to considerably less than thirty, and I am going on to di-
minish the quantity.

**T was a dreadful sufferer for many years. I now am free from
that suffering, and in the enjoyment of health and comfort. Whereas
I was ill! I am now well!

**In thus coming forward, I am fully aware that I expose myself
to the ridicule of small minds and the observations of the malevolent:
to both I am perfectly indifferent.”


We are grieved to say—but recent facts force the conclu-
sion upon us—that there are medical men who seem to regret
the recovery of a patient after the adoption of the mesmeric
treatment. In one of the cures recorded in our present num-
ber, notwithstanding both the medical attendants declared
that they could not suggest any improved treatment,—after
the cure was effected by mesmerism, they refused to call upon
their former patient, and have not answered a letter which
was addressed to them. What! are there men in our pro-
fession so inhuman as to imagine that it is the duty of a suf-
ferer to abide by the dictum of the individual who confesses
that the cure is beyond his art—to remain satisfied with his
unsuccessful routine treatment, and it may be to die, without
making an attempt to seek other aid? Can this be true?
We are sure that Dr. Fluder does not experience such purely
animal promptings, although we are sorry to say, that we
have heard he has endeavoured to persuade poor creatures
who have suffered for a long period, not to have recourse to
the mesmeric treatment. The alleviation of pain and the
cure of disease must cause congratulatory feelings in all be-
nevolent men—the individual who experiences the reverse is
not a becoming member of the medical body.


VOL. III. H


( 98 )


X. On Valentine Greatrakes and Local Mesmerisation.
By Dr. Exxiorson.


Ar the beginning of this month I received a most kind letter
from Dr. Garrett Dillon, of Bath, accompanied by a fac-simile
in pencil of a print of Greatrakes, picked up in Cambridge,
where Dr. Dillon is at present. I requested, and at once ob-
tained, permission to send it to The Zoist, for lithographing
and publishing, should the editor feel disposed.

“Though the print was republished,” Dr. Dillon writes,
“in 1794, from the style of the operator’s dress, and from
the character and spelling of the incription, it is quite clear
that the original was of a much more remote date.”

In No. L., p. 61, I gave the following little notice of
Greatrakes :—

“In the middle of the seventeenth century an Irish pro-
testant gentleman named Greatrakes, of spotless character,
receiving no recompence, acting in the purest spirit of piety
and benevolence, and not pretending to explain how he did
it, ‘stroked’ thousands of the sick with his own hands, and,
though he did not pretend to cure all, is said to have cured
large numbers, and two celebrated men, Boyle and Cudworth,
put themselves under his care, which we presume they would
not have done, if the great doctors of the day had not failed
to cure them. The Lord Bishop of Derry declared that he
himself had seen ‘ dimness cleared and deafness cured,’ pain
‘drawn out at some distant part,’ ‘grievous sores of many
months date, in a few days healed, obstructions disappear,
and stoppages removed, and cancerous knots in the breast
dissolved,’ by his manipulations. The Royal Society pub-
lished some of his cures, and accounted for them ‘ by a sana-
tive contagion in Mr. Greatrakes’s body, which had an anti-
pathy to some particular diseases, and not to-others.’ ”

He was born in 1628, at Afane, near Waterford; edu-
cated in England ; held an official situation in Cork, and was
in the commission of the peace for that county ; and died in
1680. He was distinguished for simplicity and uprightness,
to which Robert Boyle bore testimony ; attesting many of his
cures, and believing him to be an extraordinary person. He
came over to England on the invitation of Lord Conway.

He first practised in his own family and neighbourhood,
feeling an irresistible impulse to cure diseases by touching and
stroking the affected parts, from which he did not desist, in
spite of all his wife’s entreaties. Taking no credit to him-
self, he ascribed all to the grace of God: and in confor-


Valentine Greatrakes and Local Mesmerisation. 99


mity with the superstition of former times, and among peo-
ple of the most regular education, said that he “met with
several instances, which seemed to him to be possession by
dumb devils, deaf devils, and talking devils; and that to his
apprehension, and others present, several evil spirits one
after the other have been pursued out of a woman, and every
one of them have been like to choke her (when it came up
to her throat) before it went forth; and when the last was
gone, she was perfectly well and so continued.” There can
be no question that Greatrakes performed wonders; and that
he continually, especially at last, when so many flocked to
him, signally failed.

Besides the certainty that, when multitudes flocked to
him, there would be a large number of cases irremediable by
his process, his strength could not have sufficed for so many,
and the proportion of beneficial results must have been ex-
pected on this account to diminish. And in the third place,
he could no longer have devoted the requisite time to each
case. To relieve pain by the hand is sometimes an easy and
rapid affair, but sometimes an hour or hours are required.
The cure of some diseases may require weeks and months.

I have no doubt that his process amounted to local mes-
merisation. It is not mentioned that he ever produced sleep.
His method was to stroke very gently downwards over the
seat of pain; in other words, to make longitudinal passes
with contact. Some ascribed the good effects to the devil,
some to imagination, some to friction ; Glanvill, more ration-
ally, to a sanative quality inherent in his constitution.

As to the devil, Dr. Stubbe* says, “I do not remember
that ever the devil did cure a disease, no, not where his glory
was concerned in it. There are a set of men (if they were
women it were tolerable) that think it not lawful to have re-
course unto his cures.” p. 25. No doubt imagination was more
kind than the devil, and had a share or the whole merit of
some of the cures. But Dr. Stubbe conceived that friction
could not explain all the benefit, because he moved his hands
so slowly.

* The Miraculous Conformist ; an account of severall Marvaillous Cures per-

formed by the stroaking of the hands of Mr. Valentine Greaterick: with a Phy-
sicull Discourse thereupon: in a letter to the Honourable Robert Boyle, Esq.
With a letter relating some other of his Marvellous Cures attested by E. Foxcroft,
M. A., and Fellow of King’s Colledge, Cambridge. By Henry Stubbe, Phy-
sician at Stratford-upon-Avon, in the County of Warwick. Oxford, 1666.
It was dedicated to his “‘ very worthy and learned friend, Dr. Thomas
Willis, Professor of Natural Philosophy in Oxford.”

In the present day there are divines who preach the same barbarous


ignorance, and laymen who listen to them, and read Charlotte Elizabeth
Teana, and look serious.
H 2


100 Valentine Greatrakes and Local Mesmerisation.


Dr. Stubbe gives the following account of one of his
cures :—

“ T saw him stroke a man for a great and settled paine in
his left shoulder, which rendered his arme useless: upon his
stroking it, the paine removed instantly into the end of the
musculus deltodes: being stroked there, it returned to the
shoulder again: thence (upon a second stroking) it flew to
the elbow, thence to his wrist, thence to his shoulder again ;
and thence to his fingers; whence it went out upon his last
stroking, so that he moved his arm vigorously every way.”
p. 15.

Modern mesmerisers recognize this as what they see every
day. By laying the hand for a longer or shorter time over
the affected part, or pointing at it, especially with contact,
with the fingers, and by drawing the hand along the part,
especially towards the feet, or hands, or chin, such relief is
often obtained as appears to the ignorant almost a miracle :
when passes in other directions have failed, and common
rubbing up and down, perhaps with liniments. Allow me to
refer to No. [V., pp. 461-2; No. V., p. 53, &e., pp. 43,
124, &., 137; No. VI., pp. 239, &c., 247, 258, 266; No.
VIL., pp. 357, &., 388-9.

I have just received the following accounts from Mr. H.S.
Thomson, whose former cases in No. V. we must all re-
member :—

Fairfield, near York, March, 1845.

My dear Sir,-—I have still continued my course of expe-
riments of local mesmerism for the relief of pain, &c., and I
think with very good success. If I sent you a list of all the
little aches and pains that I have removed, I could fill a goodly
volume. I shall only, therefore, send you an account of a
few of the most severe.

Anne Bean, a delicate young woman, who had suffered
more or less for four or five years from what had been called
a spinal complaint, had an attack of influenza in June last.
I saw her about six weeks afterwards, when she was so weak
she could scarcely walk, from a fixed pain in her chest and
right side, the old pain in her back, and an irritable short
cough attended with spitting of blood. All the symptoms
were removed in four times mesmerising. The pain in chest,
side, and back were relieved the first time entirely. She has
been well ever since.

July 10th, Miss —, had pain in the chest, and cough ; the
paia had been fixed in one place and without intermission for
three weeks. Removed the pain the first time; slight return
the next day. Mesmerised again, after which she had no


Valentine Greatrakes and Local Mesmerisation. 101
return of pain; and in a few days, the cough, which had
been troublesome for a length of time, was entirely gone.

In three or four hopeless cases, such as in malignant
tumours and cancer, I have been enabled to give the greatest
relief, always removing the pain for a length of time, and en-
abling the patients to sleep at night. In two of the cases,
the general health has much improved, and the severity of
symptoms has been mitigated; but the cases, I fear, are of
too long standing, and the age of the patients too great ;
besides the nature of disease will not allow me to think reco-
very possible.

A farming man of Col. Smith’s cut his hand severely by
falling with the blade of a slasher in it. Three fingers were
cut to the bone. I saw him three days afterwards, when the
hand and arm were much inflamed, and he complained of great
pain and throbbing as far as his shoulder. In half an hour I
entirely relieved all pain, and in a quarter of an hour after-
wards drew his fingers (by passes merely) perfectly straight,
(they were closed before ;) put a slip of rag round each finger,
compressing the edges of the wound slightly. He felt no
further inconvenience, and the wounds were perfectly healed
in a few days.

A similar accident, but a more severe one, as it was in-
flicted by a circular saw, occurred to a workman of Col.
Croft ; and who was relieved from pain in the same manner
by Col. Croft, to whom I had related my case.

On 2nd March last, my herdsman was struck by a Scotch
bullock on the chin. The horns cut to the bone,—he was
knocked down and was much stunned, and complained of the
muscles of his neck feeling much strained. When he came
into my room, six hours after the accident, he complained of
great pain through his head, just above his ears, giddiness,
and pain and stiffness of the neck. In three quarters of an
hour, all pain, stiffness, and giddiness were removed. He had
no return of any uncomfortable feeling, had a good night,
and felt quite well the next morning.

I do not know whether such cases are worth recording,
farther than proving the potent efficacy of mesmerism in al-
laying inflammation as well as nervous excitement, and the
possibility of removing pain by mesmeric passes without sleep,
after serious and recent injury to the parts had taken place.
I have been able in several cases to relieve pains in the
chest; and in some cases of inflammation of the lungs, I
have seen instant and great relief afforded by mesmerism,
but it is not worth while writing you an account of them, as
I have no doubt many similar cases have come under your


102 Human Magnetism, &c.,


observation, and I will bring my note-book with me to town
when I come, which I think will be soon.

If you should think any of the cases worthy of transmis-
sion to The Zoist, pray make what use you like of them. If
you should like further particulars, I will send them.


Believe me ever,
Yours very truly,
H. 8. Tuomrson.


Whether Greatrakes had more than the usual mesmeric
power of taking away pain, I cannot determine. But it is
supposed that certain persons are more endowed with this
form of mesmeric power than others. Some undoubtedly
not only take away pain well, but can tell by a sensation in
their hand whether they are taking it away or not; and, when
their hand is laid upon a pained part, can tell the exact spot
where the pain is felt. This I have heard many declare, and
Mr. Atkinson, whose observation is so faithful, has often told
me so in reference to himself. See the account of his local
sensations when curing the ophthalmia of Miss Sandby, No.
VIL., p. 377.

Iam, &c.,
Joun E.uiortson.


XI. Human Magnetism ; its Claims to Dispassionate Inquiry:
being an attempt to shew the Utility of its Application for
the Relief of Human Suffering. By. W. Newnuam, Esq.
Churchill, 1845.


Sucu is the title of a work written by a medical man in
pretty extensive country practice. The labours of this branch
of the profession, embracing as they do each department of
medical and surgical study, leave but little time for less prac-
tical pursuits. It argues well for a man’s mental activity,
when in the turmoils of general practice he can keep up a
productive acquaintanceship with literature. This’ has been
the case with Mr. Newnham. It is not the first or second
time in which he has appeared in public, and the author of
The Reciprocal Influence of Body and Mind, does not seem
to have stepped far out of the geography of his former lucu-
brations, when he launches into the “ forbidden” sea of mes-
merism. It may be fairly considered as another chapter of
The Reciprocal Influence of Body and Mind; and yet the
gulph of prejudice which he must have passed over to attain


by W. Newnham, Esq. 105


his present position, cannot be better described than in his
own introductory chapter.


“About twelve months since I was asked by some friends to
write a paper against mesmerism,* and I was furnished with mate-
rials by a highly-esteemed quondam pupil, which proved incon-
testably, that under some circumstances the operator might be duped
—that hundreds of enlightened persons might be equally deceived:
and certainly went far to shew, that the pretended science was
wholly a delusion—a system of fraud and jugglery, by which the
imaginations of the credulous were held in thraldom through the arts
of the designing.”


The dedication of his work to the Rev. T. Osmond Fry,
“his young friend” and former pupil, leads us to infer the
source of those materials which we wish he had given to the
world.

Mr. N. possessed too much worldly wisdom to rush to the
conclusion, whith the gentleman who put into his hands his
counterfeit mesmeric facts, seems to have reached ; and under
a sage analogical impression that there was something “ ster-
ling,” in spite of the undeniable existence of the “ base coin,”
he candidly acknowledges,—


**T dared not undertake to write against the reality of that which
might be simulated, because it had been simulated ; and I determined
on investigating for myself a subject which up to that time had ob-
tained my unqualified contempt.”


We congratulate Mr. N. We prefer the support of truth
to the love of consistency. But though he supports truth,
he must be subjected to the ordeal of just criticism. We see
too much of the sensitiveness to ridicule in our fellow men
not to admire Mr. N.’s avowal of his convictions. Had those
convictions been more the result of his own personal observa-
tions than of his reading, they would have pleased us better.
There are many points of view in which he has placed the
subject happily. He has related one remarkable case. He
has disarmed the religious world (as it is called) of some of
their prejudices, founded on satanic or demoniacal fallacies,
better suited to a Chaldean age than the nineteenth century
of the Christian era.

The objections of medical men as a class he has well han-
dled ; but we do not think that his mode of treating the sub-
ject will pierce the rhinoceros hide of prejudice with which a


* Query. Is Mr. Newnham one of certain gentlemen requested by Dr.
Forbes to write an article against mesmerism? After a vast deal of labour
an article appears in the April number of the British and Foreign Me-
dical Review—more of this anon.


104 Human Magnetism, &c.,


large pachydermatous class of medical society enshroud them-
selves. French literature forms but a weak catapult with
which to besiege the stolidity of English prepossession. A
sound physiological and pathological enquiry into mesmeric

henomena, is still a desideratum ; and though Mr. N. has
gallantly made the attempt to fill up the gap, we must ac-
knowledge that the task is still left for a more practical inves-
tigator of the subject before the portcullis is thrown open,
and the citadel surrendered.

After reading the first chapter of Mr. N.’s book we were
somewhat disappointed. The philosophic introduction of Mr.
Townshend* was still fresh in our memory. “ Having had
many opportunities of convincing myself that man can really
influence his fellow in the manner called mesmeric, I have
determined to arrange and classify the phenomena, relative
to this influence, which have fallen under my own observa-
tion, in the hope of reducing them to a few simple and
general principles.” Had such been the natural history of
Mr. N.’s book, we should have felt somewhat more indebted
to him. The man who is ready to write a formal treatise
after one year’s cramming is too rapid a philosophy for our
slow understanding. It looks more like the gulping of a
brief, which the barrister is sometimes obliged to accomplish
in order to make an ex parte statement before a jury : it is
more suggestive of the sagacity which descries an approach-
ing change in men’s opinions and of the cacoethes scribendi,
than the inspirations of genius. We can, however, appre-
ciate the ardour with which a brain like Mr. N.’s enters upon
the investigation of a subject which has been recently pre-
sented in a new aspect to his captivated imagination. If we
may be allowed so serious a comparison, he seems like a Saul
breathing out threatenings on his way to Damascus—sud-
denly arrested by a vision of clairvoyance, and thenceforward
fired with the zeal of an apostle, preaching the faith he once
persecuted. Some brains pass electrically from the negative
to the positive pole, and Mr. N.’s seems one which does not
long remain in a state of oscillation. :

We do not like the name on the title-page. The term
Human Magnetism is objectionable. It involves a theory at
present wnproved if not untenable ; for in the present state of
the science it is a gratuitous assumption to connect it with
any modification of electrical forces: and to call it human is
erroneous, since man can mesmerise the brutes and the brutes
man.

We do not admire the fastidiousness which refuses to


* Facts in Mesmerism


by W. Newnham, Esq. 105


name a science from its prominent promulgator; yet, invent-
ing no new term, adopts the very title which (connected with
the gratuitous theory of its first promulgator, Mesmer) alone
gave point to the benumbing report of the French Academy
in 1784. ‘The name diverted enquiry from the phenomenon
itself, and like a tub thrown out to a whale, served long as
an object of attack, when the real point in debate remained
untouched altogether.” The term mesmerism, as Dr. Elliotson
well observes, involves no theory, and whether or not like
galvanism, it will remain permanently attached to the phe-
nomena thus grouped, at present we know not: but we un-
hesitatingly avow our belief that no unobjectionable theory
has hitherto been given to the world, and therefore during
the period of investigation and doubt, we abide by the term
which Chenevix employed and Elliotson adopted. Mesmerism,
and its useful adjective mesmeric, have now become household
words, and we see no advantage in going back to an earlier
and less correct phraseology. The impropriety of connecting
such a term as magnetism with the great variety of pheno-
mena to which his book relates, ought to have impressed his
judgment.

That many abnormal states of the nervous system may be
produced artificially by various processes, and that such mea-
sures have produced decidedly beneficial effects in many se-
rious diseases, no longer admits of question. The observations
of Mr. N. on the application of mesmerism to the relief of
human suffering, though barren of original facts, are valu-
able and judicious. Here he has done some justice to Dr.
Elliotson,—

** The doctor,” says Mr. N., “is no friend or favourite of ours:
we differ from him essentially in many of his views: but no one who
knows his history can at all doubt the truthfulness of his report,—
his cases afford primd facié evidence of sincerity and truth, and
making all due allowance for the enthusiasm of his character—and
allowing a liberal discount for this infirmity—there yet remains
behind unquestioned and indisputable facts, which are as much en-
titled to credence as any other facts, and which if disbelieved for
want of sufficient evidence, must sap the foundation of all human
testimony. We have also had the opportunity of ascertaining from
the best possible quarters, viz.: those who were prejudiced against
him, that more than one of his reported cures are substantially true:
and if so, he is entitled to our belief for the rest.”

Among the many ills “which flesh is heir to,” there are
some which resist all the armamenta of the most discursive
materia medica,—there are a few which produce much suffer-
ing, and for which the most skilful physician fails to admi-
nister relief,—where neither the “ ars medicine” nor the “ vis


106 Human Magnetism, &c.,


medicatrix nature,” succeed in effecting recovery. Epilepsy,
chorea, neuralgic affections, hysteria, mania, though often
curable by ordinary therapeutics, are sometimes the oppro-
éria of our art. In the latter case, Sir Benjamin Brodie
seems willing to hand them over to the quacks,—we think
they may be retained in the careful management of the pro-
fession. We refer to the cases of this description related in
the volumes of The Zoist, and we avow that Dr. Elliotson has
collected facts enough to justify the wise practitioner, when
baffled in his ordinary resources, in fairly making trial of the
mesmeric mode of treatment. It would be cruel to deprive a
patient of this description of the chance which mesmerism
affords. Some, however, object to mesmeric treatment on
account of the errors, eccentricities, selfishness, and empiri-
cism of its first promulgator, Mesmer. The character of this
German physician, we believe, is not yet fully understood.
He has been painted by his rivals and his enemies, and we
know very well what Catholic writers say of Luther. We
must receive the criticisms of cotemporary rivals, ‘‘ cum grano
salis.” Let it be allowed, however, for the sake of argument,
that Mesmer was the man he is represented to be by his cotem-
porary rivals—his parallel may be met with in Paracelsus.*
Yet what medical man now abstains from the use of anti-
mony, mercury, and opium, on account of the quackery of
the man who first introduced them to general notice? Are
we to be laughed out of the use of these remedies because
Paracelsus theorized most fantastically on their nature and
properties ?

* The present President of the College of Physicians says of him, “ In
contemplating the career of this extraordinary man, it is difficult to say
whether disgust or astonishment is the most predominant feeling: his inso-
lence and unparalleled conceit, his insincerity and brutal irregularities, and
his habits of immorality and debauchery, are beyond all censure; while the
important services he has rendered to mankind by opposing the bigotry of the
schools, and introducing powerful remedies into practice, cannot be regarded
without feelings of gratitude and respect. But in whatever estimation Pa-
racelsus may be held, there can be no doubt but that his fame produced a
very considerable influence on the character of the age, by exciting the envy
of some, the emulation of others, and the industry of all.” And again, “‘ In
the year 1493, was born at Zurich. in Switzerland, Paracelsus, or as he
termed himself Philippus, Theophrastus, Bombastus, Paracelsus de Hohen
Neim, a man who was destined to produce a greater revolution in the mate-
ria medica, and a greater change in the medical opinions and practice, than
any person who had appeared since the days of Galen.””—Dr. Paris’s Phar-
macalogia, p. 76.

The hypothesis of Paracelsus and Mesmer, may be equally at variance
with legitimate induction and right reason—their conduct in society as men,
and as physicians, may equally draw down upon their names the contempt
and disgust of the enlightened portion of mankind, but if their processes


of cure are on examivation found to-be efficacious, it is our duty to employ
them.


by W. Newnham, Esq. 107


Mr. N. devotes a long chapter in his book to the consi-
deration of Somnambulism and Clairvoyance. We think he
would have done better to have separated the two subjects, as
they have no necessary connection. Had our author devoted
himself to practical experiments, he would never, we imagine,
have fallen into the mistakes of the following passage.

**Somnambulists may be more or less clairvoyans—more or less
perfect—and may offer very varing phenomena; but the almost in-
variable attributes of this state, are the faculties of seeing with the
eyes closed—their intimate connection with their magnetisers—the
development of their intellectual faculties—the insight into their own
structure—-and the foresight of their approaching maladies.” —
Page 237.


We imagine seeing with the eyes closed—insight into their
own structure, and the foresight of approaching maladies, to be
far more rare than Mr. N. would lead us to believe. They
are Not “ the almost invariable attributes” of somnambulism.
Dr. Elliotson mesmerised for years— producing somnam-
bulism continually—and yet he was unable to testify to the
fact of “seeing with the eyes closed” when he published the
last edition of his Physiology in 1840, and has never yet, we
hear he declared last week, met with it in a case of his own.
But Mr. N.’s book is full of errors. He says at p. 92, that a
rapport must be established between the operator and patient
before phenomena can be developed.

At p. 242, that somnambulism is comparatively rare.

At p. 243, that “the somnambulist knows nothing beyond
what he knew before in his natural condition,” contradicting
himself, however, at p. 262, by asking ‘“‘ how we explain the
facts of lucid individuals seeing things, and detailing circum-
stances of which they could have had no previous knowledge?”
and by declaring at p. 295, “ that they know what passes at
a distance from them, and recognize persons and places,
whom and which they have never seen.”

At p. 261, in reference to the isolation of somnambulists,
he is completely wrong.

At p. 102, he says, that there is a “‘ very marked suscepti-
bility of persons whose health is weakly,” and repeats this at
p. 103, whereas in truth in persons whose health is weakly
their susceptibility generally lessens, and weak persons are
often quite unsusceptible.

At p. 262, that certain forms of clairvoyance occur onl
when the patients are not en rapport; and at p. 295, that
these occur only through the organs of those with whom they
are in rapport.

At p. 317 he speaks of a real faculty in somnambulism


108 Human Magnetism, &c.,


whose phenomena are entirely different from any which we
possess in our usual condition of being, and at p. 314 says,
that the knowledge of the state is always in exact proportion
to the intellectual vigor possessed during the waking hours.
These are but a few of the absurdities we could point out.
The thirteenth chapter of Mr. N.’s book is devoted to the
discussion of Phreno-mesmerism. The question is asked—


“ How comes it that some decided and thorough-going phreno-
logists are decidedly opposed to mesmerism, and some believers in
magnetism are opposed to phrenology ? ”


The answer is very obvious, and does not involve the truth
or falsehood of either science. Scarcely four years have elapsed
since phreno-mesmeric phenomena have been the subjects of
investigation. The announcement of the first experiments
created, as all curious and striking novelties in science do, a
great sensation. The Phrenologists were taken by surprise—
they never anticipated so close a connection between sciences
hitherto so divergent. The corroboration of phrenology by
mesmerism, seemed to some almost too good news to be
true; mesmerists who had rejected phrenology were thunder-
struck, and often said audibly, “ Well, then, phrenology is
true after all!” A few calmly examine the evidence—others
carefully repeat the experiments—and a third party set about
manufacturing a theory or explanation. Mr. N. belongs to
the latter class, and he comes to the consideration of the
subject with a preconceived bias. Hypothetically couclud-
ing that all phrenology is false, he suggests that the experi-
ments of phreno-mesmerists are contradictory. Instead of a
calm investigation of facts, he endeavours to throw doubt
over well-established evidence, and forces a mushroom explana-
tion in the hot-bed of his own imagination.

Miss Martineau was similarly circumstanced with regard
to her previous opinions on phrenology—but with that humble
and tractable spirit which inductive philosophy inspires, she
has submitted to the evidence of facts. She has now cast
aside her prejudices against phrenology, and in her last letter
(February) acknowledges the reality of phreno-mesmeric phe-
nomena. Mr. N. professes to be a pupil of Lord Bacon,—we
recommend him to make experiments ; or if he does not mes-
merise, let him watch the experiments of others before he de-
nounces the fallacy of phreno-mesmerism.

The first objection which Mr. N. raises against phreno-
mesmerism, is the multiplicity of organs which Mr. Sunder-
land professes to have discovered. Mr. Sunderland is au
American, of whom we know too little to be able to estimate at


by W. Newnham, Esq. 109


his proper value. There is an illogical looseness about his
statements, which require the most thorough sifting. He may
possess a talent for observation, but he is evidently wanting
in the attributes of a philosophic brain. We have read his
speculations in the American Phreno-magnet, but what should
we say of the botanist who, dazzled by the various colours of
a dahlia-bed, stoutly contended that the “ Prince Albert ” and
“ Queen Victoria” were new species instead of varieties of the
same specific plant? The mental operations are probably in-
capable of solitary aciion—each faculty has its usually associated
faculties—hence scine of the confusion of Phreno-mesmerists.
The old metaphysicians were right in laying much stress on
what they called the association of ideas. Many of the sup-
posed new organs can be accounted for on this ever-recurring
principle; and because Mr. Sunderland has been unwise
enough to announce the discovery of a hundred and fifty
organs, is Mr. N. on that account to reject all the evidence of
other investigators? He may with as much reason throw
aside all the meteorological observations of a Herschel or
Arago, on account of the palpable errors of Murphy’s Weather
Almanack. Mr. Sunderland, however, acknowledges “that
all the light upon the subject of phrenology has not led us to
alter one of the landmarks laid down by the immortal Gall :
indeed all the results at which we have arrived, have most
wonderfully confirmed the discoveries and positions assumed
by that distinguished man with regard to those organs, the
locations of which were definitively fixed by him.” Mr.
Sunderland’s supposed new organs appear to be shades of feel-
ing of the orginal radical faculty. In that portion of the brain
located to Love of Approbation, what more likely to be asso-
ciated with its exercise or excitement than ideas of a “ sense of
dignity.” a “ sense of modesty,” a “ sense of ridicule, “ vanity,”
a “desire of display,”’—why these supposed new organs are
evidently modifications of a “ Love of Approbation,” with its
associated ideas. It argues a great want of metaphysical
acumen not to be able to trace up these beautiful varieties of
human feelings and ideas to the excitement of the same primi-
tive faculty. The fact is, those who have previously condemned
phrenology look into the discrepancies and inconsistencies of
those who testify to the new facts—while those who have
wedded themselves to a certain system of phrenology, when
they hear of new organs by the hundred, chivalrously rush to
the defence of the ourworks of their creed, which they imagine
are threatened with invasion. The two parties, finding their
lines of defence run parallel with each other, enter into a


110 Human Magnetism, &c.,


“solemn league and covenant,” and swear eternal enmity to
phreno-mesmerism—“ delenda est Carthago.”

The leaning of Mr. N.’s brain creeps out in the following
admissions :—


“It is well known that without having any positive opinions on
the subject, &c., we have ranged ourselves with those who withhold
their belief from the multiplicity of the organic subdivisions.”


In other words, he had rejected phrenology “ without any
very positive opinions on the subject.” Alas! the inconsist-
ency of a man’s ranging himself on this or that side of any
question, without any very positive opinions on that question ?
Into what a labyrinth does it lead him! We have not had the
pleasure of reading Mr. N.’s other works, but we imagine he
must have professed some “ very positive opinions” on the
subject, or how could it be “ well known ” that he had ranged
himself with those who reject phrenology ?

We allow that the varying reports of experiments of dif-
ferent phreno-mesmerisers may puzzle Mr. N., but has he
never been puzzled in his medical inquiries by the most con-
tradictory statements and conclusions? Cullen, Brown, and
Broussais contradict each other’s facts as well as theories. The
Humoral Pathology was dead and buried by the Solidists, and
now behold a living resurrection of its doctrines in all the
schools of Europe! Does he conclude from this, that all
medicine is a fallacy? If Mr. N. rested on his reading for his
medical opinions, we can imagine such a result as not impre-
bable. But would not a philosopher, anxious for truth, sift
the evidence—analyze the facts—explain apparent anomalies
reconcile unharmonious views—observe for himself—embrace
a comprehensive theory, even of medicine, and make “the
winds and waves” of discordant facts and doctrines obey the
talismanic influence of a mighty mind? A temple to truth
may be built by a wise master-builder, even with the Babylonish
bricks, brought together by discordant workmen. Mr. Sunder-
land’s experiments, as well as those of other phrenologists,
may be composed of “ hay and straw and stubble,” as well as
a minute portion of genuine gold: let them be subjected to
the crucible of intellectual chemistry, and the product will be
worth preserving.

Having summarily dismissed Mr. Sunderland, Dr. Elliot-
son is next alluded to by Mr. N. Dr. E. “ states he has suc-
ceeded in mesmerising with separate and distinct effect each
side of the brain or nervous system.” In reply to this fact,
Mr. N. says, Dr. E. has got a “very lively imagination ” and


by W. Newnham, Esq. 111


“not a very sober judgment.” We must confess that this
is not a very fair way of escaping from a difficulty. Suppose
Dr. Cowan, or the editor of the Lancet, were to treat him with
some of his own logic dressed up as follows :—“ Mr. N. is an
ingenious and elegant writer, but too speculative and enthu-
siastic to be trusted either in his facts or legitimate infer-
ences.” Did not the Provincial Journal use this argument
against Mr. N.’s defence of mesmerism at Derby? Was it a
fair way of putting him down? Now there are many persons,
and we confess ourselves among the number, who have arrived
at the conclusion, that Dr. Elliotson must be far less imagi-
native than Mr. N., and having watched the doctor’s career,
as an investigator of the symptoms of disease, and of the
effects of medicines, we have detected a decided leaning to
the simple observation of facts, and a decided indisposition to
theorize or speculate. We think Galileo, looking through
his telescope, a safer philosopher than Descartes working out
his vortices.

Dr. Elliotson’s Human Physiology is full of facts—he has
evolved no new theory in his Lectures on Medicine—his forte
is a delicate observation of facts—he has hitherto never ven-
tured on an hypothesis respecting the mesmeric agent. It is
now seven years since he began the study of mesmeric phe-
nomena. A pretty long apprenticeship. Scarcely one year
has rolled away since Mr. N. became a mesmeric neophyte,
and yet after noticing facts so few, that they may be counted
on one’s fingers,* we have a work of more than 400 pages
specially devoted to the subject, and even an hypothesis inge-
niously hinted on the basis of “ Energia” or “ Actinism,” as
affording “some knowledge or some enlightenment of our
ideas on the subject of clairvoyance.” Several years elapsed
before Dr. Elliotson announced his testimony of the fact of
clairvoyance—a few months suffice to make Mr. N. not only
a believer, but an advocate of all the higher phenomena of
mesmerism,—clairvoyance, thought-reading, prevision, &c.,
&e. Mr. N.’s sneer at Dr. Elliotson’s “lively imagination”
and “ not very sober judgment” certainly after this analysis
seems rather ludicrous. It reminds us of the intoxicated gen-
tleman who, with the most self-complacent view of his own
sobriety, was most doggedly impressed with the notion that all
the rest of his more temperate companions were quite drunk.

On the subject of phreno-mesmerism then, let us refer to
Mr. N.’s own estimate of the value of Dr. Elliotson’s facts,
already quoted in an earlier part of this article,—


* It does not appear that Mr. Newnham has ever mesmerised a patient,
and we believe that he has only witnessed one case of mesmeric sleep !


112 Human Magnetism, &c.,


“No one who knows his history can at all doubt the truthfulness
of his report!”


But says Mr. N.—


‘If we admit the facts and conclusions to which they necessarily
lead, we must give up the ideas of personal identity and moral re-
sponsibility.”


Nego consequentiam. But, allowing this to be a rational
argument, and containing within itself the “ reductio ad ab-
surdum,” I would ask, how does it apply to Mr. N.’s own
view,—

‘That this much vaunted phreno-magnetism is explained by the
well-established law of clairvoyance, by which the magnetised thinks
and feels with the drain of the magnetiser.”


Personal identity and moral responsibility we imagine
are in much greater danger from this explanation! We must
confess ourselves however opposed to any such line of rea-
soning ; “immoral consequences ” are quite imaginary assump-
tions respecting the tendency of philosophical facts, and we do
not think it is quite fair for Mr. N. to reason out the truth or
falsehood of this or that position, from the injurious or danger-
ous tendencies which he alleges can never result from truth.
He has taken the idea from Rousseau “ vous répétez sans cesse
que la verité ne peut jamais faire de mal aux hommes—je le
crois et c’est pour moi le preuve que ce que vous dites n’est pas
la verité”’” Dugald Stewart has well translated the passage—
** You repeat to me incessantly that truth can never be injuri-
ous to the world. I myself believe so as firmly as you do,
and for this very reason I am satisfied that your proposition
is false.” The syllogism is based on an assumption—the
minor proposition is defective. It may answer very well as
an argumentum ad hominem should your opponent acknow-
ledge the assumption as a truth; but Rousseau should have
known enough of Aristotelian logic to have detected the
fallacy. To Mr. N. we would say, the inductive system of
Bacon has banished Aristotle from the schools: we live under
the supremacy of facts, and he who lifts the veil’ from Nature
must not shudder at the glance she gives him.

The Brahmin who destroyed the microscope which dis-
closed living myriads in the pure waters of the Ganges, acted
under the assumption of certain “dangerous moral conse-
quences” which would follow the extension of this anti-Brah-
minical knowledge among his Hindoo fellow-countrymen.
The microscope dared to contradict the Shaster—the impious
instrument of a “ vain philosophy ” was dashed into a thou-


by W. Newnham, Esq. 113


sand atoms, and the Brahmin lived on, we doubt not, in
spiritual pride, congratulating himself that he had vindicated
the honour of his gods, and had done a noble act in defence of
the true faith. ‘ Dangerous consequences!” Such was the
plea of the sacred college of Cardinals when they imprisoned
the philosopher of Pisa—and the Brahmin’s European proto-
type was the Italian professor, who, with ghostly dread shrunk
from the sin of looking through the telescope of Galileo! The
ostrich which buries her head in the sand to escape her ene-
mies is as rational as these pseudo-religionists—away with
such a mode of meeting philosophical inquiry! Experience
alone must be appealed to in our investigation of Nature. To
use a homely proverb of Pythagoras, when a man leaves the
home of his ignorance in the pursuit of knowledge he must
not look back. Mr. N. rejects phreno-mesmerism, use he
asserts it is destructive of moral responsibility and personal
identity. We cannot decide on its truth or falsehood on any
such imaginary tendencies. We recommend Mr. N., with an
unprejudiced mind, to enter upon the investigation of phreno-
mesmerism—


“* Prestat Nature voce doceri quam ingenio suo sapere,” —CiceRo.


To be a worshipper of truth is the highest style of man:
in the nobility of his nature he must sometimes trample under
his feet the superstitions of infancy—the badges and watch-
words of sect and party—and the dogmas of an early faith.
Cicero must have forgotten the lessons he received at Athens
when he said, “ si erro, libenter erro.” Error must inevita-
bly mingle with all human pursuits and inquiries, but let us
never willfully and willingly err. Truth must, from its very
nature, be the wholesome pabulum of intellectual vitality ;
error must ever be the poisonous plant, which intoxicates with
illusions, and then paralyses all the powers of intellectual pro-
gression. The phenomena of phreno-mesmerism demand the
attention of the metaphysician and physiologist—it offers a
new phasis for each mode of inquiry. And whether we con-
clude with Mr. Prideaux that its enigmas are solved on the
theory of clairvoyant thought-reading, or with Drs. Elliotson
and Engledue that the brain of the mesmerised is the actual
recipient of a stimulus from the touch of the mesmeriser,
there is enough on either view of the subject to excite to sober
and patient investigation. We say to those who explain away
phreno-mesmeric phenomena, that even allowing them to be
the result of “ thought-reading.” or a “well established law
of clairvoyance,” Which we are far from admitting, are not the
facts worthy of diligent inquiry? Are they not equally in-

VOL. III. I


114 Human Magnetism, &c.,


teresting? To our own minds the cerebral excitement with the
beautifully varied expressions of the patient’s countenance pro-
duced by the touches of the mesmeriser, form studies for the
artist as well as the philosopher. They are no fallacies, and
supposing they form but sections of the great subject of clair-
voyance, are they not as remarkable as those cases to which Mr.
N. has devoted such lengthened notices? Is it fair to dismiss
phreno-mesmerism so summarily, because it does not square
with previously received notions? Let us carefully investi-
gate, and be content to plod on in the observation of facts.
Tu navigating the ocean of knowledge, though our compass
may be sometimes reversed, and the stars shrouded in mist,
we must not forget that the proper occupation of a wise cap-
tain is to work up the log-book of observed phenomena, by
which he may sometimes draw a shrewd conclusion respecting
his position. In phreno-mesmerism Mr. N. will find there is
much that is beautiful and interesting, provided he can dis-
miss his prejudices. It must not be strangled in its birth as
a monster—it must not be set down as a fallacy, because it
ruffles our metaphysics.

The length at which we have discussed the merits and
demerits of Mr. N.’s book, shews that we attach some import-
ance to its publication. It will lead two classes of bigots to
think more favourably of the claims of mesmerism—the fana-
tical and scientific—those who with Mr. Hugh M‘Neil and
‘Charlotte Elizabeth’ vaticinate—and attribute mesmeric
phenomena to Satanic influence—and those who with Brodie
and Liston, because they cannot slice it with their scalpels—
or with Faraday and Orfila, because they cannot put it in a
bottle, dogmatise, and would kick it out of the pale of inquiry
as “sheer humbug.” Religious bigotry would manacle philo-
sophical truth with the handcuffs and clanking chains of a
self-styled Holy Inquisition. The Star-chamber is gone, but
its spirit remains in the existing fanaticism of some of our
modern Protestants. A belief in witchcraft has become for-
tunately extinct, except among the vulgar (a Kepler no longer
goes to Tiibingen to save his mother from being burnt as a
witch), but a belief in demon-craft is revived, and raving
theologians, male and female, have raised the cry of Satanic
agency against the mesmerisers! To such parties Mr. N.
condescends to address a lengthened argument; for our
own parts we must confess we are impatient enough to
think such dreaming bigotry more worthy of pity than of
logic.* The sturdier bigots of science are principally con-


** * Reason alone, says Liebig, in one of his most interesting works, “ will
not prevent whole nations from falling into the most abject superstitions,


by W. Newnham, Esq. 115


stituted of such men as have acquired perhaps notoriety in
some special department, whose calibre of mind offers impedi-
ments to their taking any very enlarged views. Such men as
Cuvier, Laplace, Jussien, and Hufeland, who have examined
the subject with attention, and have avowed their belief in
mesmeric phenomena, throw the petitesse of modern “ clique ”
leaders into the shade. The medical profession in general have
stood aloof—or looked coldly on, waiting the oracular nods of
the worthies of Lincoln’s-inn-field’s—addicted to a species of
“idol worship,” so well described by Carlyle,—like the pupils
of the sophists of old, they are accustomed “ jurare in verbo
magistri.”+ Light, however, breaks in through other windows
than those at the Medico-Chirurgical Society, and Mr. N. is
a living proof that some of the medical men of the provinces
can think for themselves. There is about him what Dr.
Arnold would call a “moral thoughtfulness,” from which
much good may be argued—he does not belong to the class
of “ camp-followers.” We have ventured to criticise his work
keenly, because we should like to see its blemishes amended
in a second edition, which the daily increasing number of
readers on mesmerism will no doubt demand. We see in the
remarkable expression of no “ very positive opinions” on
phrenology, an augury of future convictions. We will venture
to prophesy that Mr. N. is in the transition state, and we
ought fairly to appreciate the difficulties which a man in his
position, and at his time of life, must have in making mes-
meric experiments. We do not, however, participate with
him in the notion, that mesmerism should be restricted to
merely therapeutic objects. We can see no desecration of its
powers in well-directed experimental researches, without cruelty
or torture, into the more obscure parts of the physiology of
the brain and nervous system. The mesmerists possess an
advantage over Majendie—they can produce cataleptic rigidity
with a touch—they need not nail a living dog to the table for
the purpose of experiment—they can leave the cruelty of slic-
ing the cerebral hemispheres of living rabbits and pigeons to
such men as Fleurens, for with Elliotson they can manipulate
the surface of the head, with as distinct resvits as follow
from touching the keys of a musical instrument. Hitherto
while even a child, whose mind has been duly d-veloped and instructed,
will repudiate the fear of ghosts and hobgoblins.” _

t Dr. Fluder, of Lymington, is the represertative of the majority of his
fellow-professionals, and an illustration of ou’ argument. He says, “I have
lately had the opportunity of conversing or the subject of mesmerism with
some distinguished members of the medal and surgical professions, and I
have been gratified to find their ideas t}© Same as my own on the subject,


and so far from lending themselves tr the absurd innovation, they do not coun-
tenance it.”—p. 24, Mesmerism or F¢ts against Fallacies, by Adol. Kiste, Esq.


116 Dr. Forbes and our Prophecy.


metaphysicans have appealed to internal consciousness as
their chief source of knowledge of the phenomena of mind.
Phreno-mesmerism affords a new organon scientie—a new
field of inquiry—it brings metaphysical inquiries within the
pale of the demonstrative sciences. nie


XII. Dr. Forbes and our Prophecy. ‘“ Mesmerism true,


Mesmerism false,”—an article printed in the British and
Foreign Medical Review.


“The Brahmin crushed the microscope which developed to him
natural facts. You, like the Brahmin, influenced by the same cause
—ignorance, attempted to crush men who were devoting their atten-
tion to natural phenomena, and developing truths, which in some
jesuitical article you will soon be compelled to acknowledge.’’—Zoist,
p- 276, July, 1844.


Tus was addressed by us to Dr. Forbes, when referring to
his conduct in 1839, and the utter silence of his journal ever
since that period.

It is now some months since we first heard it whispered
that the British and Foreign Medical Review was preparing a
grand article against Mesmerism. Mesmerism was making
head ; the younger and more intelligent members of the pro-
fession were inquiring seriously what it was; were making
experiments in order to satisfy themselves of the reality of
the asserted facts ; and it was becoming evident, that unless the
great professional organ stepped in, either to “ put it down”
or, if needful, to move on a little further in its wake, it might
assume so formidable a shape, and get so far in advance, that
all chance of having a share either in its suppression or its
success would be lost. As time went on the rumours of the
grand article became louder ; it was written ; it had been read
to privileged and select coteries; it had been rewritten; re-
read; at last it was pronounced perfect, a settler of the whole
question, and so great became the anxiety of the author or
his editor not to deprive the world, even for a few days, of so
valuable a production, that impatience could not brook the
delay until the \st of April, but the article must appear as a
separate pamphlet, and it has accordingly been just issued,
under the title we have quoted.

Want of time ané space prevents our noticing it this
month at any length. As an article in the British and
Foreign Medical Review in the year 1845, we shall feel
called upon to examine it moze in detail in our next; had
it appeared simply as a pamphlv we can assure our read-


-_ ino ne oe ee


Dr. Forbes and our Prophecy. 117


ers we should have passed it over with very short notice.
The only thing new is the moderation of the tone, the
freedom from that abuse which generally characterizes arti-
cles against mesmerism, and so far we congratulate the
author on his good sense; but if he imagines he has
placed mesmerism in any new light, or has offered any new
arguments that at all alter its position, he deceives himself, as
much as we are sure he deceives himself in the estimate he
appears to form of the amount of information possessed by
the profession generally on the subject. As an article in-
tended to instruct or guide the profession, we believe it will
prove useless. The bigotted opponents of mesmerism will
doubtless refuse all instruction, and remain bigotted and
ignorant to the end ; the inquirers are most of them far ahead
of the writer of this pamphlet, and such as are not we fancy
will be little satisfied with reasonings which rather go to prove
that many things may be, and that many others may not be,
than that any thing is.

The title of the pamphlet should rather have been
Mesmerism not False, Mesmerism not True; for the au-
thor’s “ philosophical scepticism” appears to resolve every-
thing into a “great perhaps.” Somebody somewhere af-
firms that “every error is a truth abused,” and “ it has been
wisely said that, commonly, there is to be found a truth at
the bottom of every honest extravagance:” ergo, reasons our
author, there may be some truth at the bottom of mes-
merism, particularly as many of the asserted facts rest upon
very respectable testimony, and are not opposed to other re-
cognized facts. Whether these recognized and supposed
known facts rest upon evidence anything like so conclusive
as many of the rejected facts of mesmerism, we shall perhaps
have to inquire hereafter, this however is about one half our
author’s case, spun out rather laboriously ; the other half con-
sists mainly of another perhaps, which, as the first really
appears to assert something, and might be called the perhaps
positive, we shall call the perhaps negative. It amounts to
this,—As the testimony is not so strong in favour of the re-
maining alleged facts, and as they are not so easily reconciled
with our previous notions, perhaps they are not facts. The
author however cautiously brings in only a verdict of “ not
proven,” and asks time for further inquiry :—The way how-
ever in which he arrives at his perhaps negative, is not so satis-
factory as that in which he reaches his perhaps positive. It
appears to us that his logic is not so sound, and, what is
worse, that his statements of cases are not always over honest,
and as this is a grave charge we must in our future notice


a


118 Poetry in Philosophy and Philosophy in Poetry.


endeavour to substantiate it; for the present we will just re-
mark that, although the case of Alexis is quoted as an example
of the feeble character of the evidence adduced in proof of
clairvoyance, and although Dr. Forbes’s notes of the two ex-
hibitions of Alexis, which appeared in the Lancet in August
last, are reprinted in full as an appendix, all that is said on
the other side is, that Dr. Ellotson has collected in the
January number of The Zoist “a variety of attestations, to
shew that Alexis was truly and faithfully all that, before his
arrival in London, he had been represented, but that the
critical eye sees defective evidence, and room for delusion or
collusion in almost every one of the recorded cases.” No
mention whatever is made of the previous number of The
Zoist, for October, 1844, in which is a detailed account of Dr.
Forbes’ conduct during the exhibitions, of which he published
his notes, and where the “critical eye” may detect, both in
Dr. Forbes’ proceedings and statements, much that it would
call, if not actually dishonest, yet as near to it as prejudice
and weakness can carry an otherwise honourable mind.

For a critic, the first requisites are honesty and impar-
tiality ; qualities of which the writer of this pamphlet boasts
more liberally than he makes exhibition. We predict that it
will make no impression ; it is too careful, and too specious, to
affect any honest thinker and looker for himself; and we feel
we may safely put off, until our next number, that notice
which, as we have said, we shall feel bound to accord to the
vehicle of communication, the British and Foreign Medicai
Review, rather than to the article itself.

Y. E.


XIII. Poetry in Philosophy and Philosophy in Poetry. By
Henry G. Arxrinson, Esq. F.G.S., Upper Gloucester Place.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—The hour has come when a great poet should be
born; one whose exalted genius would tune its mellow song
to those deeply important truths, which are now forcing their
way into the obscurity of a long stagnant philosophy,—truths,
which are already shining over the world, like the beautiful
light of the breaking dawn upon the high hill tops. A few
only are up and stirring ;—whilst the world at large still
slumber on in the trance of long succeeding ages; but the
truth moves on, and the astonished sleeper starts from his
dream, and hides away his face from the light. Error and
prejudice are already straining every nerve to shake off the
intrusion ; but the night fades away—the light grows fa-


Poetry in Philosophy and Philosophy in Poetry. 119


miliar—novel facts gradually penetrate the most obscure
recesses of thought—a new day appears—and all is wonder
that we could have slept so long. But the youthful poet in
the sport of immature thought has declared that “ Philosophy
would clip an angel’s wings,” whilst the austere philosopher
in his turn deems verse a crime,—


*¢ And truth not truth if told in rhyme.”


Such is the prejudice of individuals to their respective
pursuits,—but what is the fact? Why is Shakespeare so
great a poet, and so universally admired by the most discern-
ing, but that he possessed a deep insight into human nature,
amounting to a kind of intuitive philosophy, with the gift
to express his sentiments in so vivid and pure a style, that
he at once seized upon an abstract truth from the mass of
conventionalism in which it was involved, and in a few clear
and refined expressions conveyed the loftiest sentiment or
the most profound conception? Indeed, the highest reach of
poetry is ever to express the purest ideal and the grandest
realities in the most simple, elegant, and forcible language.
For what is poetry without that philosophy, leaving with it
a deep sense of the sufferings of poor human nature, and
this illustrated by fine imagery in agreeable and musical
measure,—what more than the “ sounding brass or a tinkling
cymbal ?”

Whilst then we give men knowledge, and train them up
in good morals and right principles, let us not forget how
essential is a refined taste; that the spirit of poetry and
philosophy should work on together; as we see them de-
veloped in many of the greatest beings the world has ever
possessed—Shakespeare, and Lord Bacon, Milton, Pope,
Michael Angelo, and a host of others; and, in our own time,
Coleridge, Hazlitt, Byron, and Shelley,—for how unpalatable
and wearisome to an elevated mind is the simple detail of
facts when only given in a kind of dry powder of abstract
philosophy,—as well might we dim the myriad lights of hea-
ven, unpaint the rose, or strip the human face divine of its
fine covering, which veils the important though unsightly ap-
paratus of which it is composed.

Facts are only valuable when they shall expand into rege-
nerating principles, set forth to ameliorate the condition of
mankind and elevate his nature. And the best reality—life
itself—what is it all but a kind of poetry—a dream? Yes,
philosophy and poetry—the good, the true, the beautiful,
and the sublime—are so linked together all through nature,
that we can hardly separate them, without doing violence to


120 Poetry in Philosophy and Philosophy in Poetry.


that unity and dependence by which all existence is wove
into one harmonious whole; we must then be content to love
on and worship them together, in each other and through
each other. The highest conceptions of the poet ever entail-
ing the purest philosophy, whilst the loftiest and most
enlarged views of the philosopher and philanthropist verge
into the most sublime poetry.

I beg permission to close these remarks with a féw clever
lines on mesmerism, extracted from the lately-published
selections by my excellent friend Miss Savage, called Angel's
Visits*—a name certainly most appropriate to the following
lines, and which I think may interest your readers.


THE MAGNETIC SLEEPER.


Aye, come and gaze, for deep repose hath bowed the sleeper’s head,
And with its heavy thraldom quelled her sorrow: though my tread
Sounds through the dim and silent room, she marked not that it fell,
But slumbered as she slumbers now, b th a hidden spell.


And who art thou, that patiently with thy unwearied hand
Weavest the subtle charm as calm, as guardian spirits stand
Beside the cradled infant’s rest, to bless with watchful eye
The guileless and the holy sleep that visits infancy ?


How cam’st thou here ’mid sorrowing hearts—when friends so often fly?
W here is thy spell to calm the woes of poor humanity ?

Like one who tunes the jarring chords to some melodious strain ;

Till echos catch the song thus woke, and breathe it back again.


Thought binds her starry diadem, aye—proudly! on thy brow,
And makes thine eye her living shrine of light—but who art thox ¢
There is no kindred blood to bind, no tie more dear or warm,
And yet upon our hearth thou stand’st a beacon in the storm,


A soaring spirit, bold and free as the unfettered wind,

Exploring with its rapid wing each mystery of mind,

Searching the deep and hidden track where but the dauntless soar,
To read the countless secrets hid in nature’s mystic lore.


If thy philosophy should fail to cheat thine heart of gloom,

That follows e’en the wise and good from childhood to the tomb,
The smiles we owe thy patient care, a prayer to heaven shall be,
And joy from hearts that thou hast blessed-in blessings fall on thee.


Whence is the spell ?—‘“* Thine mighty mind” I heard a voice reply,
That bear’st alone that changeless stamp of immortality ;

And nobler tasks shall yet be thine, and heavenward be the flight,
When God all secrets shall reveal in noon-day splendour bright!


* Angel’s Visits: Poems by Anna Savage. Longman.


BOOKS RECEIVED.


Edinburgh Phrenological Journal. January.

Medical Report of the Case of Miss H. —- M —.

Letters on Mesmerism, by Harriet Martineau.

Journal du Magnétisme par une Société de Magnétiseurs et de Médecins
sous la direction de M. Le Baron Du Potet. Num.1land2. 1844-45.

Letters on Animal Magnetism, by Miss Crumpe.

Manuel Pratique de Phrénologie, par le docteur J. Fossati. Paris. 1845.

Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation.

The Anatomy of Sleep, by E. Binns, M.D.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


We regret that we have not been able to find room in this number for
many valuable communications, which, however, shall all appear in the
next,—

From the Honorable Carolina Courtenay Boyle, Mr. Topham, Mr. Hands,
Mr. Ashurst Majendie, Mr. H. S. Thompson, Dr. Elliotson, Mr. Noel, Mr.
Decimus Hands.

The Secretary of the Phrenological Society has begged us to say, in
reply to “* A Mesmeriser,” that a series of casts of drunkards would form a
useful and instructive addition to the Society’s collection, and they would
feel obliged to “‘ A Mesmefiser” to forward to them any such specimens as
may fall in his way.

Mr. Moore directs our attention to the translation of the Seherin Von
Prevorst, by Mrs. Crawe.


Z0'1ST VOL3
PL.J


Maal altey tah 3 Welln ptm * Saper #
& AR Lows del CONNOR. THE Mu DERER

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. X.


JULY, 1845.


I.—The Cerebral Development and Character of the Murderers
Hocker and Connor. By Dr. Ex.iotson.


THE circumstances of the late murder at Hampstead by
Thomas Henry Hocker, and every point of his conduct from
the period of his apprehension to that of his execution, are
too well known for any detail of them to be necessary at the
present moment. But they will soon pass from the memory
of the public as time proceeds and fresh occurrences pour on
in their incessant stream; and, when the description and view
of his cerebral development are seen even a year or two
hence, these will be useless unless accompanied by an account
of the actions of the individual,—so fleeting is the noisiest
notoriety when it springs from villany or trumpery display.
And how immense a proportion of mens’ notoriety arises from
the veriest nothingness,—from riches, inherited, or acquired
in a questionable manner,—from titles, inherited, or acquired
through subserviency, or unjust favor, or worldly cunning
mistaken for intellect, or superficial intellectual qualities cap-
tivating the mass of mankind who take fluent words for sense
and are dazzled by ingenious views and explanations based
on no solid fact and destined to vanish before the researches
of steady and laborious inquirers, or through sturdily de-
fending opinions which, though totally wrong, are the po-
pular opinion of the day because of the ignorance and pre-
judices of society, even of the greater part of those portions of
it which, being well off and perhaps moving splendidly, are
most absurdly supposed to be necessarily well informed. The
history of the murder is, besides, unknown on the continents
VOL. II. K


122 Cerebral Development and Character of Hocker.


of Europe and America, on both which, as well as in India,
The Zoist I know to be read.

On the 11th of last April, Hocker, twenty-one years of age,
slim, rather short, pale, and pock-marked, having very dark
hair and eyes, and an ugly nose and mouth, was found guilty of
the robbery and murder, by blows upon the head, of his inti-
mate friend, from whom he had very frequently received
money, named James De la Rue, a music-master, about thirty
years old, early on the evening of Friday, the 21st of the pre-
ceding February, in the fields of Hampstead, where they had
met, as was their habit more than once a week, by appoint-
ment, arranged in a letter found in the murdered man’s
pocket, written by Hocker, with a female signature and in
the language of a female. I will relate the facts under seve-
ral heads, each shewing a distinct point of character.

1. He left home, in Portland Town, at a quarter to seven,
and screams of murder, six or eight in number, where heard
soon after seven. In a few minutes the body of De la Rue
was found in the lower corner of a field, lying on its back,
with a pool of blood at the head and feet, a wound four inches
wide at the left upper and back part of the head, a smaller one
over the right eyebrow, and three or four others, all which had
been made by rapid and violent blows with a thick stick or
some such strong blunt thing. The skull was not fractured,
but great effusion of blood was found upon the brain. There
were blood upon Hocker’s shirt, coat, and waistcoat, and the
marks of a bloody hand on his coat-pocket. One wrist-band
was torn off, which afterwards was found, stained with blood ;
the front of his Mackintosh was covered with blood ; the left
knee of his trowsers, drawers, and stockings, was bloody. The
only mark of struggling was a button lying in the field off
Hocker’s coat.

2. Neither watch, ring, nor money was found upon the
body ; but De la Rue’s watch, neck-chain, and ring, with twelve
sovereigns, were seen in Hocker’s possession that very night.
Hocker had told his brother in the course of the day that he
was going to a person who would lend him ten sovereigns,
but who, it turned out, neither did nor had said she would
lend him money. On returning home at one in the morning
he shewed his brother twelve sovereigns, which he alleged
he ro so borrowed, having obtained two more than he ex-
pected.

3. So incautious was he, that he went to a neighbour-
ing public house immediately afterwards and drank brandy
and water; and then actually returned to the spot of the
murder, stooped, took hold of the wrist to feel the pulse, and


by Dr. Elliotson. 123


stood by the side of the corpse with a policeman for a quarter
of an hour while a stretcher was sent for; remarked that the
deceased had a beautiful white hand and could not therefore
have been a certain shoemaker as some surmised ; asked for
a light, opened the lantern when another was unable, and
lighted his cigar; at ten minutes past nine visited two females
in Portland-place, and remained with them till past eleven,
and returned home at one. He was apprehended at his
brother’s lodgings on the following Wednesday, having gone
down and opened the door himself for the officer.

4. All his statements from the moment of the murder to
the period of his execution were falsehoods; many contra-
dictory, and many absurd. In the field he told the police-
constable that he had been in the habit of passing that way
at night from town for two years with a great deal of pro-
perty, whereas he had been out of employment for seventeen
months, and was supported by his father, a very moderate
shoemaker: he told another man that he was in that bye-
place because he was obliged to go frequently to Hampstead
on important business: he had some weeks before told a girl
whom he courted that he was aclerk at the Exchange, and on
the night of the murder, when with her at a gentleman’s
house in Portland-place, he accounted to her for the blood on
his shirt, on her asking him if he had fallen down in Port-
land-place, by replying “ yes,” and that he had fallen through
being tipsy ; and, strange to say, accounted for it also by tell-
ing her that his employer in the city had made his nose bleed
in play. He shewed her a watch and ring, stating that he had
purchased the former for eight guineas; but, on the other
hand, told his brother the next night, when they were undress-
ing for bed, that he had just redeemed the watch and had
pledged it four months previously for three pounds. When
a policeman called at his lodgings on Wednesday and asked
if he had a watch, he hesitated, and was advised by his
brother “to say the truth for the policeman could see he was
telling a lie ;” and, when a pledge for a watch was found and
the brother expressed surprise, he confessed that this watch
had not been redeemed by him, and said it had been given him
by Dela Rue. He told his father on the evening of the murder
that he was going to a Mrs. Edwards for money she had pro-
mised him, and on a subsequent day shewed him money al-
leged to have been so given him. He told his landlord that
his wristband had been torn off in romping with some girls,
and yet a policeman actually found it, stained with blood, in
his lodgings. He declared at the Marylebone police-court,
to the clerk, that he could bring witnesses to prove he did
K 2


124 Cerebral Development and Character of Hocker.


not leave home on the Friday night till past eight, and to a
police-constable that he was in the Swiss Cottage public-
house a quarter of an hour before the murder. After the
evidence was finished, he read a statement in court most
ridiculous and evidently false, prefacing it with a remark that
it would be easy for him to fabricate a lie, but that he would
not, and, though he could account satisfactorily to his own
conscience for the blood on his clothes, he would be silent
rather than betray another. He proceeded to explain how
he became possessed of the money and articles, owning that
his previous statements were untrue; but the mass of his last
statements were evidently quite as false, as well as his account
of the manner in which his time was passed on the evening
of the murder. He pretended that he had courted a young
lady at Hampstead, and introduced De la Rue to her: that
De la Rue seduced her: that her brother resolved to punish
him severely, and that he himself forged a letter as from the
girl requesting an appointment with De la Rue in the field
on the Friday night: that both set off together and parted
near the spot, the brother going to meet and attack De la
Rue, and he going on to the Swiss Cottage: that murder was
not at all contemplated by either, but serious mutilation :
that he waited at the Swiss Cottage for the brother, who had
arranged to join him subsequently to the mutilation, and,
after having heard the cries of murder, and waited some time
in vain, he went to the spot, felt the pulse to learn if De la
Rue was dead, and then proceeded to the brother’s house,
whither the latter had fled, determined to take the guilt on
his own shoulders, and repaired to a slaughter-house and
there stained his clothes in a pool of blood. Never wasa
more wild and absurd attempt at explanation made: never
an attempt less supported by the particulars ofa case. One,
who had ample opportunities of judging during his im-
prisonment, has assured me that no reliance could be placed
upon any statement which he made, however solemnly, and
had advised no hope to be placed of learning any further par-
ticulars from him before his execution. The very night,
up to midnight, before his execution, he occupied himself
with writing a statement to the clergyman, full of detestable
cant, protesting that God had so endowed him that he could
commit neither murder nor ingratitude; and acknowledging
that his account of the mode in which he stained his clothes
with blood was false, and that of the place in which the seduced
young lady resided. This statement bears not even the sha-
dow of truth, and its style is the true “saintly.” “His hours
being now so few that a babe could count them, he can no


by Dr. Elliotson. 125


longer dissemble. The clergyman is too good and worthy a
man for him to deceive with his last breath. He has the ten-
der chord of gratitude remaining in continual motion in his
bosom ; he had rather be deemed a murderer than a vile in-
grate, though God makes it impossible for him to be either ;
he has a quiet and unresentful conscience, and a heart still
beating with innocence; he cannot indulge an 1INFIDEL* teme-
rity and asseverate an untruth, or trifle with his Maker, so


* Let all in this cant-loving country read Douglas Jerrold’s “ St. Giles
and St. James,” in his Shilling Magazine. Mr. Tangle, while going with
his family to church, each with prayer-book in hand, will not be spoken
with to save the life of a poor child cruelly doomed to death early in the
week. The good muffin-maker, Capstick, had in vain tried to see the petti-
fogger, Tangle, at home, on the Sunday morning, but met with him when
issuing from his door with his family to church. ‘* Mr. Tangle never can be
seen of a Sunday before half-past ten; a quarter to eleven he goes, of
course, to church. The Sabbath, he always says, should be a day of rest.
And Tangle—it was his only self-indulgence—illustrated this principle by
lying late in bed every Sunday morning to read his papers. Nevertheless,
with smoothly-shaven face, and with an all-unworldly look, he was, ere the
church-bell ceased, enshrined in the family pew. There was he with his
wife, decorously garnished with half-a-dozen children, sons and daughters,
patterns of Sabbath piety; of seventh day Christianity.” ‘ After six days’
hard work, what a comfort it was,’ he would say, ‘to enjoy church of a
Sunday!’ And Tangle, after his fashion, did enjoy it: he enjoyed the re-
spectability which church-going threw about him; he enjoyed his worldly
ease and superiority, as manifested in his own cosily furnished pew. Look-
ing upon the pauper worshippers on the benches, and then contemplating
the comforts of his own nook, he felt very proud of his Christianity. And in
this way did Mr. Tangle attend church. It was a decent form due to
society, and especially to himself. He went to church as he went to his
office,—as a matter of business; though he would have been mightily
shocked had such a motive been attributed to him.”

“Ere, however, the muffin-maker could touch the knocker, the door
opened, and Mr. Tangle, his wife, his two sons, and two daughters presented
themselves, all, the females especially, being dressed for church. Yes,
dressed for church ; carefully, elaborately arrayed and ornamented, to sus-
tain the severest criticism that, during the hours of devotion, might be passed
upon them by sister sinners.

“*Mr. Tangle,’ said Capstick, ‘I won’t-keep you a minute: but when
can I call on——’


. “* ¢ Nothing secular to-day, sir,’ said Tangle, and he waved both his
ands,

““*But, Mr. Tangle, there’s life and death, sir,’ cried Capstick, but
Tangle interrupted him :

“*What’s life and death, sir? What are they, sir, that we should do
anything secular to-day ?’

“* But, Mr. Tangle, its the fate of that poor wretched boy; and there
isn’t a minute to lose,’ urged the muftin-maker.

***T shall be very glad to see you in the way of business, to-morrow,’
replied Tangle, labouring to appear very placid; ‘but I beg of you, my
good man, not to disturb the current of my thoughts—of my Sabbath feelings
—with anything secular to-day. To me the world is dead on Sundays.’

** * But won’t you do good on Sundays ?’ cried Capstick.—‘ Your religion
doesn’t forbid that, I suppose?”

“** My good man, let me have none of your FREE-THINKING ribaldry here.
This is my door-step, and don’t defile my threshold with your PROFANITY.
I have given you my answer. Nothing secular to-day.’ ”


126 Cerebral Development and Character of Hocker.


strong is his conviction of a future judgment and eternal con-
sciousness ; it is the duty of all to prepare for death, and he
is prepared, and shall be able to shout out his innocence
from his heart on his entrance into eternity; the best men not
being worthy of a place in heaven, even his innocence does
not render him worthy of an immortal crown, and his hopes
beyond the grave are not his own deserts, but those of another ;
he believes that submission to God’s will, a sincere and open
confession of all his- youthful follies and imperfections, fol-
lowed by genuine contrition and faith, according to what he
has been taught, are acceptable to his merciful and gracious
Benefactor, whom he has so often offended; though some may
be harsh enough to brand him as a dying liar, he is, while
writing this statement, too weak and too heart-broken to quit
the world like an atheist ; that his poverty is his crime, and
his hopes of heaven are worth the renewal of his days; and
he trusts he shall meet his friends where all is light and
joyous, the love of God the only mystery, holiness and pure
intellect go hand in hand, and the tear of gratitude is the only
tear.” He had written to one of the sheriffs two letters, one
as absurdly false, and the other as disgustingly canting, and
ornamented with “ Rock of Ages—Divine Mercy—Faith, and
Saviour—and that Crown of Glory of which he hopes to be a
partaker.” Yet a few hours after this, when attending the
public service in the prison chapel, he advanced to his seat
with ease and self-possession, and what might be called a thea-
trical movement, which evidently surprised those of the con-
gregation who had not seen him before ; arranged it, as well
as his hassock, very particularly, so as to enable him to make
a display ; scrupulously arranged his hair, looking perfectly
conscious that he was the observed of all observers, and begged
for a glass of water which he received from the attendant
with a bow; and he joined in the responses in a firm tone.
If, as I have just read in the Times, he began to pray, and
begged others to join him, on returning to his cell from the
“ condemned” sermon, two letters written the next day, within
an hour or two of his execution, show that he was playing the
hypocrite most charmingly, like thousands of what is phari-
risaically styled the “ religious world.” After rising in the
morning for his execution at 8 o’clock, he wrote letters to two
girls, neither of whom was she whom he courted in Portland-
place,—addressing one as his very dearest Sarah, his sweet
love, sending her this his warmest kiss, and assuring her
that, notwithstanding all his falsehoods to her respecting his
condition of life are past, his love to her survives every other
feeling, and he hopes to meet her in heaven,—and addressing


by Dr. Elliotson. 127


the other as his still dearest Olivia, his first and dearest love
whom he has thought of in his “incarceration,” sleeping
and awake, till his heart has been ready to burst. One letter
he gave secretly to the clergyman, and the other to the under-
governor. It has been ascertained that these females were as
real persons as the girl whom he courted on the evening of
the murder. His thoughts were truly heavenwards !


I extract the following paragraph from the Examiner :—

** Hocker was a teacher in the school attached to Christ’s Chapel,
Maida-hill, and his case is a most remarkable one, showing us,
amongst other things, how difficult it is for even good men to per-
form their duties properly when biassed by false notions of religion,
and how necessary it is that the choice of teachers should rest with
men of business and the world. In the same school, and over
Hocker, there was a superior teacher. This miscreant, for conduct
in the school which cannot be more particularly referred to, was ob-
liged to fly the country, for the school authorities had not courage
enough to prosecute him for his crimes. Hocker, quitting the school
of Christ’s Chapel, was strongly recommended by the minister—a
very worthy man—to a brother clergyman in the neighbourhood.
In the letter of reésmmendation a great.emphasis was placed upon
the piety of Hocker, and a lively interést was expressed in the lad’s
welfare.”


5. Two days before his execution—the day before the
“condemned” sermon, I accompanied the governor to his
cell. He was sitting with his legs crossed and his hands in
his lap, having his hair cut, and completely at his ease. The
governor addressing him with the remark that he was having
his hair cut, he laughingly replied, “ Yes, it is rather long,
but it must not be cut too short, or they’ll not know me
again,” and immediately drew it from one side of his head
down over his face, seeming to take a great pride in its
blackness and length, for it reached absolutely from his
forehead to his chin and must have served his purpose well
when he went out in the evening in female clothes, as it is
now said he was in the habit of doing. I staid but a
minute or two and said nothing, since my object was to ob-
serve his appearance, as I am fond of doing with persons in
all remarkable situations. There was something very disgust-
ing in the hue of his face. The form of his mouth, nose, and
whole face was bad; and his dark eyes looked out suspiciously
and villanously ; his mouth, a part far less under control
than the eyes, harmonised with them in expression. His
vanity was exhibited also in the inflated style and fine words of
all he wrote, and in the prison he tore up again and again all
he had written before he could be satisfied with it. At the


128 Cerebral Development and Character of Hocker.


commencement of his trial he is represented to have appeared
“most remarkably collected and almost gay in his demean-
our, having an expression approaching a satisfied smile on his
countenance.” On the morning of his execution, “ short]
after four o’clock, he rose and dressed himself with great
care. Instead of the frock-coat he wore at his trial, he put
on a new black dress-coat, and as ever, was particular in the
arrangement of his hair.” * Still later, indeed just before he
left his cell for execution, on being told that the late member
of Parliament, Mr. Whittle Harvey, had expressed a willing-
ness to see him, finding he was a native of Colchester, he
readily, and “ with apparent gratification,” consented, though
he had nothing to say.

6. Although on entering the Swiss Cottage, immediately
after the murder, he is represented by one person to have
been “ flurried,” the pot-boy who served him with rum and
water was not struck with his appearance, yet he staid a
quarter of an hour; and although, when his brother told him
two days afterwards that the murdered man was De la Rue,
he was much agitated, he shewed no agitation on return-
ing home at midnight after the murder and shewing his
brother the twelve sovereigns ; and none of his family seem to
have been struck with his manner up to the time of his appre-
hension ; when a person stated before him and his father that
the murdered man’s brains had protruded, he indeed said “do
let us talk about something else,” but this was all, he is not
represented as having been agitated, and presently sang a
song with his brother. He went up whistling and apparently
unconcerned to the policeman who was waiting with the body
in the field for a stretcher to carry it away, calling out
“ Hallo, policeman; what are you about here? What is the
matter?” and held a long conversation, in which he did not
betray the least knowledge of the deceased, nay, he stooped
down and felt whether there was still a pulse, and staid till
the stretcher arrived,—a quarter of an hour. When the body
was being conveyed, he asked for a light, opened the lantern
when another could not, calmly lighting his cigar enabling
his face to be distinctly seen. Subsequently, in the house in
Portland-place, there was no indication in him that any thing


* This reminds me of an anecdote mentioned by Lord Bacon in his
treatise De Augmentis Scientiarum, |. iv. cap. 1. A murderer in Burgundy,
** when beaten with iron rods, and torn with red-hot pincers, did not utter a
groan, and, seeing something break and fall accidentally on the head of a
bystander, the rascal laughed in the midst of his torments while being
burnt, though he had just before cried at having his curly hair cut o-" I have
no doubt that Hocker’s wish not to have too much cut off when I saw him on
the Saturday, was lest he should not look so well.


by Dr. Elliotson. 129


extraordinary had happened. The murder was often the sub-
ject of conversation in his family, but nothing on his part
excited the least suspicion that he had been near the spot or
had seen the body. When he opened the door for the police-
man who went to apprehend him, in answer to the inquiry
whether Thomas Hocker was at home, he at once replied that
he was the person. It has been mentioned that on first ap-
pearing in Court, he “appeared most remarkably collected,”
and, when the evidence was closed and the judge offered him
five minutes to prepare for delivering a statement, he an-
swered, quite coolly, “I thank you, my Lord, &c., and after-
wards read his statement in a loud voice.”


The following extracts are from the Examiner :—


‘* The prisoner appeared perfectly unmoved when he heard the
verdict, a indeed the nerve he exhibited through the trial was most
extraordinary.

“When the sentence had been delivered, the prisoner leaned for-
ward in the dock as though about to say something: but, on the
turnkey touching him on the shoulder, he appeared to change his
mind, and turned round and walked away from the dock with a firm
step.”


**The moment that the prisoner was removed from the bar, al-
though a slight tremor was remarked by some of the by-standers
during the period that the verdict was being returned by the jury,
his natural firmness soon returned, indeed it was but momentarily.
His gaze was fixed and his manner firm, and in no ways shaken,
walking down the steps of the dock as though he had been but an
ordinary spectator of the scene that had just taken place. As he
passed through the passages of the prison, in his way to his cell, he
shook hands with one of the persons connected with the gaol, to
whom he observed in an under voice that “ it was all over.”” There
was nothing, however, in his tone indicative of despondency; upon
the contrary, his demeanour, even to those who are acquainted with
him, is a matter of surprise. Upon reaching his cell he complained
of being tired, and shortly after partook of some refreshment”


The measurements of his head were as follows :—


Circumference over the eyes...............+.. 22} |
Line from eartoear do. .............0005- 1]
PR no2 00 oo 00 n000 11}
over the head ..........12
From the meatus to Firmness................ 62
Sra 6
Benevolence. ............. 6
Sense of things .......... 53
Comparison.............. 5}


BE chedveebinrens secs 6}


130 Cerebral Development and Character of Hocker.


From the meatus to Parental love ............ 53

Inhabitiveness............ 4

Breadth at the outer extremity of the orbits .... 4%
disposition to violence.............. 6

centre of Causality ................ 2§

EG BD oc cccdscceseonss 54
DE nvépactsssececee @

BED wo csctcccccescas OM
OUD ci ckee seveas 3

Circumspection .......... 5$

EL vis Cad iucn osveea 4h
BE 5 5 is nccvtessce B


The head was large. The intellectual portion was full, but
the bulk was in the portion situate behind a line drawn from
one ear to the other over the head. This portion was very
large. In this portion, the organs of firmness were of extra-
ordinary size, and those of pride and vanity were remark-
ably large. On the other hand, the organs of circumspection
were small, and the whole coronal surface,—the seat of the high
moral feelings, sloped off strikingly at the sides, so that the
organs of the sense of justice, veneration, and benevolence were
very narrow and defective, though high. The great size of
the former organs, and the deficiency of the latter, gave
Hocker his distinctive character of hardened villany and
vanity. He had no moral motives of self-restraint, for his
head was “shapen in iniquity.” The organs of the disposition
to Violence were large, like all the organs, except those of Cir-
cumspection, behind the line mentioned,—those of Courage,
Sexual, Parental, and Friendly Love.* His organs of the
Love of Property were not striking, and his wants, occasioned
by his bad habits, and not the love money, led him to the
robbery. He alleged on the evening before his execution
that he was a father and devoted the money he had obtained
from De la Rue to his illegitimate child and its mother; but
nobody believed his boast, and it was put down in the papers
to the account of “his vain pride.” His organs of the disposi-
tion to Violence were quite sufficient to enable him to murder
with violence under strong motives and with his little moral
restraint.

His organs of Language were large: those of Ideality
moderate ; and those of Intellect in general very good.

The head was not that of a stupid grovelling brute,—the


* During his last night, we read that ‘‘ his slumbers were light and rest-
less, and frequently the ejaculation, ‘My mother, my poor mother,’ escaped
his lips.”


by Dr. Elliotson. 131


low murderer: but of an intelligent, conceited, showy, deter-
mined, unconscientious hypocrite.

The above was written before breakfast on the morning
of June 12, and after breakfast I received an obliging letter
from the Rev. 8S. Robins, of Shaftesbury, to whom, though
unknown to him, I had taken the liberty of applying for in-
formation respecting Hocker, on account of the reverend
gentleman’s having been the minister of Christ’s Chapel,
Paddington, in the National School attached to which the
culprit had been educated. The following is an extract :—


** During the time at which he was a pupil, and afterwards a
monitor, in the Christ Chapel School, his conduct was very good—
he gave many tokens of ability—he was ready in most things which
he had ‘to learn, particularly arithmetic. His manners were gentle
and engaging, and I should have described him as a promising and
well-ordered youth. I ought to mention that vanity was a very ap-
parent failing; it shewed itself in his dress, and in various other
ways.

** The case seems to me in many respects a | psychological pheno-
menon, the like of which I have never known.”


A being so organized could never be reclaimed, never made
good for anything, never be anything but a pest to society,
deceiving those who look upon pious external habits, which
cost no effort and usually gain much favour, as delightful
characteristics and sure marks of real worth, even perhaps
in spite of occasionally discovered contemptible or iniquitous
deeds. He had all the advantages of what is usually considered
the best possible education. He was carefully, as the excellent
Mr. Robins informs me, “ educated in the National School
attached to Christ’s Chapel, and, in consequence of his earnest
wish to become a schoolmaster, was retained until the age of
seventeen, when he took the charge of a school in the same
neighbourhood.” In the “condemned” sermon the Rev.
Mr. Davis said, “ At school it appears he was well acquainted
with spiritual truths ; and when 4 became a teacher I have
been told by those who have heard him examine the children,
that they have been delighted with his method of conveying
instruction, and edified with the explanation he gave of the
sacred Word of God.” It may be urged that his education
was not of the best kind. That he should have been in-
structed in the philosophical reason why one act is bad and
another good,—in the truth that a deed is good only because
it leads on the great scale to the greatest amount of happiness
to the greatest number of persons ; not to short-lived, but to
enduring, happiness; not of necessity to worldly happiness


132 Cerebral Development and Character of Hocker.


in the individual who does it, but to the real happiness of the
race at large, as well as to dignified happiness in the indivi-
dual himself. The religious world should remember that to
assert this to be not so, is to malign their God,—to accuse him
of arranging things so that the general tendency of virtue is to
occasion misery, and of thus discouraging virtue and making
it appear he does not delight in seeing us virtuous. This,
moreover, is not the fact. Virtue—honest and conscientious
conduct—too often injures, in a worldly sense, the individual :
but virtue is the only road to general happiness, and upon
this fact only can we determine what is virtue or vice. The
most religious person has to ascertain by observation and
reason what is wrong and what is right. For example, he is
forbidden to steal and forbidden to murder: but he is not
informed in Scripture what is theft or what is murder: and
religious people differ exceedingly as to what is or is not rob-
bery or murder. A really enlightened and benevolent honest
man might regard much as absolute theft that passes under
the most respectable names in office or service, or is regarded
as sanctioned and necessary in trade, nay, in religious esta-
blishments ; he might regard the abstraction of every six-
pence from the people that is not applied to the payment of
what is strictly necessary for the people as downright rob-
bery. He might regard war, unless in self-defence and when
it is clear that all the negociation which becomes rational
beings has failed, as murder: he might regard the legal exe-
cution of a fellow-creature, and above all the summary shoot-
ings in the army for misconduct, as murder: the sending of
poor men to pestilential countries, nay, the neglect of means
to put an end to the poisonous unhealthiness of the districts
of the poor, as murder. It may be urged also that Hocker
was taught to regard himself as a vile worm, with no particle
of goodness in him by nature, and inclined to all sin, incapa-
ble of any good by his own exertions, and deserving in his
nature of eternal punishment whatever the amount of his
virtue ; instead of being taught to rely upon his own un-
wearied efforts to act well, to aim at that noble self-respect
which is free from all selfishness and absurd pride, but which
is indispensable to virtue, and, above all, not to regard as
virtue the holding particular opinions on what are really
historical matters, or are points not capable of clear proof
nor easily comprehended by the highest intellect, in easy
acquiescence in what those around us maintain, and main-
tain generally from mere blind imitation and habit, and
perhaps in contradiction to the obvious facts of science.
But, however he had: been educated, I believe he would


by Dr. Elliotson. 133


have proved a villain to his last hour. Sound education and
good example have their effect—a mighty effect, but much
must depend upon organization ; and this leads me to speak
of our second great duty for the happiness of man—that of
not propagating from bad stocks; of the solemn duty of re-
fraining from marriage when inherent disease, and above all
insanity or some other severe affection, is known to exist
or to have existed in the person or to have occurred in a
parent or uncles or aunts. This was insisted upon in the
article by LEGE, in the last number, and a quaint quotation
was made from old Burton: but I have found the same duty
insisted upon by a Greek writer who lived about the time
when Pythagoras opened his first school in Italy, 500 years
before Christ. Ocellus Lucanus, in his treatise on the Nature
of the Universe, writes, “It is requisite, therefore, to en-
deavour, with all possible earnestness and attention, that
children may be born elegant and graceful, and that, when
born, they should be well educated. For neither is it just
that those who rear horses, or birds, or dogs, should, with
the utmost diligence, endeavour that the breed may be such
as is proper, and from such things as are proper, and when
it is proper, and likewise consider how they ought to be dis-
posed when they produce them, in order that the offspring
may not be a casual production; but that men should pay
no attention to their progeny, should beget them casually,
and when begotten should neglect both their nutriment and
their education ; for these being disregarded, the causes of
all vice and depravity are produced, since those who are thus
born will resemble cattle, and will be ignoble and vile.”

To follow this duty out with success, the true physiology
of the brain must be known to mankind. The grand truth
of the native character being dependent upon the size and
proportion of the constituent portions of the brain, and the
knowledge of the situation and functions of the respective ce-
rebral organs, must become a portion of education. The gross
ignorance of these truths, with their necessary consequences,
discovered by Gall, which pervades our legislature, our univer-
sities, our great and little schools, and the medical profession
no less than those of law and theology, is really appalling to
those who have studied this department of natural science.

Meeting Lord Jeffery at dinner two or three years ago,
I, at his request, examined his head, and was informed after-
wards that he had really been astonished to observe that I
seemed in honest earnest when I spoke of phrenology as a
truth: so that he had been stationary in regard to the true
knowledge of man’s intellectual and moral nature ever since


134 Cerebral Development and Character of Hocker.


he made the notable onslaught upon true cerebral physiology
about thirty years ago. Yet he is but like the rest in his
grade of intelligence, education, and social position. If the
true cerebral physiology were universally known, and virtue
duly estimated, marriages would no longer take place without
a careful examination of the size and proportions of the head,
as well as of an enquiry into the sense and disposition of the
party, and into the character and health of the parents and
the uncles and aunts. Rejection on these grounds may be
hard: but it is equally hard for the very ugly, the disfigured
by disease, the misshapen and misgrown, not to find matri-
monial alliance. The individual cannot help his blemishes ;
but he must submit that a large number of individuals may
not hereafter suffer, and perhaps through many—an indefi-
nite number of, generations. Where such shocking cerebral
organizations exist, education will avail little; and therefore
they should not be propagated, any more than the disposition
to imsanity, or other severe nervous diseases, consumption,
&c., should be propagated. Were good education universal,
and society so regulated that virtue had encouragement, which
at present it has not,—for falsehood, selfishness, subserviency,
and tergiversation are rewarded, and in public men, who
ought to set examples to those around and below them, un-
blushingly practised,—there can be no doubt that by the con-
stant excitement of the intellectual organs and those of the
higher feelings, and the subjection of the organs of the lower
feelings, organization would improve from generation te ge-
neration. Let us all therefore strive both for sound, rational,
philosophical education, through precept and virtuous exam-
ple, and for breeding only from the healthy and healthily
predisposed and from beings well organized in their brains
and descended from the well organized.

But what is to be done with the criminals of bad organi-
zation, who will for ages, perhaps till the human race is
extinct, infest mankind? Society must be protected from
them. Such an unfortunate being as Hocker ought never
again to be let loose upon mankind. Some are for putting
them to death,—“‘ Hang them, hang them, hang them.” The
preacher of the “ condemned” sermon before Hocker,


“Took for his text the 6th verse of the 9th chapter of the book
of Genesis: ‘ Whosoever sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his
blood be shed; for in the image of God made he man.’ The reve-
rend gentleman at some length enforced this principle, and went on
to observe that the infliction of the extreme penalty of death was
attended with salutary effects. Though scenes of a painful nature
were to be witnessed at executions,“ where those who congregated as


by Dr. Elliotson. 135


spectators indulged in ribaldry, or were guilty of acts of dishonesty,
still that formed no ground for the repeal of the law of heaven in
reference to the punishment of death for the crime of murder.
Neither, he admitted, was the punishment of death always effectual
in preventing the awful crime of murder. Nay, it appeared that on
the same day that the last unhappy youth was executed, another
offence of similar atrocity, for which there was now present another
young man, of whose guilt or otherwise it was not his province to
speak, though he stood committed for trial on the oaths of several
witnesses. If a severe example failed, that fact was not conclusive
that the law of God was wrong. Whatever might be the conduct of
the multitude congregated outside the prison, its effects were salu-
tary on the inmates of the gaol when they heard the prison bell
strike the knell of death, and also when they entered the place in
which those who now heard him were assembled, and saw vacant the
place which a few hours before had been occupied by one whose
spirit had since fled, and who had appeared before that awful Judge
to whom all hearts were known, and from whom no secrets were hid.
These are weighty but painful truths. Neither was it to be con-
sidered that the punishment of death for the crime of murder was
intended solely as an act of justice or vengeance following the crime.
It was inflicted because the image of God had been violated in the
person of the murderer’s victim.”


The church-going, sabbath-keeping, merciful Mr. Tangle,
when told that the poor child St. Giles, brought up with
every precept and example and practice of vice* and con-
demned to be hanged on the charge of horse-stealing, while
the man who stole the horse was acquitted, was to be hanged
on Wednesday, replied,


“«* Very true; I believe the affair comes off on Wednesday. A
great pity, sir! Quite a child, sir; and with good parts—very good
parts. Nevertheless, sir, the crime of horse-stealing increases
hourly; and without some example is made, some strong example
is made’


* “Poor wretch! Let the men who guide the world—the large-brained
politicians, who tinker the social scheme, making themselves the masters
and guardians of their fellow-men—let them look into this Newgate dun-
geon ; let them contemplate this blighted human bud; this child felon, never
taught the path of right, and now to be hanged for his most sinful ignorance,
What a wretched, sullen outcast! What a darkened, loathsome thing!
And now comes the clergyman—the State divine, be it remembered—to tell
him that he is treasured with an immortal soul ; that—with mercy shed upon
him—he will in a few hours be a creature of glory before the throne of God!
Oh, politicians! Oh, rulers of the world! Oh, law-making masters and
taskers of the common million, may not this cast-off wretch, this human
nuisance, be your accuser at the bar of heaven? Egregious folly! Impos-
sible! What—stars and garters impeached by rags and tatters! St. James
denounced by St. Giles! Impudent and ridiculous! Yet here, we say,
comes the reverend priest—the Christian preacher, with healing, honied
words, whose Book—your Book—with angelic utterance, says no less.”


136 Cerebral Development and Character of Hocker.


*** Why, they hanged four for horse-stealing last sessions,’ said
Capstick.

“Tangle looked round with astonishment at the interruption,
and then observed—‘ That only proves they don’t hang enough.’

** * My opinion, Mr. Tangle; quite my opinion,’ said the tutor.
*‘ We want stronger laws, sir; much stronger. If we were to hang
for everything, there’d be an end of crime altogether. It’s because
we only punish by halves—now hanging one, and now another—
that we have such a continual growth of vice. We ought to pull
crime up by the roots; now our present merciful system makes it
flourish the stronger.’ ”


Hear the poor child’s reply to the prison clergyman, who
says to him,

*** My poor boy, though young, you must remember, you're an
old sinner. You’ve done much wickedness.’

***T never done nothing but what I was taught; and if you say
—and Bob there’s been reading it to me—that the true Christian
forgives every body—well then, in course, the judge and all the nobs
are no Christians, else wouldn’t they forgive me? Wouldn’t they
like it so, to teach me better, and not to kill me?’ ”


The inutility of capital punishment is shewn by its aboli-
tion not having occasioned any increase of the many offences
which were previously made capital; and murder is at this
moment frightfully frequent among us, though execution after
execution takes place. Hanging is not at all feared at a dis-
tance ; and the consolations usually given at the time are
calculated to do more than divest it of terror. The clergyman
thus addressed St. Giles :


«The heavens, I tell you, are opening for you; repent, my
child; repent, poor boy, ol you will be an immortal spirit, wel-
comed by millions of angels.’

** « St. Giles looked with bitter incredulity at his spiritual teacher.
‘Well, if all that’s true,’ he said, ‘it isn’t so hard to be hanged,
arter all. But I don’t think the nobs like me so well, as to send me
to sich a place as that.’”


Surely, too, the Christian does not believe that too much
time can be given for repentance : to “ launch a fellow-creature
into the presence of his Maker,” and thus shorten his oppor-
tunity for repentance, even an hour, should be indefensible,
nay, fiendish, in his eyes.

One ill effect is too obvious. It habituates to the view of
violent death, and thus greatly lessens the horror of what
should be thought of with the extremest horror. It “hardens
the heart” of all who witness the execution, who read or hear
about it, or are in any way concerned with it.

I will not repeat what I have already printed, but refer the


by Dr. Elliotson. 187


reader to No. I., p. 49, and VIIL., p. 449, of The Zoist. Of
the arguments from Scripture I shall say nothing. The ques-
tion is not one of supernatural matters, but of reason: and
all matters of reason and experience—of physical and moral
science, should be freely studied without reference to revela-
tion, which is for supernatural things not cognizable by sense
or reason,* and has invariably led men into error when they
have mingled it with their enquiries into natural knowledget
and moral science; in fact, all that regards cerebral phenomena
is as much natural knowledge as geology and astronomy, both
which have suffered severely from supernaturalism.

How the clergyman could argue for the necessity of
killing the unfortunate wretch, I am at a loss to conceive,
after thus alluding to him towards the close of the sermon—


**I attribute it (the youth’s fall) to the want of pure Christian
example amongst his domestic and social relations. It is a hard
task to maintain a public and private deportment in a position at
variance with that to which a man belonged; and I hear that one,
at least, of this unhappy man’s instructors, though he taught him
the word of God, had failed to set him that example which that
holy word inculcated. He had not the influence of private example.
This was the first step towards creating the ruin which we now see
before us. The other ground is the circumstance of having, at an
age far too young, namely, at the age of seventeen, being made
master of his own actions and conduct, and by his being then placed
in a situation where no one had a right to control his private con-
duct. The due performance of the public duties of the office he
filled was all that he had to attend to. Was it wise to leave a mere
youth in such a position? Here was a youth educated in one na-


* “Nor can we be obliged, where we have the clear and evident sen-
tence of reason, to quit it for the contrary opinion, under a pretence that it
is a matter of faith ; which can have no authority against the plain and clear
dictates of reason, But there being many things, wherein we have very
imperfect notions, or none at all ; and other things, of whose past, present,
or future existence, by the natural use of our faculties, we can have no
knowledge at all; these, as being beyond the discovery of our natural
faculties, and above reason, are, when revealed, the proper matter of faith,
Thus, that part of the angels rebelled against God, and thereby lost their
first happy state; and that the dead shall rise, and live again ; these and
the like, being beyond the discovery of reason, are purely matters of faith ;
with which reason has directly nothing to do.” —Locke, Essay iv. 18.

+t “No opinions,” says Lord Bacon, “are more popular than those of
writers who with great pomp and solemnity set forth the union of divinity
and philosophy, as though it were legitimate, and thus, tickling men’s pre-
jadices, inauspiciously mix divine and human matters together.” ‘* Natural
philosophy incurs as much danger from this fallacious and improper compact
as from open hostility: and al] discoveries and improvements which are not
included in it are obstinately rejected. Religion is fall of vile suspicions
and imbecile contempt of all the improvements and discoveries of philo-
sophy.” — Cogitata et Visa, vol. ix., p. 167, 8vo. edition. Also Novum
Organon, lib. i.; Aphorism 89.


VOL, III. L


138 Cerebral Development and Character of Connor.


tional school, and made sole master of another. Why it was like
sending a vessel to sea with all sails set, but without either rudder
or compass to direct her course. In a short time he forfeited the
confidence of the committee under whom he had served as a teacher,
and being discharged, he could not bring himself to return to join
in the occupation by which his parents lived. He found himself
deserted by the friends of his youth, and thenceforth he fell into
habits of sin, and then imbibed principles of infidelity.”


Thus all is ascribed to the external circumstances for
which Hocker was no more answerable than for having learnt
the English language because all around him spoke it. What
proof the preacher possessed of Hocker’s having fallen from
intense Christianity into infidelity before his crimes, I know
not: but, while ardently professing the Christian faith to
the last moment in prison, his conduct to the last moment
proved him to be a most contemptible hypocrite.


The circumstances and head of Connor present much less
interest. On the 31st of March, after much premeditation,
he murdered a dissolute woman in a house in St. Giles’s, by
stabbing her in the neck and chest in sixteen places with a
knife, on account of an alleged injury some time previous
which had prevented his marriage; slept with his father after-
wards; and the next day went to work as usual. Some wit-
nesses on the trial gave him the character of a quiet, well-
behaved young man: but the policeman declared he was
constantly seen in the company of thieves and other bad
characters in the Seven Dials. His behaviour in prison was
very good, and, through his catholic priest, he at last made
a full confession, and died with every appearance of penitence.
When I saw him in prison he appeared only a stupid person
without any particular expression. His head was of a very
inferior kind. It was altogether smaller than Hocker’s: the
intellectual portion much less, especially about Causality ; and
moreover the frontal sinuses seemed large, and from the
general appearance I should fancy that the skull was thick.
Firmness and Pride were less, and yet a line drawn from the
ears over the head was as long as in the case of Hocker’s, on
account of the remarkable bulging out just over the ears.
The moral surface was low and rather slanting at the sides.
Cautiousness was situated very low down, but, together with
Cunning, was very large; the mass of this lateral region
being enormous. He appears to have had so strong a thirst
for revenge that he told many persons he would “ pepper” or
“serve out” the unfortunate woman, and so far his cautious-


Fundamental Principles of Cerebral Physiology. 139


ness was overcome: yet as soon as the murder was committed
he told a man that he did not know whether he had killed her,
but he had “ been home and taken off his things so that they
should not know him.” His conduct shewed him to be very
stupid, and an attempt was made after the trial to prove him
insane, since, when he was in a passion he would throw any
dangerous weapon that he could lay his hand upon at those
near him; and on one occasion killed his mother’s cat and a
favourite bird, and on others had exhibited savage conduct.


The following are the measurements of his head :—


Circumference over the eyes ................ 223
Line from ear toear do. ..................12
CO ees
over the head ..........12
From the meatus to Firmness................ 5g
ee
Benevolence.............. 5%
Sense of Things.......... 53
CO eee
gg Sa 5$
Parental Love ............ 45
Inhabitiveness............ 48
Breadth at the outer extremity of the orbits.... 4}
-—— disposition to violence.............. 5%
centre of Causality................ 22
———— Sense of Property ................ 5%
ere 64
EE an dune ns os eas i 5
Ee 33
Circumspection .......... 6}
la Ah
Attachment .............. 3


II. The Fundamental Principles of Cerebral Physiology applied
to Philosophy. A Discourse delivered at the Annual
Meeting of the Phrenological Society of Paris, on the
9th of February, 1845, by Dr. J. B. Mége, President.


Gentlemen,—Every age has its distinctive characteristic,
and every epoch its general tendency towards progress; but
the development of the human intellect does not always pursue
a regular and progressive movement. Social, as well as other
elements, retard or accelerate it. Nevertheless, the truths
which are acquired, remain and serve as points for further
discoveries. It is thus that the labours of the seventeenth
L2


140 Fundamental Principles of Cerebral Physiology,


century prepared the way for the researches and the bold
views of the eighteenth, in spite of numerous obstacles. Our
first, our radical revolution of ’89, was only the forced conse-
quence—the solemn consecration of the great principles laid
down by our chief philosophers, who, shaking off the yoke of
prejudice, purifying all things by examination, rejecting the
scholastic, Aristotle and Plato, set forth the rights of man, and
deduced legal equality from the identity of the organic laws
governing the human race. But counteracting causes, well
known to you, gentlemen, did not allow that new era, that
regeneration of ideas to acquire the development and power
which the friends of humanity hoped for. However, the
epoch of progress returning again in 1830 seemed out of all
further danger, and the empire of reason appeared at last
about to sweep away the opinions and usages which had too
long degraded humanity.

You now know, by experience, not that our hopes are
again destroyed—they cannot be—but that they are deferred ;
not only do we not advance, we retrograde ; the present is not
a period of rest, it is the return of a portion of the past, and
no effort is spared to effect this return. The congregations
proscribed by law, are tolerated, nay, encouraged ; the unli-
mited dissemination of the grossest superstitions is permitted ;
while every philosophical idea which attacks the principle of
these absurdities is obstructed. The expelled Jesuits have
re-appeared in France, and are beginning a religious war in
Switzerland ; seminaries multiply, and churches arise more
numerous and more pompous than ever, to insult the misery
of the people. But it is not sufficient that the State contri-
butes enormous sums to satisfy the sacerdotal vanity—the
anti-Christian ambition of that clergy which still craves for
more. It thirsts for the monopoly of education, for subjec-
tion to its gloomy theology, and ultimately for universal domi-
nation, for laws which come from heaven, and of which the
priests are to be the only ministers. Yes, this is their object
—it cannot be misunderstood. This is the liberty of instruc-
tion which they so arrogantly and menacingly demand; and
our government of July not only fears, trembles, and nego-
ciates with them, but removes the professors of a philosophy
which has nothing in it hostile to Christianity. Deplorable
and stupid is the policy which constantly tends to strengthen
our enemies. Men of power, are you ignorant that they are
more powerful than you? Go and hear them; read their
manifestoes, their mandates; look at their organized legions,
ready to overthrow you at the first signal from Rome, from
Loyola, or Henry the Fifth. We, who are physiologists, feel


by Dr. J. B. Mege. 141


less secure, less simple than you; we denounce to you the
usurpation, the extravagant demands of the clergy, as fatal to
progress, to philosophy, to morality, to yourselves; minis-
ters, who cannot throw aside the notion of Divine right !

The professors of abstraction are the most powerful auxi-
liaries of this deceptive system of government ; the sophisms
of dogmatism produce those of superstition and politics, and
serve to support the violation of public liberty.

Yes, the false principles of our statesmen tacitly rest upon
those taught from our chairs of philosophy, or preached in the
churches ; it is with this twofold system of instruction that
the people are deceived—the masses by sermons, and the
ill-educated students by the incomprehensible absurdities of
the Sorbonne. Besides this manufactory of sophisms, there is
a crowd of innovators, whose systems are quite as erroneous,
quite as little founded on the nature of man. At our period
of progress and positivity, is not the appearance of this multi-
tude of doctrines, all false though opposed to each other,
strange and distressing to true philosophy? It is a fact
anomalous and unique in the history of the human intellect,
and proves that physical science—that anthropology has
always furnished the bases and principles of the abstract
sciences, and that when these have not been founded upon
them, they have never possessed a real value.

What overthrow of our ideas could make it otherwise in
the present day? Could man’s pretensions cause the stream
of positive knowledge to flow back? No, no; it is a torrent
which bears you on in spite of yourselves, ye sophists of col-
leges, of reviews—ye ministers or kings, who are dreaming of
what is impossible.

Cerebral Physiology, as I will prove, is the criterion, the
key-stone of all philosophy; but before I present to you
the general notions which form the object of this discourse,
allow me briefly to state the principal mataphysical doctrines
which in our day have the greatest number of followers.
There are those of the Scotch and German psychologists,
Reid and Stewart, Hegel and Schelling, who have opposed
Locke and Condillac, occupying themselves with the intellec-
tual manifestations only, without studying the form, the
structure, or the material relations from which they emanate
and result,—Schelling in particular inclines to mysticism and
preaches to the King of Prussia,—Kantism with its critiques,
its catagories, its analogies, and its absolutism, is only a pure
abstraction without logical necessity,—the dreams of Plato,
the different systems of India and of the Celestial Empire,
obscured, confused, /ogomachized by our new Sorbonne,—the


142 Fundamental Principles of Cerebral Physiology,


logos which is everything, explains everything, is sufficient
for everything, that is to say, the doctrines of Christ which
are being re-animated for the great glory of man, because
they maintain that liberty and all moral and social laws are
written there ;—the animists or ontologists of Montpellier or
Paris, who believe in a principle, an entity presiding over all
the functions and disorders of the animal economy,—the spi-
ritualism of the universities in which is taught the phenominal
trinity, the incomprehensible or the first cause of the finite or
the infinite,—the sensualism with a tabula rasa, or ideology,
which still believes with Helvetius that there are no innate
ideas,—the resuscitated system of Leucippus, Epicurus, and
Lucretius, which find a physical explanation of everything
in the arrangement and arbitrary forms of atoms; and lastly,
eclectism, adopted by an illegitimate sect, without principles,
direction, or logic, and consequently without scientific value :
this is the juste milieu of philosophy.

Here, then, are the doctrines, magnificent if they were but
true, which are taught to the rising generation, to pervert its
judgment and to make it receive sooner or later, according to
the period, the errors and prejudices upon which they are found-
ed; tyranny, despotism, violation of rights, fanaticism, and the
scientific systems deduced from abstract principles. We will
not speak of the theories which natural philosophers and che-
mists have performed upon space and vacuum, extension and
weight, movement and affinity, molecular aggregation and at-
traction at great distances, the power of cohesion, of the com-
position and decomposition of minerals, vegetables, and ani-
mals; nor, of those established on electricity and magnetism,
light and caloric, &c., &. We ought not to enter upon these
matters here, notwithstanding the great scientific interest
which they possess, but it is important that I should declare
to you that our method excludes every hypothesis which does
not rest upon physical analogies, and that we admit no scien-
tific reality except in secondary causes.

In social intercourse, in the distribution of labour, in
the adjustment of social power, there is the same diversity of
opinion, the same ignorance of the laws of cerebral formation,
of the fundamental faculties, of the wants and rights of man.
M. de Lamartine, in one of his last writings on the distribu-
tion of labour, has thundered against the Socialists and Com-
munists of the day; and, speaking of the religion of the St.
Simonians, has written the following remarkable words, “Be-
cause nothing less than divine authority could make men
receive laws, which would never have been received by them
in the name of reason.” i


by Dr. J. B. Mege. 143


If the plan of this discourse were more extensive it would
be easy to shew you the falseness of all these systems, to take
them one by one and overthrow them, for their bases are less
solid than moving sand. But I have and can have but one
object in directing your attention to the general principles,
which in my opinion ought to be the foundation of all positive
philosophy, and to endeavour to make you understand that
this can be furnished by cerebral physiology only—inthe anato-
mical and physiological study of the brain and its connexions.

This new science has two classes of opponents, I will even
say of detractors.

Those who do not understand it at all, and those who un-
derstand it imperfectly, reject it because of its materialism.
Very well, let us speak boldly ; truths ought to be expressed
without restriction, that they may be fairly judged of, and
that unsound conclusions may not be perfidiously drawn from
them. Yes, what is called phrenology, consists of facts,
purely material, and the principles, laws and deductions are
only a systematized expression of organization and its mani-
festations. All our scientific edifice is founded on materialism.
This, and this only, gives it its certainty and its philosophical
superiority. Is this saying that cerebral physiology is athe-
istical? Certainly not. It does not deny the existence of
God or a first cause, but, like La Place and Biot, does not
meddle with this question. Like these illustrious men, it
does not require it in order to explain sensible phenomena.
The phenomena which it cannot explain, and which are
ascribed to some occult force or power, it considers as pro-
blems yet to be solved, and expresses them by 2; but, not
wishing to deduce the known from the unknown, it rejects
all these z, till their value shall be determined. Neverthe-
less, cerebral physiology leaves every one to enjoy his own
opinion on this subject,—it admits even the organ of Theo-
sophy, the predominance of which leads to fanaticism and
superstition, or to the belief of unreal beings and fantastic
theories.

Cerebral physiologists understand better than any other
persons the diversity of opinion, because they know that it
depends upon the diversity of cerebral organization, but they
feel themselves unable to adopt those which are erroneous
and, in order to judge of these, they oppose the observation of
fact to the fancies of imagination.

We are aware of what is said against our method of in-
vestigation—of the errors and absurdities with which certain
writers favour us regarding that portion of the science called
organology,—but this neither astonishes nor disturbs us; and


144 Fundamental Principles of Cerebral Physiology,


besides, it is not necessary in the present day, in order to
establish our science, to repeat the refutations which we have
already given to all these objections, suggested more fre-
quently by motives which they dare not avow, than by a true
love of science. And again; do you not know that class of
persons, who have no other talent than that of proving that
they are deficient in judgment, who believe in the faculty
possessed by somnambulists of seeing by the neck or the
stomach, and of extending their magnetic vision as far as
Pekin, to tell you exactly what is going on there at a certain
hour ?* Who believe in the globules of Hahnemann and in
miracles, yet doubt the realities of this lower world, which
are too gross to deserve the attention of their sublime intelli-
gence? Others, who quote Rousseau, and would prove to
you in their own way that you ought to walk on all fours?
or, referring to Berkeley, would deny the existence of matter?
How shall we answer these formidable adversaries? Shall
we say to the one that their credulity would imply the over-
throw of the natural order of things? Shall we show to
others the direction of the occipital foramen and of the eyes ?
Make the Berkleists feel the weight of a club? What good
would result from this? Cerebral physiology does not even
laugh at them ; it pities them, and sees in the form of their
head the organic reason of their errors.

However, organology, or the localization of the intellec-
tual faculties, moral sentiments, inclinations and dispositions,
although impregnable in its generalities and chief divisions,
does not possess the same degree of certainty in its particular


* O prejudice! prejudice! how dost thou blind even the most rational
men? Whilst translating this passage, we cast aside our pen, and re-
perused the preceding paragraph. We asked ourselves this question,—Can
it be possible that Dr. Mége, who just gave us the true value of inexplicable
phenomena, can so soon forget his own philosophy? The branch of mes-
merism referred to, is a question of fact. Men of intellect state that they
have witnessed such phenomena. We say, in the language of Dr. M., let x
represent them—treat them the same as other x; reject them, if you please,
till their value shall be determined ; but do not denounce as “ deficient in
judgment,” the men who observe and chronicle what their experience pre-
sents to them,

“ Seeing” is not the word which an enlightened mesmerist would use.
Mesmeric patients du become acquainted with occurrences which are beyond
the sphere of vision, but how they accomplish this we know not, and we
have no word which clearly, and in an unobjectionable manner, expresses
the phenomenon. They possess a power which is frequently manifested in
the mesmeric state, and occasionally observed in persons who have not been
mesmerised. In fact, there is no phenomenon developed under the influence
of mesmerism, that is not observed without it. We have insisted on this
before, and we do so again. Medical records furnish abundant proofs of the
truth of this. See ‘‘ Numerous cases of Surgical Operations without Pain,”
by Dr. Elliotson. Bailliére, p. 35.—Zoist.


by Dr. J. B. Mége. 145


application : and in spite of the great number of facts and
observations which appear to leave no doubt of the situation
of such or such an organ in the brain, the scepticism of the
greater part of cerebral physiologists does not allow them to
adopt as definitive the classification and nomenclature of Gall,
Spurzheim, and others ; they wait till experience shall furnish
new facts which may confirm, modify, or change them, but
at present they consider them as landmarks to guide them in
their farther pursuit of truth.

The principal truths of the science have been established
by observation from the most remote antiquity. The statues
of gods and heroes prove that the head, and particularly the
forehead, has always been considered the seat of intelligence.
Democritus sought in the brain for the material cause of mad-
ness. Most philosophers, learned men, and even the fathers
of the church, recognized and foresaw these great truths, but
misinterpreted them and mixed them with a multitude of
errors.

It was reserved for the illustrious Gall, imitating the me-
thod of Hipprocrates, to collect all the previous facts, and
add to them others which a long and sagacious experience
had discovered to him ; to clear away conjectures, hypotheses,
abstractions, and then to erect the edifice of science upon a
foundation, solid, imperishable—furnished by the anatomical
and physiological demonstrations to which he devoted himself
during the thirty best years of his life.

Gall proved that not only the intellectual faculties had
their seat in the brain, but that the moral sentiments, pro-
pensities, and dispositions had also certain parts of the brain
for their organs, which he ascertained by a multitude of com-
parative observations upon men of all nations, ages, and de-
grees of intelligence; upon criminals, painters, musicians,
great travellers, calculators, learned persons, &c., and those
who were mad or idiotic from the cessation or alteration of
a function through the lesion of a cerebral organ. He availed
himself of the manners, habits, and instincts of brutes in
seeking for elementary analogies, in the conformation of their
cranium, and the number, volume, and relative position of
the organs.*

Gall neglected nothing to gain information, and carried
on his investigations in a mode which may be regarded as a
pattern for all investigators of the truth. The science which
he created possesses the same characters of certainty in its


* M. Vimont has made similar researches, and formed a most valuable


collection and published an important work on Comparative Cerebral
Physiology.


146 Fundamental Principles of Cerebral Physiology,


generalities as the other natural sciences; but, like these,
cerebral physiology is in its nature cumulative. Though con-
jectural in its subdivisions and provisional admissions, it is
positive in its fundamental truths ; accordingly, it is from these
incontestable facts that I intend to derive principles and rules
applicable to philosophy, to that science of sciences which
epitomizes them all, which systematizes by the knowledge and
classification of their generative elements, of their common
laws and numerous ramifications, converging towards a cen-
tre where the conditions of human perfectibility meet and
arrange themselves.

I submit these great truths to your consideration ; the fol-
lowing is the most simple view of them :—

1. Animals are born with a nervous system, which pre-
sides over the development and preservation of the individual
and species, by the manifestations, instincts, manners, and
habits necessary to the perfection of their existence.

2. This nervous system obeys, in its development, the
laws of progression which characterize the numerous grades
of the animal scale, from the monad up to man.

3. The comparative study of the differences and analogies
of the nervous system in the various classes of animals,
demonstrates that their instinctive and affective faculties
depend on the volume and force of the nervous and sensitive
organs, and that the manifestations are more or less energetic,
according to the degree of development of the assemblage of
organs, or of one of them.

4. The brain of man being the most complicated and the
most complete, its functions: must be, and are more compli-
cated and more complete than those of other animals.
Accordingly, besides the instincts and sensations of brutes, it
possesses intellectual and moral faculties, inclinations, and
dispositions.

5. The anatomical and physiological study of the brain
and its connections, in man and brutes, constitutes the science
of phrenology, which, having material elements for its sub-
ject, is impregnable in its foundation, its principles, its laws
of relation and manifestation, and its necessary or logical
consequences are of the same nature and value as those of
other natural sciences.

6. The instincts, inclinations, dispositions, and intellectual
faculties, which are called talent, imagination and genius ; the
moral sentiments, the passions, the notion of justice and in-
justice, of good and evil, of beautiful and ugly, of free will, or
of necessity which destroys it, are manifested by the cerebrum,
cerebellum, and their connections ; and the number, variety,


by Dr. J. B. Meége. 147


and degree of intensity or weakness of these manifestations,
as well as their various combinations, necessarily depend on
the volume, form, and energy of the brain in general, or of
the predominance of one or more of the organs which compose
it.

7. The source of the instincts and intellect being entirely
organic, the manifestations called spiritual, are purely mate-
rial; they are attributes or products of organized matter, as
in the case of all the other functions of the animal economy.

8. The study of distinct portions of the brain constitutes
organology, the reality of which is proved a priori by the analo-
gical and synthetic method, and a posteriori by the experi-
mental and analytic method. The latter method has less
certainty than the former; but, were it entirely erroneous,
organology would still exist as a general fact. The cerebral
mass is not homogeneous ; its parts are different in form, sub-
stance, and texture; therefore, its functions must present
corresponding differences. If, for example, it is hereafter
discovered that the organ of music does not occupy the place
assigned to it by Gall and Spurzheim, what then? Look for
it in other parts of the brain, it must be there; but do not
look for it in the larynx or in the fingers. You might as well
search in these parts for the talent of the author, the mecha-
nician, or the painter. Our limbs are only the passive instru-
ments of our faculties.

9. The brain, during its development, makes impressions
and inequalities on its bony case, which exactly correspond
with the projections and depressions on its surface, so as to be
transferred to the exterior of the skull. The knowledge of its
inequalities, developments, and relations, is called cranioscopy ;
it is a part of organology ; it enables us to ascertain the abso-
lute and relative volume of the different cerebral organs.

10. The human brain requires from five-and-forty to fifty
years to attain its highest degree of development and activity.
The head of Cuvier afforded an example of this law; but as
all parts do not develope themselves equally, the organs which
have been most exercised acquire a superior volume and
energy, to such an amount, that those organs which remained
inactive—waste, like a muscle which is not used, and this
wasting causes the partial imbecility which we sometimes
observe in persons devoted to one pursuit, such as musicians,
mathematicians, botanists, poets, and others who devote them-
selves to one particular study.

11. Accidental injuries, structural changes of the brain,
original mal-organization and deformity, impair, disturb, or
destroy the functions of the organs attacked, whence loss of


148 Fundamental Principles of Cerebral Physiology,


memory, of hearing, &c., palsy or idiotism, madness or imbe-
cility. But since each organ of the brain is double, we can
understand that a change in one does not necessarily occasion
disorder in the function of its fellow, which may singly mani-
fest the faculty, just as one eye is sufficient for vision.

12. However, cerebral physiologists acknowledge that it
is not always possible to determine the precise seat of the
various diseases; there are structural changes so delicate as
to leave, after death, no trace of themselves appreciable by
the senses, even assisted by the microscope and chemical
analysis, imperfect as these are at present. In this respect,
medicine is not more advanced than cerebral physiology ; the
scalpel is frequently, too frequently unable to discover the
organic cause of a host of diseases. But, independently of
the principles of the science, a multitude of well observed
facts leave no doubt that every functional derangement has a
material origin in the organism.

13. The knowledge of the organic forms, of the intellectual
faculties, of their individual powers, whether irresistible or
subdued, of their mutual influence, and of the means calcu-
lated to develope organs which are too weak, to enfeeble those
which are too strong, offer to those who are engaged in ad-
vancing society and the arts, the most certain precepts and
rules for education, morals, criminal legislation, and the
representation of the head by the painter and the sculptor.

14. Lastly, since cerebral physiology gives a material
explanation of the different organs of sensation and intellect,
it is clear and positive that it contains within itself the prin-
ciples of all scientific method, that is to say, of general method-
ology, from which philosophy cannot separate itself without
going astray.

This rapid view of the foundations of our science presents
you with an epitome of the chief facts of cerebral organization,
which must convince you of the impossibility of establishing
a good philosophy without the aid of cerebral physiology. In
truth, consider what would be the value of the system of a
philosopher who neglected the knowledge of the only instru-
ments which could enable him to discover the truth he was
searching for, and who, imitating the metaphysician, employed
his instruments without precise notions of their nature and
power.

He would then resemble an architect constructing an
edifice with materials of which he knows nothing. Those
among you who study the natural sciences must be more
than others aware of the high importance of the fundamental
principles of cerebral physiology, and of the indispensable


by Dr. J. B. Mege. 149


necessity of applying them to positive philosophy, the domain
of which extends to all the sciences, in order to extract from
them what truth they contain, and what they have in com-
mon, that all may be united by the general laws of one uni-
versal and purely material system.

We do not, therefore, invite philosophers to attach them-
selves exclusively to the physiology of the brain in order to
compose their systems ; we are not exclusive ; we have not the
arrogant presumption to imagine that this science reveals all
truths, resolves all problems, as others have believed, each
for his own science ;—the ideologists, the sensualists, certain
rhetoricians or logicians, and the greater part of those who
have attempted to systematize philosophy. We understand
the word philosophy in a much larger sense. We consider that
philosophy cannot dispense with the study of the animal,
intellectual, and moral man. This knowledge must be his
base and guide, but his notions would be imperfect and bar-
ren if he neglected the study of the other natural sciences in
their constituent elements and logical connection. Thus em-
bryology, the natural history of the three kingdoms, pure ma-
thematics, physics, chemistry, astronomy, the study of natural
and conventional rights, of manners, of social institutions,
and of the development of the human character, will furnish,
according to their relative importance, their contingent of
the general knowledge necessary to the completion of a great
work or of a great philosopher.

I could have wished to have terminated this discourse
by a more explicit parallel between positivism and spiritual-
ism, that I might better display the advantages of the one
and the disadvantages of the other in the study of natural
phenomena; but I am reluctant to take advantage of your
indulgence, and moreover, relying upon the attention with
which you have honoured me, I trust that the generalities
which I have placed before you will be sufficient to enlighten
your judgment on the scientific value of our principles. To
the metaphysicians, who will never admit them, further details
would be useless—their opposition is preconceived, innate—
in their eyes evidence proceeds less from facts than from psy-
chological fancies. But independence of thought is the most
sacred human right, and the liberty of declaring it ought to
be unlimited. I respect therefore all their convictions, just
as I wish, as a matter of right, that they should respect ours;
willingly subjecting ourselves to every scientific and honourable
attack, we ask the same from our opponents ;—to whom for
the present we will be content to say—if you wish to build
upon idealism and abstraction—if you wish to carry your in-


150 Fundamental Principles of Cerebral Physiology.


vestigation onwards unto immensity—if you wish to discover
the elements of cosmogony, morals and society, beyond the
sun and the stars—do so—you have a perfect right, you have
assumed or received this mission, and we are not jealous of
you: but permit us to decline following you into these ethe-
real regions ; we have no inclination to fall from so great a
height. But one thing we do wish, O! spiritualists! to be
allowed like you, and side by side with you, at the Sorbonne,
at the College of France, and in all the academies of the
university, chairs from which we also might freely preach
our doctrines. We should then see under which portico the
students would collect ; we should then see the value of that
false proverb—the world likes to be deceived, Mundus vult
decipi.—No, the world does not wish to be deceived; it is a
calumny, it is a deplorable error, in use amongst moralists
and statesmen. The world desires truth—it accepts and clings
to errors solely because it mistakes them for truths. If we
were allowed to undeceive it, we should at once behold it dash-
ing its idols to pieces, and ranging itself under the banners
of unfolded reason. But custom, prejudices, and institutions,
prevent this. Upon us, upon us cerebral physiologists, more
especially devolves the duty of combatting the false systems
which limit or obscure the horizon of intelligence—upon us
of enlarging the field of positive ideas,—upon us, above all
things, of proclaiming the emancipation of the people, for it is
written in the Human OreanizatTion.

Approach ye young students, come, observe, and admire
with us the wonders of this organization—approach, we will
introduce you into the temple of true philosophy, we will
initiate you into its doctrines and its laws—we will entrust
you with their cultivation and protection, in the hope of
securing their universal triumph, as soon as adverse times
shall have passed away.


We cannot permit ourselves to insert this truly philo-
sophical address without appending a few remarks. In 1842
the session of the British Phrenological Association was
opened with an address inculcating precisely the same doc-
trines. It was received with horror by a band of spiritualists,
who expressed their discontent by the most rabid manifesta-
tions, and forthwith issued a “ Declaraction of Expediency.”
This declaration was composed of a series of self-contradic-
tory statements, but dressed up in such a jesuitical manner
that a few of the unwary were caught, and the list of signa-
tures not only displayed the names of men who had never


by Dr. J. B. Mége. 151


investigated the doctrines they were called upon to denounce,
but, strange to say, we noticed the signature of one indivi-
dual who had written a work to prove the truth of the very
doctrine he was made by the declaration to declare false.
Worse still, for the most humiliating statement is yet to be
made, the author of this never-to-be-forgotten declaration,
Mr. James Simpson, made all his deluded followers give the
following luminous and philosophic reason for opposing the
doctrine of materialism—we quote the very words: “ We
repeat with submission becoming our ignorance that we know
nothing in the matter.”

This was in 1842. We foretold soon after this explosion
that cerebral physiologists would be compelled to give up
their position—that the brain was an instrument, and we are
pleased that the views we have again and again inculcated in
this journal receive such powerful support from Dr. Mége,
who, it is manifest, is a profound and logical thinker.

This eloquent address was delivered in the city which
received the last breath of the immortal Gall,—in the city
where he for years promulgated his doctrines, and erected
an everlasting monument of his originality, his profound
powers of reason, and his untiring ardour in the collection of
facts,—yes, in the presence of the skull which contained the
brain of Gall, the man who propounded a philosophy which
is to regenerate our race, did Dr. Mége stand forth and
boldly declare that nature presents no facts which can give
his degenerate disciples authority for their continued inculca-
tion of a spiritualism, which is productive of the worst pos-
sible effects, and the chief cause of the slow progress of
humanity. When will the walls of the Edinburgh Society
reverberate with doctrines so beautiful—so true? When will
the man upon whom it was said that the mantle of Gall had
descended, unshackle himself—cast aside his prejudices—
prejudices which were infused into him before he became ac-
quainted with the philosophy of his later years: when, we
repeat, will he perform that duty which every man should ful-
fil before he dies, and state fairly and unreservedly the true
thoughts which within him lie? Science and humanity de-
mand the strict interpretation of the facts which are accumu-
lated. And will any man who has devoted a few years to the
study of cerebral physiology declare, that the facts he has
observed do not lead to a conclusion the reverse of that which
has been so long inculeated? Will any man who is capable
of continuous thought declare, that the materialist is not an
inductive philosopher, and the spiritualist not a seeker after
a phantom of his own creation? Ye men of modern Athens!


152 Materialism in Germany.


Why do ye not arise and shake off the incubus which has
so long oppressed you? Why do ye not declare that the
philosophy which ye embrace shall have a practical influ-
ence? Listen to us. Ye will do no great or good thing till ye
build a solid foundation, till ye follow the example of the
French philosopher, and of the German philosophers we are
now about to quote, and proclaim that ye are all seekers after,
and interpreters of, facts, and not the blind supporters of a
fancy, one of the many remaining fancies of a barbarous and
superstitious age. Res non verba queso. Ye have chosen
this for your motto—act upon it.—Zoist.


III. Materialism in Germany.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Rosawitz, Bohemia, May 9, 1845.

Dear Str—It may be of interest to your readers to receive,
from time to time, some account of the progress in Germany
of unprejudiced scientific investigations into the nature of the
mental constitution of man. The doctrines of the schools
still have great weight in Germany, and theology and specu-
lative philosophy, in all the Universities, still maintain the
first rank in worldly dignity, and form the summits of the
learned faculties, who condescendingly take the sciences of
nature under their protecting wings. In consequence of this,
and of the impressions too indelibly implanted in the brains
of youthful students, most of the celebrated authorities in
physiology, as Miiller, Burdach, Wagner, Valentin, Volk-
mann, &c., when they treat of the Physiology of the brain,
remain content to speak of its general functions as the sen-
sorium commune, the seat of all sensation and thought, but
at the same time to consider it as the mere instrument of an
immaterial mind, of a spiritual essence, an abstraction ; and
in describing the qualities and workings of this mind itself,
to borrow a chapter from some favorite system of mere specu-
lative psychology. The inconsistencies involved in this pro-
cedure: the teaching on the one hand, that there are mate-
rial conditions for the mind’s manifestations—that faulty
development,—that diseased states of the brain and other
organs, prevent the due manifestation of the mind, &c.; on
the other hand, that the mind, per se, forms and works upon
its own organs, and that there is an absolute free moral will
in man and responsibibility for his actions. Then again, the
doctrines of the qualities of this spiritual (human!) mind—


Materialism in Germany. 153


derived, however, de facto, if not openly acknowledged, from
the manifestations in life—these and many other inconsist-
encies, I need not allude to, are with wonderful self-denial as
regards character for acuteness, magnanimously, philosophi-
eally (!) disregarded. Nevertheless, in many directions, the
signs of a deeper and more independent study of nature, as
regards the mind of man and its healthy and diseased action,
become more and more apparent and the lunatic views,
especially amongst the medical men connected with hospitals
for the insane, gain more and more ground.

I cannot collect together all the proofs of the correctness
of this view; but confine myself for the present to two or
three facts. In a work lately published by Dr. G. A. Spiess
(Spiess), of Franckfort a. M., entitled “ Physiology of the
Nervous System, with particular regard to Pathological states,”
a work which contains the results of important observations
and much deep reflection—the dualist doctrines of the schools
are directly and powerfully attacked. Materialism and neces-
sity are boldly advocated, as the only true and consistent views,
which a physiologist or anthropological psychologist, after
fully examining the facts of organization, can hold. Mental
activity in all its forms, even the highest efforts of thought
and man’s much vaunted consciousness—the immateriality of
which is always contended for by theologians and so-called
philosophers with the greatest determination—are shewn to
be but the eapressions of human organism, of cerebral activity.
The author says,—

**It is physiology, and not by any means philosophy, which has
to treat of these organic actions. Physiology neither can nor dare
let this office be taken from her; she neither can nor dare retreat
from this subject: she has to draw the phenomena of mind into her
sphere, and to treat of them in entire accordance with all other
organic actions.” &c.


In speaking of deranged mental action, Dr. Spiess shews
the errors and mischievous results of the prevalent dualist
views, and adds :—


‘If we have to thank the efforts of those many superior physi-
cians, occupied with the treatment of the insane, who pay due atten-
tion to the somatic side, that those days,—not very far back, however,
—when the treatment of insanity was cutie principally as the
business of theologians and moral philosophers, are, thank God,
entirely passed away, never more to return; if we have likewise to
be grateful, that in our schools (Lehren) insanity —because a subject
no one knew what to do with—is no longer treated as a step-child,
asa mere and most inconvenient appendix to pathology: still we
are far from that point when the perfect harmony of the various
VOL. III. M


154 Materialism in Germany.


forms of deranged mental action, with other deranged nervous
actions, shall become fully acknowledged.”

This enlightened physician, although he objects most
decidedly, in the main, to all the mere speculative systems of
psychology, and although he lays much stress in the para.-
LELISM,—from the lowest class of vertebrated animals to man,
—between the development of the brain and the increase of
the mental faculties, still repudiates phrenology altogether.
He contends against the doctrines of spiritualists uncom-
promisingly, and yet he himself, with some inconsistency,
adopts the views of an arch-spiritualist—Drobisch—and ex-
plains the mental processes nearly according to his theory,
viz., that conceptions (Vorstellungen) are the foundation, or
elements of all feelings, desires, actions, &c. These concep-
tions, Dr. S. teaches, however, are formed in the brain,
through the aid of the senses, and he explains their forma-
tion, growth into desires, and their manifestation as actions,
in a manner analogous to the reflex-actions of the nervous
fibres connected with the spinal marrow. Apart from the
entire disregard of inborn dispositions for this or that kind of
impressions and conceptions, and the impossibility of explaining
the various individual characters of men, placed under simi-
lar circumstances—this theory of Dr. S. is ingenious at least,
and it contains some valuable views of psychical (cerebral)
reflex-action, of which I may speak another time. For the
present, I conclude with an extract from another work, the
author of which it will be seen, likewise knows nothing of
phrenology, although he is a thorough-going materialist.

I remain, dear, Sir, your’s very truly,
R. R. Noet.


Concluding Words of an Article by W. Griesinger, M.D.,
“On Psychical-Reflex-Action,” &c., in the Medicinische
Vierteljahscrift des Drs. Roser and Wunderlich, Erstes
Heft, 1843.


** We do not know which parts of the brain perform the separate
acts comprised under psychical activity; but we carry materialism
so far, that we do not believe the artificially complicated structure of
the brain exists only on account of its anatomical interest. We con-
sider rather that it presents the organic apparatus for the reception
of the centripetal impressions, for their reproduction in conception,
for their dispersion and combination, for their transformation into
desires, and their emission (Entladung) as the impulses of motion.
In truth, neither as regards self-respect nor love for our fellow-crea-
tures, do we become poorer by placing the fact clearly before our
eyes ;—that conceptions and desires are but the result of organic pro-
cesses, and that it is therefore erroneous to speak of these conditions


Materialism in Germany. 155


thus: —*‘ that the brain is the instrument, the material substratum of
the mind.’ The mind! that which is so called in a fully developed
organism, is not a thing which originally came forth at once perfect
from the hand of nature or of a creator elevated above nature. It
has been formed slowly and by degrees. The observations of the
earliest moments of a child’s life, shew us clearly enough, that a
tolerably long time must elapse before conceptions and actual desires
awake—before these struggle forth from the darkness of unconsci-
ousness, or half consciousness, and that it is not till a late period
that the fact of our psychical unity becomes clear to us. Self-ex-
perience offers its instructive lesson to all. If we but attempt to re-
call the long vanished fable of our earliest development—the deeper
our recollection dips into the twilight of the earliest dawn of our in-
fancy, the more we become conscious of the original confusion, of
the décousu state of the earliest impressions on the senses, and of
their earliest action. That state appears again before us, in which,
animal-like, we as yet had no knowledge of our J, and knew our-
selves only by the name which had been given to us by others. We
then become clearly aware that our psychical individuality, no less
than the rest of our entire organization, has been developed slowly,
and that our mind is not an original ready-made product of nature,
but that, on the contrary, it has become what it is, and comprises
its own history within itself.”


In an excellent article lately in the Algemeine Zeitung,
Der Mensch als Mikrokosmus, the true philosophic doctrines of
materialism and necessity are likewise expressed, if not di-
rectly, that is to say too palpably for prejudiced minds.

The same journal, Nos. 242 and following, 1843, con-
tained a valuable article on “The Newest Discoveries with
regard to Light,” and particularly on the results of the ob-
servations and experiments of Professor Julius Moser, of
Konigsberg (‘ Uber das Licht, Kénigsberg bei H. E. Voigt,
1843.”), in which the fact is urged, that not only the forma-
tion of an image of an object on the retina is a physical occur-
rence; but the perception of it by the brain, especially physi-
cal and material, although physiologists have generally fancied
the latter half of the process to be the work of spirit.


“ We have no one rational ground for supposing that there exists
any difference between the process by which we see, namely, between
the cause of a picture being noc on the retina, and the cause of
& picture being produced on an inorganic body, for instance, on an
iodized-silver plate. It has long indeed been assumed that physical
laws are not equally applicable to the phenomena of animal organiza-
tion; that where life properly commences, nature is vanquished and
higher operations begin; that particularly the production of a pic-
ture in that part of the eye susceptible to light, is a process to which
there is nothing analogous in the inanimate world. However, in
the first place, no fact is known from which we can conclude that
M2


156 Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


the nervous substance is not subjected to universal laws, and does
not undergo the same changes as any other matter when affected by
light. In the second place, there would remain no other explanation
of the production of light, besides the highly plausible one, that the
nerve undergoes a chemical change, just as iodized-silver does, than
that truly marvellous explanation that the eye counts the hundred
billions of oscillations which light is said to make in a second.
Therefore the opinions hitherto held by physiologists must be given
up. For they believed their duty fulfilled when they had shewn how
the rays of light, coming from different objects, are so refracted by
the various parts of the eye as to produce a picture on the retina—
whilst they turned away from all examination into any further pro-
cess, such as the mode in which the nerve itself is affected by the
picture, as a subject not belonging to their department. They ac-
companied the picture as it were, to the gate which leads to the holy
of holies, as far as the nerve, to the porter of the mind, and then
they said, ‘ Here consciousness commences, here our business ends.
Here is the boundary of another department, the language of which
we do not understand, and to which our laws do not appertain,—
for our department is concerned with matter only, and philosophers
and psychologists may rack their brains as much as they please
about the manner in which the picture enters the soul.”


It was impossible for physiologists to be of any other
opinion, and simply because they had never emancipated
themselves from the notions of a dualism, but still held fast
to the delusions of many thousand years, that matter and
thought, body and mind, are totally distinct, and have no-
thing more in common than a mere temporary union during
life. The uprooting this opinion is a task which this century
has already performed. The Daguerro-Moser discoveries
have given a fatal blow to this belief, for they are so palpable,
so free from difficulties, and so self-evident, that they cannot
be rejected. They form therefore the most important physi-
cal discoveries of our age.


IV. Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


A new science is discovery of new phenomena, and new con-
nections and relations between old phenomena. Objectively
no science is new, but old as creation, though the relative
importance and mutual dependence of its phenomena, and
many of the phenomena themselves, are unobserved. Thus
when man comes into possession of a new science, he may
not only by observation and experiment compare its laws with
the present and the constantly ensuing, but may turn to the


Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics. 157


history of the past in the hope of tracing its operations there
—of finding a store of those glaring instances that occur but
at intervals of ages, and for which he may long wait in vain ;
and he may also hope, that by the possession of a new test,
a new law possessing a new power of explanation and analysis,
he may reduce some of those difficulties that have been left
unexplained by his precursors; or being misexplained by
strained applications of merely subsidiary influences, have
originated counterbalancing difficulties in explaining the com-
parative inertness of the same influences in other instances.

The examination thus induced, frequently leads to the
result, that the new discovery of the science is to a consider-
able extent a re-discovery. Many of its leading principles
are found to have been acted on empirically ; discovered per-
haps in the first instance by accident, and handed down tra-
ditionally, not only without being evolved and rationalized,
but so encumbered with the absurd and irrelevant, by igno-
rance and superstition, that the germ of truth was concealed
out of the sight and the way of the reflecting who might have
improved it.

But ancient vestiges of far more distinct, and of even
scientific knowledge will not unfrequently be forthcoming ; so
distinct and so scientific, that its subsequent extinction can
only be ascribed to the influence of priestly or mercantile in-
terest having confined it jealously, as an art and mystery, to
a class, whose degeneration it shared, and with whom, dis-
credited or proscribed, it ultimately perished.

In a scientific view, it is desirable to re-assemble these
vestiges of the knowledge of “ancient days, those days we
fancy wise,” as possibly ancillary to the advancement of the
science, by analogies of grouped and combined phenomena,
suggesting experiments and indicating promising lines of re-
search. And so long as a science continues a subject of con-
troversy, the sceptical will make the demand that some stray
traces of a power so easily set in action and open to observa-
tion, should be discoverable on the highway of ages; and
however unreasonable the demand, it may be more easily
—— of by satisfying it than by proving its unreasona-

eness,

But these researches, as they illustrate the degree of
command of man over nature in other times, are interesting
historically ; and the more so, the more they apply to those
branches of science which, like mesmerism, concern the most
delicate dependencies of human nature—of mind and body ;
have been made instruments of moral and political power ;


158 Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


have moulded religion and intellect, and governed the pro-
gress, perhaps origin, of civilization in earliest times, and
among people whose culture was the fountain-head, whose
histories are the commencement of that great stream of hu-
man progressiveness, on whose waters the best hopes of the
world are now happily afloat.

Such illustration is especially wanted, and should be wel-
come among the seeming abnormal phenomena presented by
the sensitive, yet highly intellectual temperament of the
Greeks. In those periods of their course on which the light
of history is clearest, difficulties occur, that are hardly exag-
gerated in semi-mythical periods, to account for the strength
of evidence on the part of competent witnesses in favour of
various forms of divination, of oracles and mystical purifica-
tions, of still recurring accounts of the characteristics of or-
giastic excitement, of enthusiasms and endemic manias, and
sympathetic cures. These are the great enigmas of ancient
history to modern observers and students, the appreciation of
the difficulty of which has sometimes induced the impression
that there are crises in the development of the human race
as of individuals, in the course of which powers and passions
are manifested, to which the superinduced condition has no-
thing analogous and affords no parallel.

For the solution of many of these enigmas, the re-dis-
covery of mesmerism is most efficient ; and though it were a
convicted fraud or a detected fallacy, it would be still a chief
illustration of a leading influence in the history of the Greeks
—of mankind civilized and progressive. Authenticated and
evidenced as it now stands before the world, the recognition
of it in remote and venerable antiquity becomes significant
indeed. There is hardly a mesmeric phenomenon of modern
times which does not appear in Greek antiquity, and as re-
markably among the records of the earliest as of the later
times. Careful comparison and consideration of these ves-
tiges of the early world, it is believed would clearly shew that
the knowledge and practice of mesmerism was a chief instru-
ment in the hands of fraternities or families of combined me-
dical, priestly, and prophetic pretensions, who exercised most
critical influence on the development of the Greek mind, and
left enduring impression on its history.

The knowledge among the Greeks of the medical power
of the human hand, appears very distinctly in the following
passages of Solon and Aischylus. The first has been fre-
quently cited ; the other, which is equally distinct, and from
its connection still more suggestive, appears here as a vestige


Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics. 159


of antique mesmerismy as far as I am aware for the first
time.


Tloaaams S'& datyns cdvens wéya yiyveras aryos
K’oix av tis Avoaut’ hia Paguana dous,
Tov 8 xuxaig volcoirt xuxdpevov apyartais Te
Avapevos xeigoiv anpa tiSne’ by.
SoLon.

‘* Often from trifling pain great suffering arises, not to be allayed
by the administration of soothing medicines, but touching with the
hands the sufferer by malignant and obstinate diseases, you immedi-
ately restore him to health.”


The passage of Aischylus occurs in the Prometheus
vinctus, 847: Prometheus foretells to Io, that after all her
wanderings in frenzy and persecution, she will find relief at
last at Canobus, at the mouth of the Nile :—


Evraiba dn ce Zeds tidnow EuQoova
Ezapav aragir xergi nai Siywv udvov.


“There Zeus will render you sane, stroking you with gentle hand
and simply touching you.”


A more exact description of mesmeric manipulation can
hardly be imagined, unless it be that of the parallel passage
in Moschus :—


Ev & iv Zeds Emapaduevos iptuce xergi beein.


“Zeus was represented gently stroking or soothing (Io) with
divine hand.”


If any doubt could exist as to the nature of the influence
ascribed here to the hand of Zeus, it would be removed by
our meeting with records of the details and celebrity of mes-
meric cures in connection with the sanctuaries at Canobus in
historical times. The progress of our enquiries will bring us
back to the passage. It is an example of the striking truth-
fulness of local allusions in Greek poets.

But it is in connection with the worship of Asculapius
that the most important traces of mesmerism in Greece occur,
and here again we are assisted by the poets. Aristophanes
describes in the Plutus the cure of the blind power of wealth
in the temple of sculapius, by the god himself, who com-
mences by seating himself beside the patient and touching
his head (é9m/aro). That this was a regular and essential
part of the process of cure, appears from parallel instances.
The philosopher Proclus, who has ascribed to him by his
pupil biographer some remarkable cures, evidently mesmeric,
during a severe illness in his youth, dreamt that Telesphorus,


160 Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


the mythical attendant of Aisculapius, appeared to him,
touched his head and cured him.

These instances may be sufficient to identify the ancient
and modern process, and vindicate the commencement of an
enquiry, of which the progress will furnish many more.

The worship of Aisculapius was very general in Greece,
and like other worships, had its yearly festival and exhibition
of sacred symbols. Several of its seats claimed the honour
of the birth of the God, but the Epidaurian was the most
renowned, and generally considered the original and chief, of
which the others were offshoots or colonies, though Strabo
prefers that of Tricca in Thessaly. Notices of the details of
these establishments are very much scattered, but their agree-
ment indicates considerable uniformity of system.

The priests or ministers of the temple claimed descent
from the god by their title Asclepiade, and formed at once
an order of priests and a medical caste ; at least some portion
of the medical knowledge that was handed down from father
to son was preserved as a sacred secret, and the oath which
bound those who were put in possession of it still remains.
(Galen, Anat. 11; Aristid., Orat. 1.)

The sick who visited the temples passed the night in his
sanctuary, and were said to receive revelations of remedies in
dreams, (Cic. de Div. xi., 50; Jamblich de Myst. iii., 2 ; Philos-
tron. Vit. Apollon. i., 7,) and at the same time they followed
the instructions of the priests as to sacrifices, purifications,
&c., which probably included the means of inducing the state
of mesmeric sleep-waking. Thus Philostratus celebrates the
valuable advice given by Apollonius of Tyana, at Pergamus,
on the means of obtaining such revelations or dreams. Those
who were cured suspended in the temple a brass tablet with
a statement of their names, symptoms, and the successful
remedy.

These records of cases prove that somnambulism was not
solely relied on, and of the use made of the opportunities of
observation and study an illustrious proof remains in the
writings of Hippocrates, who was an Asclepiad of Cos, which
should have preserved his class from the charge of vulgar
quackery and priestcraft. Plutarch (Quest. Rom.) notices
that the Greeks chose elevated and pure situations for the
establishments of Aisculapius, as more healthy than residence
within the cities. Is not this a hint for modern hospitals?
They were also frequently in the neighbourhood of medical
springs.

At the same time it appears clear that with whatever
view,—to enhance their influenee or to-obtain the assistance


Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics. 161


of the predisposing power of faith, or perhaps originally as a
means of overawing ignorance and interested hostility,—use
was made of pretended personal manifestations of the god him-
self. Aristophanes alone might be insufficient evidence of this,
but the agreement of the statement of Strabo is conclusive.


** Epidauros,” he says, “is in itself a city of note and especially
through the epiphaneia (manifestation) of Asclepius, who is believed
to cure diseases of all sorts, and whose temple is always full of sick
and of the dedicated tablets on which modes of treatment have been
inscribed as at Cos and Tricca.” (Stra. viii. 6.)


The absence of notices in the writings of Hippocrates, of
Cos, that can be referred to mesmerism, is probably a result
of the oath of secrecy referred to. General conclusions or
special selections from the cases and cures that were publicly
suspended, evidently are without the terms of the oath.
That some reservation was made by the great physician is
admitted in the observation (Ap. Alex. Trall. i. 92), “that
sacred things were to bé exhibited to the sacred and not to
the profane,’ which is quoted by Alexander of Tralles, and
referred by him directly to the employment of frictions among
other secret remedies, on which he himself treats at length.
Thus again there is as little reason to suppose that the phe-
nomena of clairvoyance were not known to the earlier Ascle-
piads, as they come before us at later date in connection with
Apollonius, who is related to have declared at Ephesus the
assassination of Domitian at the moment it took place, and
with his successor Alexander, who gave answers to questions
submitted to him in sealed packets.* (Lucian Pseudomantis).

It is remarkable that with the knowledge that the Ascle-
piads evidently possessed, they appear (except in the later
cases just quoted) to have restricted the employment of it to
the treatment of disease and divination of remedies; an indi-
cation of the strength of professional feeling in the brother-
hood.


Pausanias travelled through Greece in the reign of Hadrian,
and mentions numerous fanes of sculapius; his account of
that at Epidauros is from its consequence most detailed, and
is sufficiently interesting to be quoted at length, as an illus-
tration of the influence the system possessed.

“‘The sacred grove of Aisculapius is surrounded on all sides by
hills, and neither births nor deaths are allowed to take place within


* The celebrated temple of Hieropolis, in Syria, gave oracles in the same
Way ; it was consulted by the absent ‘‘ diplomatibus consignatis missis.” The
Emperor Trajan is said by Macrobius to have sent a sealed blank as an
enquiry previous to his Parthian expedition, and to have received a blank
asan answer. ( Macrob. Saturn. i.)


162 Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


the enclosure: the same rule obtains at Delos. Whatever is sacri-
ficed, whether by stranger or citizen, is also consumed within the
same boundary, which is the custom again at Titane. The statue
of Asculapius is about half the size of that of Olympian Zeus at
Athens, and formed of ivory and gold,—the work according to the
inscription, of Thrasymedes, son of Arignotus, a Parian. The figure
is seated on a throne holding a staff in one hand, and with the other
on the head of a serpent; a dog is lying on the ground beside him.
On the throne are represented the actions of Argive heroes, Bellero-
phon destroying the chimeera, and Perseus cutting off the head of
Medusa.

‘It is beyond the naos that the supplicants of the god sleep.
Close by is a round building of white marble, worthy of inspection,
called the Tholus, in which are two pictures of Pausias; one of Eros
who has thrown away his bow and darts, and bears a lyre instead;
and another of Ebriety, represented as a female drinking from a
glass cup, her face appearing through the transparent vessel. Six
steles still remain within the enclosure out of many more that were
there formerly, inscribed with the names of men and women cured
by Aisculapius, with the disorder of each and the mode of cure.
The inscriptions are in the Doric dialect The works
erected by the Senator Antoninus in our own time, are these; the
bath of Aisculapius and the sanctuary of the goddesses that they call
Epidote; the fane of Hygiea (health), Esculapius and Apollo, who
are entitled the Egyptian. THe also built up the stoe, called that -
of Cotys, of which the roof had fallen in and the whole decayed.
The Epidaurians attached to the sanctuary had been greatly distressed
from the circumstance that births and deaths had to take place in
the open air, and to remedy the inconvenience, Antoninus raised
the building which is now appropriated to them.

** Serpents of all kinds, and especially a species inclining to a
tawny hun, are sacred to Aisculapius: and these are harmless to
man and peculiar to Epidaurus.”


The goddesses entitled Epidotz, are probably powers of
sleep, who are found with this title in connection with Aiscu-
lapius at Sicyon. (Paus. ii.)

The lavish decorations of Epidaurus by Antoninus, whose
general religious character gained for him the title of Pius
(Paus. viii.), was but one example of his peculiar affection for
the worship of Aisculapius, which revived in consequence in
his age with extraordinary vigour. Numerous ez voto tablets
still remain which record his obligations to the divinities
of health— “ Aisculapius the sacred Saviour and Hygiea”
(Gruter, xiii. 5), and perhaps are worthy of as much credit as
Marcus Aurelius, who ascribes the good health of his illustri-
ous master entirely to his own temperance. (L. xvi.) Nume-
ous coins of Antoninus bear witness to this direction of his
zeal, The writings of the rhetorician Aristides, a contempo-


Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics. 163


rary of Pausanias and Antoninus, and himself a priest of
€sculapius, are full of accounts of cures of the god revealing
remedies in dreams to the patients, or their friends for them,
that have all the characters of mesmerism. However, even
in the reign of Antoninus, the medical instincts of somnam-
bulists were questioned by Artemidorus, who, in his work on
the interpretation of dreams, (iv. 24), roundly declares, with
all the front of the Megatherium of the Lancet, that “they do
not record what they see, but what they invent themselves.”
His own egregious system of interpreting dreams is, assuredly,
no improvement on the practice of the Asculapians.

It is unnecessary to collect the other notices in Pausanias
of the various temples of the god. In one he notices the
appropriate statues of Sleep lulling a Lion, and Dream.—
Paus. ii., 10, 2.

_ This account of the establishments of Aisculapius is pro-
perly completed by the sketch of the practice pursued in them,
which is preserved in the Plutus of Aristophanes. After every
allowance is made for the caricature of comedy, there can be
no doubt that much remains that is literally correct; the
Asclepieion referred to was at Athens, and is frequently
mentioned ; and, indeed, the details of the Epidaurian fane
must have been well known at Athens.*

But to the case :—


“The blind patient, no other than the god of wealth, is bathed
in the sea, then taken to the temenos of the god, where, after sundry
cakes are consecrated on the burning altar, he is placed in bed, and
his friends also prepare to pass the night there with him. The
minister of the god extinguishes the lights, and enjoins them to
sleep, and whatever noise was heard, to ee silence; and so they
compose themselves. ..... The god appears, attended by two
maidens, Iaso and Panaceia, and walks round, inspecting the diseases
of the patients, a child bringing him a pestle and mortar, and little

At length he seats himself by the side of the blind
patient, and first touched (égmaro) his head; then, taking a clean
handkerchief, he wiped round his eyelids, and Panaceia covered his
head and whole face with a purple covering; the god then made a
signal (exomsvcev)—made the sound that the word exemplifies—and
immediately two serpents of immense size sprung from the neos,


* I may notice here, that Pericles, at the commencement of the Pelopon-
nesian war, attacked ‘‘ the sacred Epidaurus,” and failed, in consequence of
a pestilence that attacked, it is said, not only his army, but all who held
communication with it. I suspect that a religious, as well as political reac-
tion was concerned in his temporary disgrace shortly after ; and the story of
his philosophical illustration of the principle of an eclipse, as the expedition
was about to sail, by throwing his chlamys over the eyes of the superstitious
steersman, may have been used, if not invented, to assist the imputation of
impiety and sacrilege.


164 Allusions ta Mesmerism in the Classics.


slid gently under the covering of the patient’s head, and, as the nar-
rator supposed, licked his eyes, and the cure was effected.”

The god here, evidently, is in human form, and not iden-
tified with a serpent. A legend of Sicyon, however, (Paus. ii.),
brought the god thither in the form of a serpent; and in the
year of Rome, 462, the Sibylline books enjoined the introduc-
tion into Rome of the worship of Aisculapius; and in all the
accounts of the transaction, {Val. Max. i., 8, 2°; Epit. Liv. ii. ;
Ovd. Metam. xv., 537), the serpent that was then introduced
from Epidaurus is identified with Aisculapius himself. The
temple of Aisculapius on the island of Tiber appears as a
medical establishment under Claudius, and probably con-
tinued so till superseded by the Christian hospital that now
occupies its place. This was not the first change, for, anterior
to the serpent-god of Epidaurus, Jupiter Faunus, a genuine
Latin god, had there given oracles in dreams.—Adler’s Des-
cription of Rome, p. 348; Servius ad Ain. vii., 85.* -

Of the numerous physicians who bore the name, and pro-
bably sprung from the family of the Asclepiades, the most
celebrated was the Asclepiades who, in the time of Pompey,
overturned the greater part of the previously prevailing sys-
tem, and “ carried away with him,” says Pliny, (xxvi. 2), “the
whole human race, little otherwise than if he had descended
from heaven.” Pliny, who accuses him of ignorance, paltry
origin, avarice, and the arts of the purely fashionable physi-
cian of all ages, is highly indignant at his giving suddenly to
the human race laws of health, but still admits, involuntarily,
the success of his practice. He seems to have relied chiefly
on modifications of diet and exercise, the regulated use of
wine and of cold water, of peysile baths, and swinging beds,
of which the motion soothed the disorders, or procured sleep,


* The last reference to the Eneid again tempts us aside to notice the extra-
ordinary coincidence of modes of divination. King Latinus, seeking for an
oracular dream, sleeps on the hides of the beasts he has just sacrificed to the

od, Frequent instances of this custom are found in Greece, as at the oracle
of Amphiaraus at Oropus, (Paus. i., 34), who was chiefly consulted for dis-
eases : but who does not remember the Seer of the Highlands, in the “* Lady
of the Lake,” whose power of pre-vision is awakened in the same way?
(Does this coincidence point to some circuitous communication of super-
stitions, or not rather to a physiological fact known or betraying itself inde-
pendently to two remote tribes? Have I not read somewhere of extraordinary
relief being obtained for a contused and wounded patient, by wrapping him
in the hide, as stripped warm from the carcase of an animal? Is there not
here another parallelism, hinting that such means are capable of inducing
mesmeric sleep, or sleep-waking? If so, we cannot wonder that the fact
should be known to rude tribes, who found in the skins of animals both
clothing and bedding. Who will verify this conjecture by experiment?
Oracles were obtained by the same method by the Daunians at the tomb of
Podalirius, son of Esculapius.—Lycophron),


Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics. 165


(“quorum jactatu aut morbosextenuaret, aut somnos alliceret”’)
and especially frictions, (“fricationem corporis”’).

That these frictions were mesmeric manipulations may be
inferred from the instructions for their application found in
the works of Alexander of Tralles, and appears distinctly in a
recorded instance of their efficacy. Pliny mentions the fame
gained by Asclepiades, by reviving and restoring a stranger
who was on the-point of being burned as a corpse ; the details
of the anecdote are given us by Appuleius :—


‘He carefully examined the body, and, noting certain signs,
again and again felt the body over, and found life still latent within
him. In spite of the heirs and relations, who could not, or did not
wish to believe him, he gained a respite for the funeral, and reco-
vered the unfortunate.

*€ Miseri illius membra contemplatus, cum diligentissime
quibusdam signis animadvertit et etiam atque etiam pertractavit


corpus hominis, invenit in illo vitam latentem.” —Appuleius Florida,
p- 94.


Mention is very frequent of the use of these mesmeric
frictions ; among other instances, Porphyry mentions that his
master, the philosopher Plotinus, “employed them daily, until
a pestilence having carried off all those who had attended him
for the purpose, he neglected the practice, and was speedily
seized with the disorder of which he died.” a. pv. 270.
(renpect xa éxaortny nuecav Xpwpevos EMI THs OIMIAS, EMELON TOU AoILOU
emiPertavTos guveRn Tous TeiRovTas auTov amoSavew, ameancas THs
Toautns Sepameias MAT CALYOY THY TOU KUVAYXOU aYpLOTHTA ETH,~E).

The late continuance of the repute of Aisculapius appears
strikingly in the tones of lament or triumph in which, by
friend or enemy, the successive fall of his temples is recorded.
_ Marinus bitterly notices the destruction of that at Athens, the

scene of the cures of his master, Proclus ; triumphantly Euse-
bius declares that the decree of Constantine, abolishing the
Asclepieion of Aigz, (with which Apollonius had been con-
nected), gave a blow to A’sculapius more fatal than he received
from the bolt of Jove, that, depriving him of life, still had left
him honours more than heroic.

Let us now turn our consideration to Egypt, where we
shall find mesmerism not only as unequivocally developed as
in Greece, but characterized by circumstances of agreement
that imply direct or mediate communication. From the pro-
gress of the enquiry, two results are expected ; first, corrobo-
ration of the arguments for the extensive relations of early
Greek civilization ; and, secondly, demonstration of the influ-
ence of mesmeric science in an antiquity that fully justifies a
search for its vestiges among the very earliest mythic records.


166 Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


History, inscriptions, and monumeuts agree in connecting
cures of evident mesmeric character with the worship of Isis :


**The Egyptians,” says Diodorus, (i. 25), ‘claim for the goddess
the invention of numerous healthful medicines, and cures through
sleep, evidenced by positive facts Standing by the sick in
sleep, she relieved their disorders, and those who attended to her
were cured beyond all expectation. Multitudes despaired of by plty-
sicians, were saved by her; and many who had entirely lost the use
of their organs of sight, or other parts of the body, having recourse
to the goddess, were perfectly restored.”


The votive inscriptions that remain, are counterparts of
those to Asculapius, acknowledging assistance by visions ;
and the Isiac table presents a group of a sick man and two
attendants, which is said to be a most striking representation
of mesmeric operations. The inscriptions are collected by
Gruter.

But Egyptian mesmerism appears chiefly concentrated in
connection with the fanes of Serapis, at Memphis, the most
ancient seat of Serapis, according to Strabo, who is confirmed
by one of the traditions reported by Tacitus, at Alexandria,
and at Canobus.

It was at Alexandria that Vespasian performed the cures
so often quoted, as illustrative of mesmerism, of which Tacitus
says, that “they continued to be asserted by witnesses of
them at the time he wrote, when there was no longer a motive
for falsehood.” He evidently regarded the testimony as un-
impeachable.


*¢ A blind Alexandrine, and another who had lost the use of his
hand, besought him to cure them, averring that they had been
directed to apply to him by Serapis, the first for him to touch his
cheeks and eyeballs with the imperial saliva, the other expecting re-
storation from the pressure of his foot. Vespasian, after some hesi-
tation, referred the cases to physicians, who reported that neither
case was positively incurable from organic injury: the power of the
eye was obstructed only, not destroyed; al that of the limb yet
recoverable, if healthful power were to be applied. (Si salubris vis
adhibeatur). He was so far encouraged by the representations of
the possibility of the cures, as to perform the prescribed processes
before a multitude of spectators, and the promised benefits imme-
diately ensued.”


Mesmerism assumed, these cures may have been either
real or fictitious; and, in either case, they illustrate the prac-
tice of mesmeric manipulation in connection with the sanc-
tuaries of Serapis, and its relation to the cures ascribed to the
god in numerous extant inscriptions. The votive hand, dedi-
cated by Cecropius, (Monfaucon ii., 2, cap. xx., p. 328), is


Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics. 167


a farther illustration of the point. Some of the mesmeric
powers seem to have been in Egypt, as in Greece, matter of
popular notoriety and public employment. The cures of
Vespasian took place in public; and a notice appears, (Origen.
contr. Celsum. i.), that “ there were a class of men, who, for
a small fee, expelled demons and cured diseases by the pro-
cess of insufflation” still employed by magnetic Mussulmen in
the bazaar of Constantinople,” (White’s Residence, 1845).
But it appears probable that still more was known only toa
class, and preserved and employed as occult science,—the
Xgyptian auxilia secreta of Prosper Alpinus, the secret disci-
pline of the Zgyptian fanes of Arnobius (Arnob. contr. Gent.i.)
“« /Egyptiorum ex adytis remotas disciplinas ;” and counter-
part of the secret treatment of the colleges of Asclepiade.

But the seat of Egyptian mesmerism in which we are
most interested is Canobus, where Aischylus assigns the cure
of Io, by contrectation of the hand of Zeus.

**Canobus,” says Strabo, who visited the country in the time of
Augustus, “is a city distant 120 stadia from Alexandria, by the
road, with a temple of Serapis of great sanctity, and affording medical
assistance of such repute, that men of the first consideration or credit
put faith in it, and sleep there, either on their own account or that
of others. The cures and the oracles of the fane are both the sub-
jects of numerous literary works.”—-Strab. xvii. 1.


The agreement of the terms of this passage with those
which describe the incubationes in the temples of Asculapius
is exact ; of these we have already considered the nature.

The proof is clear, that the mesmeric practice, which flou-
rished at Canobus in the time of Strabo, flourished there at
least as early as the age of Aischylus, who carries Io also to
Memphis, (Supplices), the archaic seat of the god, (Strab.),
and connects the exactest extant description of mesmeric ma-
nipulation with her sojourn at Canobus, where the mesmeric
sleep and instinct of remedies, personal and vicarious, are
afterwards renowned.

But how much earlier a date does not the notice of Aischy-
lus imply for the establishment of the system or science in
these places. In the “ Supplices” of Aischylus, if any au-
thority may be relied on for selecting an archaic tradition,
the chief interest appears to have rested, as in the oldest
chronicle plays of the English stage, in the connection and
embodiment of the most ancient and recondite historical
legends. In all his representations of religious mythus and
historic legend, he appears to have had a leaning and affec-
tion for the preservation or revival of those that a new order
of things threatened soon to render obsolete.


168 Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


The estimate of the probabilities of antiquity in such an
instance must necessarily be vague; there are, nevertheless,
some remarkable indications, in the extent to which later his-
tory harmonizes with very early mythology, of an origin long
anterior to Homer in those ages of primitive civilization.

The evidence of the eye-witness, Strabo, is not more dis-
tinctly reflected in the poetry of Aischylus than that of
ARschylus by Homer, and legend still anterior. Multifarious
traditions carried Argive Helen to the Canobic mouth of the
Nile, whether in the company of Menelaus or Paris. Canobus
itself was said to derive its name from the helmsman of the
Spartan who died there of the bite of a serpent. The use
that Euripides made of these legends in his tragedy of “ Helen”
is well known ; even the priests of Memphis had their own
version of the story ; and Herodotus, (xi. 182), who evidently
was familiar with it in other forms, gives reasons that appear
satisfactory for believing that it was known to Homer. In
the Iliad, Helen is carried to Troy at least by a route so cir-
cuitous as to touch at Sidon; and in the Odyssey, her inter-
course with the Egyptian princes, Thone and Polydamna, are
distinctly declared.

Whether we incline to see in these legends of the visit to
Egypt of Argive Helen, an expression of the same historical
fact that may be elicited from that of Io, the intercourse with
that country, in this instance of the southern state of Pelo-
ponnesus, as in the other of Argos and Mycenz, at least
leads us to the indication by Homer of the same prevailing
medical pursuits of the locality that we found in Aischylus.
The “sweet oblivious antidote” of Helen, “ which whoso drank
should that day shed no tear, though his father or mother
died, or though a brother or dear son were slain, and slain
before his eyes,” she received, with other drugs of happy
power, (Paguaxa untioevta, EcSaa), from Polydamna, wife of
Thone of Egypt, “ of all countries most fertile in medicaments,
evil and good; and every man is a physician skilled above all
mankind, for they are of the race of Paieon.”

It is in this neighbourhood that, at a later date, we meet
with the remarkable class of Jewish religionists, the The-
rapeute, who “formed into sodalities, studied the nature of
medicinal roots, and the properties of stones ; who, by study
of the ancients, and qualifying themselves by various purifica-
tions, prophecied with great certainty ; feasting on wisdom, or
supported by the melody of hymns, they were supported
sometimes three, or even six days, with scarcely any nourish-
ment, and delivered in their dreams excellent sayings of
Divine wisdom.”—(Philo and Josephus).


Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


169


This medico-religious class I believe to have been the
Jewish offshoot of the Canobic mysteries, as the Asclepiade
were the Greek. The mention of their ancient authorities
intimates a high antiquity ; how high I believe this to be,
how intimately they were connected, in origin, with the
schools of the prophets in Judea of the time, and anterior to
Samuel, and how far it is probable that the strange parallel-
isms of early Greek and Hebrew literature and tradition are
to be accounted for by their common relation to the Delta, I
hardly care to say. The resemblance, however, of the cha-
racteristics cited, to the phenomena of mesmerism, is obvious ;
and the fact remains, that at whatever dates, within this nar-
row circle, mesmerism is found, a medical instrument and
religious mystery to Egyptian, Greek, and Jew, and the Phe-
nician follows.

On independent ground there is reason to infer the early
and extensive intercourse of Argos, Pheenicia, and Egypt,
and such intercourse in such ages as inevitably induced trans-
ferences of religious impressions and customs as of wares,
whatever may have been the selection made and however the
adopted associations were afterwards modified and assimilated.

It is quite in accordance with these views that the points
of resemblance that unite the Asclepian system with the
Egyptian are the same that bring it into relation to Phoenicia.
Besides the general resemblance between the mesmeric cha-
racteristics of Aisculapius and Serapis, it is noticed by the
scholiast to the passage of Plutus already quoted, that the
serpent peculiar in Greece to Epidaurus (Paus.), and regarded
in some instances as the manifest God, was the same species
(wageas ofis) that was found at Alexandria; at Metelis in the
neighbourhood of that city its worship was established with
all the appointments of an Egyptian cult, and in especial
connection with the medical offices of Isis and Health and
healtliful oracles. (A2lian de Anim. xi. Iablousky. Paus.) It
occurs in abundant representations on gems, coins, and mo-
numents, as Cneph or Agathodemon of Egyptians and Phe-
nicians. (Compare Euseb. prep. Evan. i. 10.) Thus the
Esmun or Agathodzemon of the Pheenicians was Cneph the
serpent-god of Egypt, and who in this connection does not
remember the brazen serpent of the wilderness—the solace
and cure of the despairing and perishing Israelites? The
elevation of this symbol, as noticed by Bottiger, has re-
markable analogy to the chief act and ceremony of the
Asclepian festival of Cos, the elevation of the staff and coil-
ing serpent of Aisculapius. (avaamlis pa8dov) Aristides. From
this root sprung the Gnostic heresy of the Ophites, the

VOL, III N


170 Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


adorers of the serpent saviour. So again the cup and serpent
of Egypt reappears first in the hand of Hygeia, and finally
of St. John.

The statue of Antinous as Cneph (Muller. Denk. Ail.
Kunst.) is visibly conceived as an A¢sculapian figure.

But there were deeper analogies between the health-god
of Phoenicia and Greece. At Aigion, in Achaia, Pausanias
(vii. 23) found a temenos of Aisculapius containing the statues
of the god and of Hygeia (health).


‘In this temple,” he says, “a man of Sidon engaged me in
discussion, affirming that the Phcenicians were generally superior to
the Greeks in divine knowledge, and particularly with respect to
ésculapius, who, according to them, was son of Apollo, but by
no mortal mother, (as held by the Greeks.) For that Asculapius
was the air, serviceable to health both to the human species and all
animals alike, and Apollo the sun, most appropriately entitled the
father of Aisculapius, as it is the sun that by the seasonable per-
formance of its course imparts healthful qualities to the air. To all
this I assented, but averred that it was no whit more the account of
the Pheenicians than of the Greeks, since at Titane of Sicyon, the
statue was the same as that of Hygeia (health), and a child might
know that it was the sun’s course that caused health on the earth for
mankind.”


Traces of this mystic relationship are discernible in the
subjects selected for the embellishment of the throne of Ais-
culapius at Epidaurus,—the exploits of Bellerophon and
Perseus, which both symbolize the relation of the sun to the
(anciently) triple seasons. The demonstration of this, how-
ever easy, cannot be entered into here,—receive in place of
it as evidence of the Phoenician aspect of the mythus, the
statement of Josephus that Pheenicia and Syria abounded in
various legends of Perseus. That Pausanias was right in
vindicating for the Greeks acquaintance with the Pheenician
view of the relation of Aisculapius to the sun-god (= Per-
seus), also appears from the legend that the medical power
of the god was derived from the blood of Gorgon, given to
him by Athene from the head cut off by Perseus. The
ancient idea that there existed between the various parts
of the universe a sympathy with each other and with the
whole, analogous to that which obtains in an animated body
(4 cupmaSeia tev os ev evi Low TH MavTi uepwv Mewonawoeis eX-t
tivwy eos adanda. Jamblichus de Myst.) appears to have been
suggested or encouraged by the wonders of divination in the
forms of clairvoyance and somnambulism; and the connec-
tion of these with Aisculapius, already associated with influ-
ences “as wide and general-as the casing air,” accounts


Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics. 171


for the doctrine that he was the animating principle of the

universe—the soul of the world. (Porph. ap. Procl., in Tim. i.,
. 49.)

Thus the early intercourse between Greece, Pheenicia,

and Egypt, (of Assyria, perhaps, hereafter,) that is avouched

by the father of history, appears confirmed by the indirect

evidence of poetry, mythology, and religious cult and customs.

It is idle to pretend or to attempt to define the precise
chronology of these changes, or to trace in detail and posi-
tively the genealogies of these customs and ideas,—to decide
the elements that in each case were native,—the route and
course of transference of each. But intercourse being esta-
blished, there is every reason to give full weight to the evi-
dence of activity in early times of a characteristic of the
Greek mind, that remained so influential in later ages in
despite of accumulated checks,—the tendency to recognize in
foreign divinities other forms of his own, to combine their
legends and transfer their titles, symbols, and genealogies,
according to whatever analogies aiekkaven obviously or fitly
present themselves.

Hence it is that the worship of Aisculapius, traceable on
one hand to Beotia and Thessaly, blends away on the other
with that of Serapis and of Esmun, and who shall now say
whether acquaintance with mesmerism that may be detected
in each seat of the various cult, grew up in each independ-
ently, and was merely assimilated to the extent we have seen
by intercommunication, or was directly and originally trans-
ferred from one to the other? Who shall say that the com-
binations of the age of Argive supremacy were not merely
the meeting of waters from a common source, the emptying
into a common sea of streams from regions most divided, but
all derivable from a single fount ?

Certain it is that numerous Greek legends rather direct
us to trace the course of mesmerism towards Egypt than away
from it. They associate it with Epaphus, the son of Io the
Inachid, colonist, according to Aischylus, of the Delta—
“of all the land watered by the broad-flowing Nile ;” whose
hands, says Pindar, Nem. x. 8, founded numerous cities in
Egypt,—husband of Memphis (seat of Apis), daughter of
Nile (Apollon.) ; the same as the Apis of Egypt, according to
Herodotus, and evidently considered so by Aischylus, who
calls him the black Epaphus,—the colour, according to Hero-
dotus, of the sacred bull who represented him at Memphis.

Other legends derive the Apis of the Delta direct and not
through Io from Peloponnesus, apparently another form of
the legend only, as like Io he is represented as a descendant

N2


172 Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


of Inachus. Apis gave his kingdom of Argos to his brother
and went to Egypt (Euseb. Chron. 271, Arg. Civ. Dei.),
where he reigned for some years. Apis king of Argos is also
spoken of as founder of Memphis,—as we have seen, one
chief Egyptian centre of mesmeric science.

But after the foregone combinations it becomes significant
that in almost all the numerous instances in which an Apis
occurs in Greek mythology, he is associated with medical or
divining characteristics. Apis, of Sicyon, is son of Telchin
and father of Thelxion (Paus. ii. 5), of whom more hereafter.
Apis, of Arcadia, is son of Iason (the curer), while Apis,
son of Apollo (like Asculapius), came from Naupactus into
Peloponnesus, from him called Apia (Qwros :atgou yagi), an
iatromantis, physician-diviner, and purified the land of mon-
sters, dragons which the earth brought forth from the miasm
of ancient blood. (Aischy. supp. 268.)

The agreement of this Apis in origin and functions with
ésculapius, also son of Apollo, and Iatromantis, “ physician-
diviner,” combining medicine and divination, refers us at
once to the agreement of the names. The name Asclepius
(= Asculapius), it appears to be agreed, is hermaphrodite, the
last three syllables being the Greek word imiis = the mild—
the pain luller. (Observe the frequent recurrence of the
phrase ma Qaguaxa—mild—or soothing medicaments, in
connection with the operation of the god.) Demosthenes
however brought down the derision of the fastidious people of
Athens, when he marked, they thought pedantically, the
difference by accent. (Vit. x. Orat.)

Hence it may be inferred that the Apis of Greek mytho-
logy is a primitive form of Asculapius (Asclepius) operative
both in Greece and Egypt, and thus is explained the legend
preserved by Clemens Alexandrinus that A®sculapius was a
man of Memphis, who after death was deified and worshipped.
And whatever indications there may be of re-action of Egypt
or Pheenicia on Greece, at a subsequent date, the indications
appear very significant that the earlier influence was trans-
mitted in the reverse direction.

Whence then the Thessalian Asclepius, A®tolian Apis ?—
from Egypt the original seat of civilization? Again, who
shall say, hints are not absent that rather indicate progress
from the Euxine, from Caucasus; and the opinion that Egypt
was really the original cradle of civilization, or formed an
organized polity so long before such institution found place
in Greece, may perhaps chiefly rest on grounds no better
than the more durable character of her monuments.

But be this as it may, it would seem that with the most


Cure of Tic Douloureux with Mesmerism. 173


prudent limitations the result at least may stand, and with
this, if assented to, we may be satisfied,—the recognition of
the early date of Greek civilization and intercourse with
Egypt and Pheenicia, and the intimate relation of mesmeric
knowledge or mystery to the progress of its social and reli-
gious development ;—above all, the recognition of the true
character of the legendary records of mesmeric facts, as by
no means as heretofore the main obstacles to the admission
of historic value for the traditions, but their capital vouchers.

Thus our analysis establishing the prevalence of mesmeric
practice in the historical ages of antiquity has traced it into
the hands of the mixed, priestly, and medical sodalities, who
so powerfully influenced early civilization and upwards by
uninterrupted sequence and connection, to within those earlier
ages of which the records are preserved in the obscure but
valuable form of Greek legend and mythology. In the elu-
cidation of these, therefore,—the occupation of so much of
the best learning of Europe,—the fact of the antiquity of
mesmerism must be constantly kept in mind, considered, and
allowed for, and will be found to give easy explanation of
some of the most obstinate enigmas that the study involves.
The further pursuit of inquiry in this direction belongs pro-
perly to publications specially antiquarian, and classical.
But the following spicelegium of mesmeric antiquities may not
be uninteresting here.


To be continued.


V. Cure of Tic Douloureux with Mesmerism.
By Mr. Kusre.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Srr,—As you have mentioned in the last number of your
Journal my little pamphlet, Facts against Fallacies, and the
case of the Hon. Mrs. Hare, recorded therein, I would beg |
leave to inform your readers that the reports which have been
extensively circulated,—for instance, “that Mrs. Hare’s com-
plaint is now worse than ever,” are weak inventions of the
enemy.

Mrs. Hare has been indisposed, but her indisposition had
no more to do with her former complaint than the tooth-ache
has with the typhus-fever, from which an individual has been
cured many months previous ; and I now again beg distinctly
to state the simple facts of the case. Mrs. H. had suffered


174 Cure of Tic Doulovreux with Mesmerism,


during 18 years from a most serious complaint of the heart; she
had consulted various medical men of the very highest repu-
tation in this country without obtaining relief; her sufferings
continued unabated to the middle of September, 1844, when
mesmerism was applied with the most unequivocal success.
In October she felt fears of a return, but no such result fol-
lowed, and since has not even felt the slightest symptoms of
her former complaint, and is therefore entirely cured by mes-
merism of a serious affection of the heart.

She most nobly complied with my request, and permitted
me to lay her case before the public, well aware of the ill feel-
ing so often manifested by virulent and unprincipled oppo-
nents, who have recourse to fabrications in order to gratify
their own selfish feelings ; conduct, which must excite a feel-
ing of honest indignation in the mind of every upright
man. I am, Sir,

Your obedient servant,
ApotrHE Kiste.
Octagon-place, Plymouth, June 10th, 1845.


P.S.—I beg to forward to you a statement of facts con-
nected with a most serious case of tic-douloureux, of thirty-
three years standing, written by Mr. Adams, of Lymington,
who is one of those medical gentleman that act according to
reason and principle, and honestly would admit truth where-
ever it be found. I have just received a letter from the
patient herself, in which she most strongly expresses her
gratitude for the inestimable blessings of mesmerism, and to
myself, the humble individual who had the happiness and
gratification to apply it.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—I send for your perusal, and for insertion in The
Zoist, if you think proper, a case of long-continued and severe
tic-douloureux, successfully treated with mesmerism by Mr.
Kiste, under my own observation.

I will first give you the patient’s own history and descrip-
tion of her case; adding to it what I know myself (as her
medical attendant), of the disease, and of her general state of
health and constitution. I will then state the particulars of
the mesmeric treatment as witnessed and noted down by my-
self, day by day, as they occurred.

I beg to add, that though a reader of your journal from
its commencement, I had not, up to this period, practised
mesmerism, nor had I before an opportunity of seeing it em-
ployed as a remedy for disease. In attending to this remark-


by Mr. Kiste. 175


able case I endeavoured to divest my mind of all preposses-
sions on the subject, one way or the other, and to record
facts, let them apply how they may; and I must say that,
although prepared to expect, from what I had read and heard
on the subject, that some good effects might be obtained in
this case, the extent of benefit derived, viz., the cure of this
most painful and inveterate malady in so short a time, has
filled me with astonishment and admiration.

I have recently successfully employed this new and power-
ful agent; and at a future time I shall probably furnish you
with the particulars of my experience.

I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
N. Abas.


Case of Mrs. Grove, of Lymington, Hampshire.
Related by HersE tr.


When at the age of 16, I was living at Brompton, in
Kent, and one morning while in the garden picking up some
walnuts which had fallen from a tree, I was seized with a
violent pain in the fourth finger of the right hand, near the
root of the nail. The pain was so accute that I ran round
the garden into the house, screaming to my mother. The
hand was put into warm water, which soothed the pain, but
a great tenderness was left for a long period. Upon acci-
dentally striking the finger the pain returned with double
violence, which again subsided, and returned at periods of
about three months, till I was attacked with severe bodily
illness and asthma, and was considered by my medical attend-
ant in a most dangerous state. I was at this period (1812)
under the care of Mr. Conquest, surgeon, of Chatham, and
after a severe struggle I got the better of my illness, but the
finger was still very troublesome, and I was suffering alter-
nately with violent pain in it and the left side of the face,
which no remedies removed. My case was called tic-doulou-
reux, and under its effects my constitution began to give
way.
After the death of Mr. Conquest, Mr. Spencer, surgeon,
of Brompton, attended me, but no considerable or permanent
benefit was obtained. I was recommended to try change of
air, and I accordingly went to Faversham, and there con-
sulted Mr. Lukin, an eminent surgeon of that town. Mr.
Lukin extracted several teeth, but with no good effect, and
upon my return to Brompton I got still worse, when my
father consulted Dr. White. He called the disease tic-doulou-
reux, and said it originated in the attack I first had in my


176 Cure of Tic Douloureux with Mesmerism,


finger, and advised a division of the nerve of the face. But
while this was in contemplation, a lady in Rochester, suffer-
ing from the same complaint, underwent a division of the
nerve without benefit ; indeed her sufferings were more acute
than before. In consequence of this occurrence I did not
submit to the intended operation.

At this period Mr. Martin, of Chatham, became my medi-
cal attendant, and he strongly advised that the nerve should
not be divided. Mr. M. put me into a mercurial salivation,
and directed warm baths, but from these means I received
little or no relief.

I continued to suffer the most agonizing pain, alternately
in the finger and in the temple and face on the opposite side.
I went again to Faversham for change of air, and gained
some strength by taking powerful tonic medicine, and ob-
tained some mitigation of suffering for a short time. In the
year 1818 I married, and came to reside at Lymington, and
from that period to the present I have endured attacks of the
most agonizing pain, coming on at uncertain intervals ; some-
times leaving me for two or three days or more, and some-
times occurring several times in the day and night, and for
many days and nights successively ; the pain extending from
the finger up the arm to the side of the face on the same side,
with a slight pain in the left temple where formerly it was so
severe. I took a good deal of medicine, but without any
material relief. The late Mr. Robert Smith, who attended
me for many years, advised me to wear a shield over the
finger, but under its use the finger wasted and the pain con-
tinued the same. At the decease of Mr. Smith, Mr. Adams
became my medical attendant, and has been so now for six-
teen years, but no progress was made towards the removal of
the complaint.

The pain would affect the hand, arm, side, breast, and
head, and be accompanied by violent palpitations of the heart
and spasms of the jaw. My walking was affected. The
finger had been drawn down some years into the palm of the
hand, and had become useless. I could straighten it (but
with pain) by taking hold of it with the finger and thumb of
the other hand, but not otherwise, and when let go it imme-
diately returned to the bent position. When in so much pain
the finger felt as if dipped in hot lead. On these occasions,
immersing it in cold water gave relief, and I was in the habit,
when seized in the night, of rushing out of bed, and putting
the hand into the water-jug. At times I have had no sleep
for nearly a week. Sometimes it appeared better in warm
weather and sometimes in cold; always worse in stormy


by Mr. Kiste. 177


weather. Certainly of late years I have suffered most in cold
weather.

My general health has been within the last few years
much broken down by suffering and loss of rest. Having
lately read Mr. Kiste’s publication of the benefits derived
from mesmerism by the Hon. Mrs. Hare, in this neighbour-
hood, I asked my medical attendant, Mr. Adams, if I might
safely try it, and he said it was a very fair case for it, and
introduced Mr. Kiste to me.

Liberos genuerat. Plus anno steterant menstrua: que
antea per bienninm, nunc non bene responderant, nunc tam
copiosa fuerant, ut tentaret hydrops. Hune autem facile
sustulerant digitalis et ferrum. Ante illud tempus semper
bene provenerunt. Finito menstruorum cursu, optime se
habuit uterus; nec unquam uteri conditione affectus erat
nervorum dolor.

At the time I began to attend Mrs. Grove and family, in
1829, the tic-doloureux, from which she had suffered so many
years, was regarded by her as incurable, and all remedies had
been long abandoned. I made no attempts to cure it, as all
the means with which I was acquainted had been already
tried and had failed. I have, however, frequently attended
Mrs. G. for other complaints, which, for the most part, re-


quired tonics; and within the last three years I have given
her a good deal of iron, with great general benefit, but with
little or no good effect on the tic. Mrs. G. has not been able
to rotate the forearm for years. Her age is now 49. She is
somewhat above the middle height, of rather pallid com-
plexion, of nervous temperament, without organic disease, of
active habits, and naturally of cheerful temper.


THE MESMERIC TREATMENT.


Feb. 20, 1845.—Mesmerised by Mr. K. for three-quarters of
an hour. At the end of the first quarter, had slight convulsive
jerks of the affected arm, head and chest, like electric shocks,
and similar to what she has been previously subject. On
the discontinuation of the mesmeric efforts, and after the
operator had waved his hands before the face, the patient said
she felt a little heavy about the head, but not as if she could
sleep. On calling on her in the evening, she said that after
we were gone, and she had passed into another room, she felt
so extremely drowsy she could have leaned her head against
the wall and gone to sleep, but resisted it, and walked out of
doors to shake it off, which she was desired not to do again,


178 Cure of Tic Douloureux with Mesmerism,


but to yield to any disposition to sleep or quietude after a
sitting.

Feb. 21.—Felt much the same as usual last night.

Was mesmerised again to-day by Mr. K. for three-quar-
ters of an hour. Had no spasmodic jerks ; no sleep was in-
duced. At the end of the time, and after the usual demes-
merising passes, she said she felt more soothed, as it were, than
yesterday ; felt a mental composure, a sort of cessation from
thought.

Called in the evening, and was informed she had felt a
subdued, and a rather sick and languid sensation all the
afternoon. Feels now a wish to be very quiet, and not to
talk or be spoken to.

Feb. 22.—Has had a very good night, without any spasms.

Was mesmerised by Mr. K. for three-quarters of an hour.
At the expiration of half an hour the eyes were closed and
the patient appeared asleep, but uneasy, putting her hand up
to the throat. Mr. K. lifted forward the head, the back of
which was resting against the wall, but it immediately fell
back again. After about eight minutes, the patient opened
her eyes, apparently with great effort (the mesmeric passes
still going on), and on being asked how she was, said she felt
great weight on the head, and a very benumbed feeling all
over: could not, on trying, rise from her chair, and said the
benumbed feeling was more decided on the side afflicted with
spasms than any where else. After being demesmerised, and
asked what she felt, said her eyes had closed involuntarily,
and she could not open them for some time: that she had felt
several times just sinking into sleep, but it was prevented by
a spasmodic feeling in the throat ; had at one time completely
lost her sight; all was dark, but was still conscious of the
mesmeriser’s hand passing before her, though it did not
touch her.

Mrs. G., in the evening, said she had felt listless and in-
disposed to do any thing all the afternoon: had experienced
a kind of benumbed feeling. This led her to inquire if I
thought she had not better relinquish mesmerism as likely to
make her weak.

Feb. 23.—Mrs. G. reports this morning that she slept
soundly last night till three o’clock, when the tic-doloureux
awoke her, and she suffered from it an hour and a half, but
felt unusually heavy for sleep, which almost overcame the

ain.
7 She was now mesmerised by Mr. K. for three-quarters of
an hour, and was much sooner influenced by it than before,
and during several minutes, and at two distinct intervals, was


by Mr. Kiste. 179


completely asleep, during which, her head moved towards the
operator’s hand, on the right side (which is the affected side),
but not so on the left side.

On being demesmerised, said she could not recall any
sensations or dreams when asleep; says the affected side feels
benumbed.

Feb. 24.—Has passed a good night, with less pain. Felt
very tranquil and comfortable the remainder of yesterday
after the mesmerisation. To-day was sooner and completely
put to sleep. No new phenomena.

Feb. 25.—Mrs. G. says she feels much better in general
health. Had tic-doloureux pains last evening and night, but
by no means so severe.

Mesmerised by Mr. K. for three-quarters of an hour.
Sleep induced in rather less than a quarter of an hour. When
asked by Mr. K. if she were asleep, she said “Yes.” “Do
you feel comfortable? ” “Yes.” “Can you see me” “ Yes.”
“Can you see Mr. Adams?” “No.” “Is he in the room?”
“TI don’t know.” “ Wake me, wake me, before Mr. Adams

oes.”

, On being awakened, said she felt perfectly tranquil and
easy; said she could not hear her heart beat. Was obliged
to remain some time quietly in the chair before being able
to go to the sofa, when she laid down for half an hour; did
not sleep, but gradually recovered her usual feelings.

Feb. 26.—Last evening being stormy, Mrs. G. says she
had a return of tic-doloureux, as is always the case on those
occasions ; but that instead of having repeated spasms, severe,
and close upon one another, the spasms came single, less
severe, and at long intervals; and that in this way she found
them more or less during the night. She is this morning
very well, in good spirits, and without pain.

Was mesmerised by Mr. K. as usual. Was put to sleep
in less than a quarter of an hour, and seemed in deeper sleep,
and for a longer time together, than before. She was asked
some questions by Mr. K., to one or two of which she re-
turned short answers, with apparently great effort, as, “ Do
you feel comfortable and easy?” “Yes.” “To what do you
attribute being better?” “'To being mesmerised.” Mr. K.
went away for half an hour, leaving Mrs. G. alone in the
chair, and found her the same on returning, and then awoke
her. I asked if she could recollect now what questions had
been put to her, and her answers? She appeared to do so
very imperfectly. Said she understood perfectly what was
said to her, and knew what to reply, but before she could give
it utterance was overcome by sleep or something like it, and


180 Cure of Tic Douloureux with Mesmerism,


lost the power to speak. She said she could feel every motion
of the operator’s hand as it passed up and down, over, and not
touching the right arm and side of the head, but nothing at
all of it on the left side.

Feb. 27.—Mrs. G. has had a bad night: went to bed
with the old tic, and suffered as severely as ever in the night,
and was obliged to immerse the arm in cold water for relief.
She was quite discouraged and dispirited this morning.

Mr. K. proceeded to mesmerise the arm and hand of the
affected side only, and continued to do so for three-quarters
of an hour, by passing the hands up and down, over and
under the arm and hand without touching, breathing some-
times upon the hand and affected finger of the patient. At
the end of about half an hour the patient could bend back-
wards and forwards the affected finger without pain, and felt
the whole limb freed from pain entirely. She was also now
enabled to rotate the forearm freely, and joyfully exclaimed,
“ If I can but keep the free use of my arm and finger, I ought
not to mind if a little pain does remain.” Said she felt “as
if some strings had loosened in her arm and finger.” Mr. K.
wished to touch the particular part of the finger from which
the tic proceeded, which Mrs. G. was most unwilling he
should do; in fact was distressed almost to faintness at the
apprehension of his doing it, for she said it did not happen
more than twice in the year that this part of the finger (near
the root of the nail) came by accident into contact with any
thing, such excessive care was she obliged to take of it ; for
whenever touched, the agony was so great that she bounded
almost to the ceiling (as her husband said), and did not re-
cover for sometime. She was at last persuaded to rest this
part of the finger on the operator’s hand, and all she felt was
a sort of sting.

Feb. 28.—Has had a good night. Can move the affected
finger about without pain, but still keeps it carefully from
being touched. Mr. K. repeated the same passes as yester-
day over the arm and hand, and in a quarter of an hour she
became almost asleep, although no other efforts had been
made directly to produce sleep. On extending the passes
over the face and body, complete sleep soon took place, Mr.
K. continuing to operate upon the arm and hand, and parti-
cularly upon the affected finger. Mr. K. took the patient’s
fingers in his hand, pressing them firmly (the affected finger
being extended with the rest), without giving any pain. He
also touched and rubbed the spot from which the tic proceeded
without occasioning pain, and Mrs. G. herself afterwards
handled it without pain, thongh with much fear, and with


by Mr. Kiste. 181


still more astonishment both to herself and her husband who
was present. The muscles of the arm were to-day stiffened,
and the arm kept extended for at least half an hour without
fatigue, the patient feeling, as she said, as if her arm were
lying on a table.

March 1 and 2.—The mesmerism was repeated for the
usual period, and applied to the arm and hand only, and with
the same results. ‘Two days and nights have passed in per-
fect ease, and the finger can be touched and used freely, and
the forearm rotated without pain or difficulty.

March 3.—Had some return of pain yesterday afternoon,
between the hours of four and ten. Had a good night after-
wards. Mesmerism repeated to-day.

March 4.—Has been quite easy ever since, and last night
slept throughout without waking. Was mesmerised as usual,
and went to sleep under the passes, applied only to the arm
for a short time.

The mesmerism was continued daily till the 12th, during
which time Mrs. Grove enjoyed perfect ease aud the entire use
of the forearm and finger. The operations were now sus-
pended for four days in consequence of accidental domestic
circumstances, and during this time there was some return of
pain, but not very severe, and what is very remarkable, it was
confined to the two extreme joints of the finger, instead of ex-
tending up the arm to the trunk and head as formerly. Mes-
merism applied to the hand and arm was resumed, and con-
tinued daily, with the exception of two or three days inter-
mission from unavoidable circumstances, when some pain at
intervals occurred in the finger, but not beyond the two first
joints.

Mr. Kiste, on the 25th, resumed the application of mes-
merism to the system generally ; inducing sleep in less than
ten minutes, and allowing it to continue until the patient
awoke spontaneously, which at first she generally did in three
hours: by degrees the influence became so strong that she
could be put into the state in two minutes. This course was
pursued till the 13th of April, when the mesmeric treatment
was discontinued. She had been free from pain during this
time. Soon after she took cold, and felt occasional twitches
in the point of her finger, but she now enjoys perfect health,
; free from pain, and has the perfect use of her arm and

nger.


N. Apams.
Lymington, June, 1845.


VI. Great power of Mesmerism in a case of Asthma.


The following cases, two of Clergymen, and one of a private Gentleman,
in Yorkshire, were drawn up by the patients, and sent to Mr. H. S. Thomp-
son, of Fairfield House, who forwarded them to Dr. Elliotson, with permis-
sion to make what use of them he thought proper. The clergyman, whose
case comes first, objects to the publication of his name, but we have been
made acquainted with it.


Jan. 24, 1845.

My Dear S1r,—I have much pleasure in furnishing you

with the particulars of my case, as regards the benefit which

1 have received from mesmerism, so kindly administered by

your hands; and for which, I trust, I feel grateful to the
Author and Giver of all good. Believe me,

Yours, very sincerely and obliged,

. ©


* x
To H. S. Thompson, Esq.


You are aware that I have been for many years in a very
delicate state of health, marked by great debility, and con-
stant attacks of spasmodic asthma. For the two years previ-
ous to my use of mesmerism, I had been apparently growing
worse and worse,—the attacks of asthma were very frequent,
—nearly every month or six weeks,—and lasting for two, or
three, or more days, leaving me also in a very weak and un-
comfortable state. I gradually became so very susceptible of
cold, and so liable to “take cold” upon exposure to the
weather, that I was recommended by my medical adviser to
confine myself entirely to the house during the autumn and
winter of 1843 and 1844. This I did, although at the ex-
pence of much discomfort, and extreme sensitiveness to the
slightest breath of air. As the spring of 1844 advanced, I
found myself still unable to venture out without catching
cold, except on very fine and warm days; and I was equal to
very little exertion out of doors, and had occasional returns
of asthma as before. Indeed I may say, that up to the period
of my trying mesmerism, I was scarcely able to venture out,
—and this was at the beginning of July,—at least, I only
went out in fear and trembling,—having usually much chilii-
ness after any little extra exposure; and being almost afraid
of taking any exercise except on foot. During all this period
I was trying tonics, or sponging, or shower-bathing, &c., but
none of them appeared to suit me so far as to induce me to
persevere in their use, and very frequently I seemed to suffer
from them.

I have now arrived at that period of my history, or case,
when, through your kind offer, I was led to avail myself of


Great power of Mesmerism in a case of Asthma. 183


the use of mesmerism. You know that I have never been a
very sound sleeper under the process,—a very soothing, com-
fortable doze, has been what I have usually experienced,—
although occasionally I have been sound asleep,—and the
effect produced from the first has been of a refreshing and
invigorating character. The second time after you demes-
merised me, I rode several miles, and paid one or two visits,
—a thing I had not done, I believe for two years previous.
I continued to use horse-exercise after that time, got out by
degrees more and more, and that daily, except when the
weather was very rainy,—and although I had one or two re-
turns of asthma during the early part of last autumn, they
were much slighter. Once in particular, a rather severe
spasm was effectually removed by mesmerism,—and from
that date, which was the 25th September, up to the present
time,—the latter part of January,—I have had but one day’s
asthma, and that by no means severe, either during the
paroxysm, or in its after effects. I should also observe, that
during the slight asthma which I had after I had begun the
use of mesmerism, I was still able to go out with it, which
was quite different from the course I was formerly obliged to
pursue. I have continued out-of-door exercise throughout
the autumn and winter, and have scarcely abstained from
this even on the coldest days,—and have ridden several miles
on horseback on days which I should not have dared to go
out upon for a considerable time before. I am much more
equal to exertion,—have been able to engage in some of the
duties of my ministerial profession, from which I had been
quite laid aside, and have found myself less nervous, and
better, and stronger in every respect.

I ought to mention, that during the last six weeks or two
months, I have scarcely been mesmerised at all, and yet I
have been able to bear the weather, and have been free from
asthma, so that the benefit resulting from mesmerism does
not appear, in my case, to be transient. I will only add, that
while I am fully persuaded as regards my own case, of the
inefficiency of common medical remedies, I have the strongest
conviction of the remarkable adaptation of mesmerism to the
relief of a disorder like my own.


VII. Second case of the great power of Mesmerism in Asthma,
under the care of Mr. Thompson.


Skelton Grange, March 17, 1845.
My Dear Sir,—I have great pleasure in giving the de-
tails of the great benefit I have derived from mesmerism in a


184 Power of Mesmerisin in a second case of Asthma,


case of violent spasmodic asthma, where the ordinary remedies
altogether failed.

I will premise by stating that this disease in my own case
is hereditary, and that I have occasionally suffered from it
from boyhood ; of late years, however, it had obviously de-
creased both in the frequency and violence of its attacks, and
I began to indulge a hope that it was wearing itself out.

In that hope I was shortly destined to be completely un-
deceived. On the 17th of July, 1844, I left Staffordshire to
take up my abode near York, and in a fortnight after this
change of residence I took cold (I must confess through an
act of imprudence on my part), and was attacked in a few
days after with violent spasmodic asthma, accompanied by
congestion of the lungs. Indeed so violent was the attack,
that I believe, had I attempted to place myself in a recum-
bent posture I should have been suffocated, and for upwards
of six weeks from the commencement of the seizure all the
rest I was enabled to get was in a chair. I never went to bed.

In an early stage of the attack I had recourse to medical
aid, and the name of the practitioner employed (Mr. Hay, of
York) will be a sufficient guarantee that every thing which
skill and attention could do was done in this case. From
some of the medicines I certainly derived a temporary relief
(I may instance the Lobelia), but the effect was merely tem-
porary, and I was finally left reduced to a state of very great
weakness, and although I was enabled to procure some rest
in bed, that rest was invariably broken at a certain hour of
the night or rather morning, by a spasm of greater or less
violence.

It was thus the case stood, when, at the suggestion of a
brother-clergyman and a sufferer from the same complaint, I
was induced to solicit your aid. For the readiness with which
it was accorded I can never be sufficiently grateful. And
now, I will briefly describe the effects of the very powerful
remedial agent, mesmerism, as exemplified in my own parti-
cular case.

After I became obviously under its influence, which was
the case on my second or third séance, I began to gain
strength, the nervous system, much shaken by the copious
exhibition of blue pill, &c., assumed a firmer tone, the spirits
recovered their elasticity, and I was at length enabled to dis-
7 altogether with the daily medicine which my weakened

odily functions had rendered indispensable. With regard
to the specific disease under which I had been labouring, the
effects were equally marked. All difficulty of breathing
ceased upon my being put into the mesmeric sleep, the in-


under the care of Mr. Thompson. 185


spirations instead of being laborious, were full and free, and
I was enabled to take my customary exercise, and that occa-
sionally pretty severe, without any unpleasant memento from
my old complaint. Although still troubled by a tendency to
spasm in bed, the attacks were becoming both less violent
and shorter in duration. Sometimes I passed a night free
from any disagreeable symptom, and the time when the at-
tack took place, began to vary from three to four o’clock in
the morning, then it became five, six, or seven, before I was
attacked; and I have little doubt that if no fresh cold had been
taken, I should have been restored to health at that time.

Unfortunately I did take fresh cold, which shewed itself
in an acute attack of inflammation of the glands of the throat
and the uvula. In this case again you were so kind as to
operate upon me, to my obvious relief. In compliance, how-
ever, with the earnest wishes of some members of my family,
I had a second time recourse to medical aid, which, as I
feared, and as you had predicted might be the case, removed
the attack in the throat, but only to leave behind a second
most severe attack of spasmodic asthma.

It now became perfectly obvious to myself, and all near
me, that medicine was insufficient to combat the disease suc-
cessfully, and as I slowly recovered from this second attack,
which I was beginning to do under your hands, I mentally
resolved that however severely I might be attacked on any
future occasion, and whatever might be the symptoms, I
would altogether reject the use of medicine, and confide my-
self implicitly to your care.

About a month ago (seven months from the time of the
first attack, and during no portion of which could I call my-
self convalescent) I was, through cold, a third time subjected
toa violent attack of spasmodic asthma, varying, however,
from the more recent one, in that it was accompanied by
strong inflammatory symptoms. Among the many distress-
ing seizures to which I have at various times been subject, I
do not think that any have equalled, certainly none exceeded
the present one in intensity. So unnatural was the play of
the lungs, from the violence of the spasmodic action, that it
was with difficulty (so it appeared) sufficient air was inhaled
for the purpose of supporting animation.

I believe that on your first visit you found the pulse very
rapid, and indicative of inflammatory action, and that after
the second time of your seeing me these unpleasant symptoms
had altogether disappeared. What I have to describe is the
gradual relaxation of the unnatural contraction of the chest,
until, from a state of violent spasm, my breathing became

VOL. III. 0


186 Mr. Thompson’s second case.


calm and untroubled, more and more so upon every visit,
until, by God’s blessing, I am restored again to health.

During the whole of this attack I took no medicine.

lst Day. Put into the mesmeric sleep. In five minutes
a visible improvement in respiration, passes over the chest
continued, and in an hour’s time I felt so far relieved as to be
able to walk, and that night I went to bed. Slept in the chair
most of the afternoon ; a violent attack in bed, which lasted
five hours; spasm then abated, and slept till morning.

2nd day. Chest again perceptibly relieved by passes; con-
tinued so during the day; felt strong and appetite good ;
went to bed and slept tolerably.

3rd, 4th, and 5th, days. The disease seemed to be gra-
dually changing its character ; the spasms, which invariably
came on at night, ceased to do so, and I slept pretty well.
Spasm usually returned about 10 or 11 o’clock in forenoon.

6th Day. A severe spasm at night, seemingly the last

struggle between the remedial power and the disease; it has
never recurred with any force at night since.

7th day, and onwards for twenty-one days, during which
I have been under your care, the imposition of your hand
on the region of the affected part seemed to give immediate
relief. The chest thus relieved, flitting pains were felt across
the back and shoulders, which, however, retired when the
hand was placed on the part. Slept well ail the night, and
every night; gradually, but certainly improving, every un-
pleasant symptom on the decrease; manifest relief, and
strengthening of the chest from the imposition of the hand;
appetite good, sleep sound, and bodily strength unimpaired
by confinement to the house, until I am enabled to face this
inclement weather, which I have now done for a week with-
out injury to the parts lately affected; and with all the feel-
ings of renovated health.

Such, my dear sir, is my case, and I have risked the chance
of seeming more than commonly tedious and egotistical in
entering so minutely into the details of it, in the hope that
some fellow-sufferer who recognises in it a similarity to his
own case, may resort to a means of relief in which I feel cer-
tain he will not be disappointed.

Believe me, your’s sincerely and obliged,


JOHN MUCKLESTONE.
To H. S. Thompson, Esq.


June 22nd, 1845.—In a letter received from Mr. Thomp-
son this day, he says, “ Mr. M. is quite well, and does not
recollect when he has enjoyed better health.”—Zoist.


( 187 )


VIII. Cure of Tic Douloureux with Mesmerism.


Dear S1r,—I beg to apologize for having so long delayed
forwarding to you a minute of the removal of the distressing
complaint I had so long laboured under, previous to your
kindly giving me the benefit of mesmerism, and taking this
opportunity of gratefully acknowledging your great kindness
and attention, I am, dear Sir,

Your truly obliged,
Wo. Biees.
Clifton, Dec. 9th, 1844.
To H. 8. Thompson, Esq.


Having suffered for more than seven years from repeated
and long continued attacks of nervous pains, or tic-doloureux
in the head, I readily availed myself of Mr. Henry 8. Thomp-
son’s kindness to try the effects of mesmerism. On the 10th
of August last, about 10 o’clock in the morning, I waited on
Mr. Thompson, suffering at the time from acute pain across
the forehead, and extending along the right side of the head,
down to the throat.

Being placed in an upright position, in a chair with a
high back, Mr. Thompson made several passes from the fore-
head down the centre of the face, and also pointing his fingers
steadily and close to the eyes; this having no effect on the
pains, and producing no disposition to sleep, he changed his
position to the back of the chair, and commenced making
passes, with both hands, from the forehead across the head,
down the back of the head and neck, towards the spine. This
had not been continued long, before I experienced an attractive
power most distinctly, producing considerable vibration of,
and a tingling sensation through the head, and drawing, as it
were, the pains from the forehead, in the direction the passes
were made, having a very soothing effect on the nerves, but
not producing any disposition to sleep. I had no return of
the pains for two hours, or more, after leaving Mr. Thomp-
son’s house; but somewhere about the end of that time they
returned, much in the same form, and nearly to the same ex-
tent as before.

In consequence of Mr. Thompson’s engag ‘ments, three or


four days elapsed before I had an opportunity of again trying
the effects.


On being mesmerised the second time, the pains were re-
moved, and the sensation much the same; but, Mr. Thomp-
02


188 Mr. Thompson’s case of cure of Tic Douloureux.


son being of opinion that I should be relieved for a longer
period, if mesmeric sleep could be produced, he was very per-
severing in his endeavours on this occasion, and also the two
or three following days, to put me to sleep, but did not suc-
ceed; yet I was invariably relieved of the pains for a time,
and the intervals of return were longer, my nights much
easier, and I had several hours more sleep.

I believe it was the sixth time that I was mesmerised, that
I experienced the attractive power to a much greater extent
than I had done before ; and after the passes had been made
in the usual way, for a short time, and whilst I was in a per-
fectly upright position in the chair, I felt a starting of the
muscles of the head, and along the back of the neck, and the
head was irresistably drawn back, and fixed to the back of the
chair ; the lips compressed, the limbs stiff and rigid, and I
went into a profound sleep, which I think lasted probably
from twenty minutes to half an hour. With the omission of
a day or two occasionally, I was mesmerised daily for four or
five weeks, and the results were much the same. After that
time, finding myself quite relieved of the pains, I did not
think it necessary to avail myself of Mr. Thompson’s kindness
more frequently than once or twice a week, which I continued
to do until within the last month; from that time I have
altogether discontinued being mesmerised, and have been per-
fectly free from any return of the pains. I have generally
slept well, have been able to take more exercise, and have
found the nerves braced, and the muscular strength increased.
I would observe, that previous to being put under mesmeric
influence myself, I had not seen any one under that influence ;
never attended any lectures on that subject, or on animal
magnetism, nor seen any experiments on either. I did not
experience any fears or misgivings in availing myself of mes-
merism, and at the time I endeavoured to be as quiet as pos-
sible, without either trying to court or resist the influence. I
have been particularly struck with the total absence of all re-
action succeeding pain being removed by mesmerism. I have,
when suffering from violent nervous pains, procured a little
temporary relief from friction, and the use of stimulating ap-
plications ; but I invariably found that a re-action shortly
took place, and the pains returned more violent than before ;
so much was I convinced of this, that I had long discontinued
the use of such applications. I would also observe, that on
awaking out of mesmeric sleep, I felt no heaviness or drowsi-
ness, which is often the case on awaking from ordinary sleep.

June 22nd, 1845.—This case remains well.—2Zoist.


( 189 )


IX. Cases of Mesmerism, by Mr. Chandler.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


S1r,—Several very interesting cases of mesmerism have
fallen under my observation since those communicated
through Dr. Elliotson, in the seventh number of The Zoist.
Such short notes as my numerous occupations have allowed
me time to make, I send you for insertion, if you think them
worthy.

The readers of The Zoist know better than I can tell them
the deep obligations which every department of their science
is under to Dr. Elliotson, but perhaps I may be allowed to
take this opportunity of expressing my personal gratitude to
him, for it was through his kindness I was first introduced to
so fertile a source of knowledge and intellectual gratification.

I am, Sir, yours obediently,
Tuos. CHANDLER.
58, Paradise-street, Rotherhithe, June 12, 1845.


Mrs. Holdsworth, aged 38, was frightened on the 2nd of
March last, by her next door neighbour falling down in a fit
of apoplexy. The poor woman died while supported in Mrs.
H.’s arms. The shock had so great an effect, that Mrs.
Holdsworth fell into a state of insensibility, with hardly per-
ceptable breathing or pulse, in which condition she remained
(notwithstanding the application of stimulants, &c.) for 48
hours. On returning to consciousness she complained of
great pain in the head, with uneasiness in the stomach; of
pain in the right arm, and of being haunted in her dreams by
the idea that she was still supporting the poor woman on this
arm ; and whenever she closed her eyes, of a vision of a coffin
and angels flying before them. This state continued until
March 22, when I commenced mesmerising her. The only
effect at the first sitting was “a great confusion in the head.”

24th. Produced sleep in twenty minutes. After ten
minutes had elapsed I awoke her by the transverse passes.
She said she had felt very sleepy, and that a weight had ap-
peared to be pressing on each eyelid.

25th. Expresses herself much relieved. She has lost
nearly all her unpleasant symptoms. Sleep produced in ten
minutes.

26th. Still better. Sleep produced in five minutes, al-
though she was in a very constrained position. Pricking the
hand or tickling the nose produces no effect. Both to-day


190 Cases of Mesmerism,


and yesterday expressed herself much refreshed by the mes-
merism: much lighter after it.

29th. Asleep in two minutes. Before going to sleep she
complained of a pain in the left side, which she said she had
suffered from for months previous to her present attack. I
said nothing, but determined to try and remove it, as I had
previously done with Reevely. When she was asleep, there-
fore, I made a few passes from the part she complained of
down to the knee, and, as I expected, the moment she be-
came conscious she put her hand to her knee, and complained
of a pain and pricking sensation there. Her general health
is so much improved that she walked to my house for her
medicine this evening—a little gentian.

31st. I moved the pain to the ankle. I attempted to pro-
duce manifestations of the cerebral organs, but without any
other effect than slight movements of the lips and head.

I mesmerised her again in the evening, before several
sceptics, and they were convinced.

April 2. She had been complaining for some time of pain
between the shoulders. I determined to remove it to the left
elbow, by making passes in that direction during her sleep.
On awaking she immediately, as I anticipated, complained of
pain the elbow : it was gone from the back.

I had found her on all occasions deaf even to the loudest
noises ; shouting did not succeed, pointing towards the ears
no better, but on this occasion I found blowing gently inte
the ear took away her deafness. Three or four downward
passes caused its immediate return. I repeated this several
times. On awaking she complained of a buzzing in that ear,
which was soon removed by making transverse passes opposite
the ear. She also answered instantly when spoken to at the
epigastrium, either in a full voice or whisper.*

4th. Still improving. I tried traction (of course without
hinting to the patient the effect desired). It succeeded per-
fectly both behind and before the head, and with the hands.

6th. Asleep in about three minutes, although talking half
the time. Traction still more perfect. Passes were as effi-
cient from Mr. H. (a friend of mesmerism, who accompanied
me) as from myself. Effective traction might be made by
both at the same time. Mr. H. was drawing her hands,
when, without saying a word, I went behind her and drew
the head backwards. There is no rigidity produced in her by


* Subsequent experiments were tried (at the suggestion of Dr. Engle-
due), from which it appeared that though deaf to loud noises, she was ex-
tremely sensitive to faint ones (as whispers). She answered immediately to
a whisper, although the person whispering was at some distance.


by Mr. Chandler. 191


making passes over the limbs as I have found in other
patients ; but by holding her limbs in any position for a few
seconds they remain suspended in that position, however con-
strained it may be.

13th. I suspended a shell, of about 4 lb. weight, on her
extended wrist, and allowed it to remain three minutes and a
half. A strong sailor and another man had the greatest diffi-
culty in doing the same, both complained of pain in the
shoulder. I asked her when awake to perform the same feat,
but she could not, even for one minute.

15th. The same shell was suspended to her wrist for
six minutes; when awaked she complained of pain in the
shoulder.

June 10. I have mesmerised her occasionally since last
report, always with the same results. Her health remains
perfectly restored; indeed she declares herself much better
than she has been some for some months previously.


Elizabeth Halliday, aged 18, of dark complexion and nerv-
ous temperament, whose catamenia have been suppressed for
some time, complained of head-ache and various hysterical
symptoms.

19th of April. Mesmerised for the first time for half an
hour, without any other decided effect than a sense of giddi-
ness, and an increase of pain in the head.

21st. After a quarter of an hour’s mesmerism she was un-
able to open her eyes, but remained conscious, and started
violently on any sudden noise.

22nd. Asleep in twelve minutes. Sleep more complete ;
does not start as on preceding occasion.

23rd. Asleep in nine minutes. Catalepsy perfect; unin-
fluenced by traction.

26th. Asleep in seven minutes. Scarcely any indication
of hearing. Can bear tickling of the eyelids and nose.

28th. Up to this time the case had been in the hands of
my assistant, Mr. G., who is become a perfect convert to the
great science, and is also quite susceptible himself to mesmeric
influence. On mesmerising her myself the same effects were
produced in one-third the time. This appears to prove that
there is a difference in the power of different persons, for it
continued for some days to take Mr. G. three times as long
as it did me to produce sleep.

May 4. Complains of pain in the side and abdomen, ac-
companied with diarrhcea, for which she was mermerised at 10
a.M. She slept in little more than half a minute, and awoke
relieved. The same effect was produced in the evening, and


192 Cases of Mesmerism,


on many subsequent occasions, indeed, it was often beautiful
to see the altered state of her countenance when awoke after
a few minutes mesmeric sleep.

8th. Sleep produced by one pass.

llth. I touched the organs of tune and asked her to sing,
which she did, but stopped when the fingers were removed.
This patient is also deaf to the loudest noises, but hears when
spoken to at the epigastrium, or whispered to at some distance.
I am indebted to Dr. Engledue for this whispering experi-
ment; he has found it invariable in all his cases, and the
same rule holds good in all mine.

21st. Her general health is improving, indeed she appears
quite well; but is sure to relapse if mesmerism is omitted for
a single day. Sleep is produced by one pass, but it requires
several to awaken her; and if she has only been asleep a few
minutes or seconds, she goes through the same process as
though she had slept an hour, viz., a peculiar twisting of the
mouth, then a stretching of the hands, and then the eyes open.

In this case there is no traction, but quite a different kind
of catalepsy from what is witnessed in any of my other pa-
tients. I can put all the limbs into any position, and they
will remain until I choose to alter them, which I can do at
pleasure, as there is not the slightest rigidity.

June 10. She has been mesmerised almost daily since last
report ; her health is now quite restored, though I do not yet
think it safe to give her up entirely.


Mary Ann Smith, aged 19. This is a case of epilepsy, of
three years standing; formerly she had two or three fits a
day, of late not oftener than one in three weeks or a month,
unless suffering from any unusual excitement.

April 28th. Mesmerised for half an hour. She appeared
somewhat affected, but did not sleep.

30th. Asleep in twenty-five minutes.

At the third sitting sleep was produced (with rigidity) im
ten minutes; at the fourth in four minutes; fifth, in three
minutes; sixth and seventh, in two minutes; eighth time,
which was on May 15, in one minute. Exhibits traction
of the hands and feet beautifully. Appears quite deaf. (It
was afterwards ascertained, as in the other cases, that she
hears a whisper.) She awakes very beautifully and quickly
by the transverse passes. Has not had a fit since the begin-
ning of April.

17th. Tickling and pricking do not appear to produce any
sensation.
18th. Traction does not suceeed if a book is held before


by Mr. Chandler. 193


the face; this has been the case with several of my traction
patients.

21st. Improving very fast. Sleep produced by one pass, or
even pointing the finger from the further side of the room,—
awaked instantly by one transverse pass. Knows where
she is, and is quite rational; will get up and follow me.

June 10th. I continue to mesmerise her about three times

a week, with the same results. She remains quite well, and
has not had a fit since she was first mesmerised. She is also
much less nervous, for a knock at the door used to invariably
make her start ; she never does so now, and she acknowledges
herself very much better, which she never did from any pre-
vious treatment, and she has had enough, both private and at
hospitals.


These three cases, when seen together, form a beautiful
contrast with regard to the cataleptic phenomena.

Holdsworth remains perfectly rigid in whatever position
she is placed, and cannot be moved without transverse passes,
or breathing on the part to be moved. Halliday can be moved
into a fresh position at any moment, and will remain in it ;
whilst Smith can with ease be put into a fresh position, but
will resume the old one the moment the hand is taken from
her, unless transverse passes be made over the limb moved.


Miss M. H. labours under a very peculiar nervous hallu-
cination. She fancies she meets a member of her family on
the stairs, or at the door of a room, and makes way, and
sometimes even speaks, when on subsequent inquiry it is
proved that the person has not been near the place at the
time. These attacks have occurred several times, and have
always lasted nine or ten weeks in spite of drugs and chemi-
cals. The present attack commenced about a fortnight before
the 8th of May, when I commenced mesmerising her.

The first time she slept in sixteen minutes, and awoke by
the transverse passes. She complained of slight pricking
and other unpleasant feelings in the eyes which soon passed off.

The next time, which was on the 14th, she slept in seven
minutes, and awoke much more comfortable.

10th. Whilst asleep to-day there was beautiful traction of
the right hand, but the left was so particularly sensitive that
I dared not even point at it. She said it felt as though I
was cutting it. The same phenomena occurred each time
subsequently, though I accidentally discovered that by keep-
ing my fingers on the organ of Benevolence this unpleasant
sensation was always very much diminished.


194 Cases of Mesmerism,


She has had for some years a slight affection of the heart
after rheumatic fever; there is also frequent coldness and
numbness of the eft hand and arm, and deafness particularly
of the left ear.

21st. She has been mesmerised every day since last re-
port. Her health is much improved, and she has lost her un-
pleasant nervous affection, and fancies she hears better.

During the sleep her hearing becomes so very acute that
she often asks the persons present not to talk so loud as it
distresses her ; she is perfectly conscious and retains a partial
recollection of what has occured when awake. Benevolence
and Veneration are most distinctly affected, but I cannot
make any impression on the other organs.

June 10. She has been mesmerised daily since last report,
and remains quite well; all the symptoms have left for which
she was mesmerised, and her deafness is much relieved. As
she is now residing at some distance I shall not see her with
any regularity ; during her cure she has been under my own
roof,


The two following cases are related to shew that a mes-
meriser should not be deterred from operating on a patient
because he expects only to have two or three opportunities.
Great benefit may arise even from one operation :—


Mrs. Scates, aged 28, of leuco-phlegmatic temperament,
has been in a delicate state of health for some time, com-
plaining of constant severe head-ache, and other hysterical
symptoms.

She came to my house one evening with Mrs. Holdsworth
from mere curiosity. She expressed a wish to try the effect
herself, and my assistant, Mr. G., immediately commenced.
She slept soundly in eighteen minutes, but remained quite
sensible when spoken to, though she had not the power of
answering or opening her eyes. She became rigid in any
position, but there was no traction. After being allowed to
sleep about half an hour, she was awakened by transverse
passes, and expressed herself relieved.

Two days after she called again, stating that she was go-
ing to Shoreham the following day, but had found her head
so much relieved by the mesmerism that she should like “ ¢o
be done” once more.

She went to sleep in two minutes and a half, and became
cataleptic as before.


Being in the country last week, I was introduced to Miss


by Mr. Chandler. 195


W., aged 27, of very fair complexion and decidedly scrofulous
diathesis. She has been suffering for eight months from
chronic inflammation of the tonsils, with severe pains shoot-
ing to the ears. Gargles of all kinds, sarsaparilla, steel, and
other medicines have been tried without the slightest benefit.
I told her if she were a patient of mine I should certainly re-
commend mesmerism. She said she should have no objec-
tion, and I made a few passes just to show her how it was
done. I saw there was some effect, and continued about
twenty-five minutes, she did not go to sleep, but told me
afterwards she was very nearly doing so.

I mesmerised her twice more before leaving the neigh-
bourhood with increasing effect, indeed the third time she
slept, though not soundly. The following morning, just as I
was leaving, her mother called on me to say her daughter
(Miss W.) had enjoyed a better night than she had for many
months, and felt herself altogether so much better that she
was determined to bring her to London, as soon as she could
make arrangements to leave home, in order to place her under
my care. She had not felt the pain in her ear since the first
time I mesmerised her.

I have several other cases under treatment, but they are
not yet sufficiently advanced to be worth reporting.


I may perhaps be permitted to add a few hints which have
occurred to me in the course of my mesmeric practice. As I
mesmerise only for the cure of disease, and never for mere
amusement, I am always particularly careful not to persist in
any experiments which appear unpleasant to the patient. I
have in several instances had the cure of patients much re-
tarded, and even thrown back, by an accident of this kind.
On the contrary, producing phenomena which do not annoy,
appear to have a decidedly beneficial effect.

When I find a patient wake uneasy in any respect, which
they sometimes will, I always remesmerise and invariably
find a beneficial result.

When I observe the eyes of a patient follow my hand at
the commencement of the sitting, I am always led to consider
that patient easily susceptible, and I have never yet, been de-
ceived. It does not follow that other persons are not sus-
ceptible, but they are usually much less so at first.


( 196 )


X. Cases of Cures with Mesmerism. By T. B. Brinp.ey.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Stourbridge, May, 1845.

Dear Sir,—Since my last communication, I have, in the
intervals of professional duties, been prosecuting my investi-
gations (as an amateur operator) into the curative and reme-
dial powers of the mesmeric agency; and notwithstanding
the opposition I have had to contend with from the medical
profession in this neighbourhood—the persecutions of some,
and the ridicule of others, conjoined with the cry of the
vulgar,—I still continue, after a lapse of years, a firm believer
in the now-established fact, that mesmerism is a therapeutic
agent of wonderful efficacy. I have cured upwards of fifty
persons labouring under various and complicated diseases ;
all, I am happy to inform you, have continued up to the
present period in perfect health, with one or two exceptions,
and they have again applied to mesmerism for relief. In this
estimate I exclude hundreds of persons who have had rheu-
matic pains, &c., removed by the mesmeric passes, without
inducing sleep. During the last two years I have succeeded
in mesmerising nearly one hundred persons of both sexes and
of every variety of temperament. The bilious I have gene-
rally found the most difficult to affect. I have only failed in
about ten instances. These facts would lead us to conclude,
that mesmerism is a therapeutic agent which may be success-
fully employed in very many and opposite diseases ; that its
beneficial effects are not merely momentary and transient,
but permanent and continuous; and that the majority of
mankind are susceptible of its influence.

Notwithstanding the legitimacy of these conclusions, which
may be deduced from the experience of numerous individuals
who have effected the most astonishing cures with mesmerism,
in diseases of the heart, nervous affections, epilepsy, para-
lysis, sciatica, rheumatism, gout, deafness, hysteria, vertigo,
and even insanity,*—the host of believers in the science,
comprising men of all ranks of society, from the peasant to
the courtier,—still the medical profession keep aloof from the
examination of the agent in question, and the adoption of it
in their practice. We should probably find it difficult to re-
concile the glaring inconsistency of opposing and neglecting
an agency of indisputable efficacy, as a means of cure, with


* See Teste’s Animal Magnetism, for the cure of a case of madness with
mesmerism. .


1
1
:


Cases of Cures with Mesmerism. 197


the acknowledged fact, that great uncertainty exists as to
any medicine being a specific in any one disease to which hu-
manity is liable ;—if the general conduct of the profession,
in relation to every novel opinion or discovery, did not eluci-
date this departure from what we deem consistency and com-
mon sense.* ‘ Opposition” has long been the watch-word of
the members of the medical profession, relative to all that is
new or contradictory of their preconceived opinions; and that
they never receive a truth or discovery till forced upon them
by its general reception among the public, cannot be denied.

It would appear by their conduct in relation to mesmerism,
and indeed, to many newly-discovered medical truths, (as
witness their conduct relatively to the discovery of the circu-
lation of the blood, inoculation, vaccination, &c. &c.,) that
they deem the present state of their science, and also of
society, the best that can possibly be attained, and sit down
contented with the present, ignorant that the past has con-
tributed to the present advanced state of knowledge and re-
finement, and that if the wheels of society were now to be
clogged, its supposed perfection would deteriorate, and society
sink again into its original barbarism. Such men forget that
society is progressive, and that the truth which in one age
met with incredulity and persecution, in the next was exalted
to the highest pedestal in the temple of science. Such men
are the dead-weights of society; they sit like an incubus on
its breast, paralyzing its energies, preventing improvement,
and retarding the progress of intellect and reformation. But
while such men and bodies of men are thus busy in retarding
the advancement of science, and the establishment of truth,


* A conversation which I had with a medical gentleman the other day,
will probably place the conduct of the profession in connection with this
subject in its proper light. Remarking that the modus operandi of mesmerism
in the cure of diseases was imagination, I observed, ‘‘ Why then do you not
‘throw physic to the dogs,’ and employ mesmerism, or, if you like, imagi-
nation, in the cure of diseases?”

“Oh! I don’t know ; perhaps because it’s unfashionable.”

“ Well then, why not adopt it, and then it will soon become fashionable ?”

“Why? because society is not prepared for such a mode of treatment ;
and if we were to make such an assertion to our patients, we should at once
lose their confidence and our practice.”

“Well, but I thought it was the doctor’s place to prescribe, and not the
patient’s ; and I am sure it is your’s to lead society in all that relates to your
profession, and not the reverse.”

“Ah, it is all very fine in theory, but where will you find a profession
that would be bold enough to carry a favourite point against the frown of
society ?”

“Where? why everywhere, if men are true to themselves as individuals ;
but the fact is, it is because this is not a favourite point with your profession,
that it has not been brought to bear on society generally.”” With this our doctor
smiled, hemmed, and wished me a very good morning.


198 Cases of Cures with Mesmerism,


others are alive to the interests of their fellow-men. Conse-
quently as regards mesmeric science, notwithstanding the
scepticism of some, and the ridicule of others—the sneer of
pur-blind prejudice—the laugh of incredulity, and alas! in
too many instances, the cruel persecutions of bigotry and
intolerance, which honest zeal and good intentions have had
to contend with,—intellect is progressing, knowledge is in-
creasing, society is advancing, and light is being poured in
from all quarters, tending to advance mesmerism to the high-
est rank of known and undisputed truths; and to prove to
the sceptic that it is not an undigested theory of crude and
speculative opinions, but a great and eternal truth, full of
hope and advantage to the human family. And we believe
the time is not far distant, despite the contumely and igno-
rant prejudice with which the science has to contend, when
it will be established, and its opponents compelled to cease
their opposition, and to acknowledge its truthfulness.

But while the majority of the worthy Galens of the day
affect to laugh at mesmerism, and treat of its advantages as
chimerical, and its prospects as illusory and Utopian ; or,
driven from their strongholds of prejudice, take their stand
on their last argument, that “it is too wonderful to be true,”
(to which, by the bye, they cling with dreadful tenacity, as
their last refuge and hope, like the drowning man in his
despair clinging to a twig, which this objection of their’s
greatly resembles ;*) and while we cannot but condemn their
conduct towards mesmerism and its supporters, we must in
justice admit that some among them have been unprejudiced
and fearless enough to examine the subject for themselves,
and to employ the agency in question, in their practice ; and
though they may for a time have lost caste, yet the approval
of their own consciences, and the approbation of the lovers
of truth, and of the wise and good, with the conviction that
they are suffering in defence of truth, will sufficiently repay
them for the supposed degradation. In reality there is none,
they occupy the post of honour. This must soon be seen in
its proper light. In the meanwhile let me exhort the scien-
tific, the truth-loving, and the wise, to investigate still fur-


* “ Mesmerism is too wonderful for belief,” cry these sapient objectors.
Too wonderful for belief! Why what is there in existence that is not
wonderful? The heavens and the earth, a blade of grass, and our own ex-
istence, are all subjects of wonder, and therefore, according to the reason-
ing of our opponents, must not be believed. Which of the sciences most
accredited and received, would be true, if the degree in which they are
wonderful is to be the test of their falsity? Away with such sophistry, and
let reason judge of the merits of mesmerism, and it will triumph gloriously
over all the cavils of its opponents.


by Mr. Brindley. 199


ther into the nature of man, (asking what is truth, nor
fearing to hear the answer,) and boldly proclaim the results,
careless of the sneer of incredulity, or the persecution of
prejudice, resting assured that truth must and will be ulti-
mately acknowledged and received.

But to return from this long digression to my late inves-
tigations of the mesmeric agency. Its curative effects I have
found of great benefit in many cases during the last few
months; two or three of which I now send you the account of.

The first is that of Mr. Thomas Lucas, of Stoke Prior,
upon whom I operated for dyspepsia of several years stand-
ing, with continued disorder of the whole alimentary canal,
attended with distressing pains, &c., and also for deafness.
After three sittings Mr. Lucas was obliged to return home,
and was not mesmerised subsequently. At the third sitting
a clairvoyante was mesmerised, and the patient placed en
rapport with her, whom she examined and prescribed for.
Mr. Lucas returned home, followed her advice for some time,
and a short time ago wrote me the enclosed letter, which I
received with great pleasure, as Mr. Lucas is a man of no
ordinary attainments, of mature age and judgment, and not
to be imposed upon by the mere novelties of a science, or
swayed by interest or fancy. His opinion, therefore, in re-
gard to the curative powers of mesmerism is of considerable
weight and import.

We only quote the following portion of this letter.


‘Stoke Prior, near Bromsgrove,
Feb. 24th, 1845.
“Dear Sir,—With respect to my own health, I am happy to
say that the more distressing symptoms of my complaint are greatly
mitigated, and I have no doubt a perfect cure would have resulted
from a few more applications of the mesmeric influence, if circum-
stances would have allowed. Upon the whole, however, I have
enjoyed as much better state of health since I was with you, than I
have for a like period for many years; and I cannot assign any other
cause for the very great improvement I have experienced than what
is due to the influence of the mesmeric treatment to which I was
subjected, and to the beneficial effects of which I have no doubt
your energy and skill greatly contributed.


*T am, dear Sir,
** Your obedient Servant,
*“*THomas Lucas.”


__ The second case is that of Miss ——, a young lady resid-
ing at Stourbridge, who had become subject to violent attacks
of hysteria, through a fright she had received some few months


200 Cases of Cures with Mesmerism,


since. I was sent for hastily, while she was labouring under
a violent hysterical attack, which resembled an attack of epi-
lepsy ; and which lasted a considerable time. Immediately
she was restored to consciousness, I determined to mesmerise
her, which I accomplished in 24} minutes. She was perfectly
insensible. I excited the organs of Hearing and Language,
and asked her how she was. She answered by a passionate
burst of tears. I then said to her, “Why do you weep?
Tell me what is the matter with you.” At length she replied,
amid convulsive sobs, “Oh, I am going to die!” “God
forbid,” said I: “but why do you think so?” “TI shall, I
shall die, and in a year from this time, if I am not mesmer-
ised three times a week for a fortnight. If you mesmerise
me six times more, I shall be well on this day fortnight, and
shall live beyond the day I see; if not, I shall grow worse and
worse, and on that day I shall die.” Of course I instantly
promised to attend her. I then questioned her as to the
time her fits would come on, and I ascertained that they al-
ways attacked her at the precise time she indicated in her
mesmeric trance. I mentioned this fact to Dr. and
another gentleman, who accompanied me on one of my visits,
when a fit was expected, as she had stated it would come on
at six o’clock precisely that evening. She was never told
when awake what time she had indicated the attack; and, as
in natural somnambulism, the mesmeric somnambulist has no
recollection of what has transpired when restored to his usual
condition (the exception to this rule being a remembrance
when not in mesmeric sleep of whatever the operator desires
or wills he shall remember), she did not know when the at-
tacks would come on. Accordingly, when we waited upon
her, she was going to take a walk, it being then half-past five
o’clock. We persuaded her not to go out, but to remain
with us and converse about mesmerism. While she left the
room to remove her bonnet, &c., one of the gentlemen ac-
companying me put the clock back a quarter of an hour, both
of them being rather suspicious that the girl was deceiving
me. But in the midst of a very pleasant conversation, exactly
as the fingers of the clock pointed to a quarter to six, the fit
commenced, it being then in reality six o’clock. This per-
fectly convinced the gentlemen present that there was no de-
ception in the case, and the violence of the fit confirmed
them in this opinion. I mesmerised her on this occasion, and
afterwards three times a week for a fortnight; at the expira-
tion of which period, while in the mesmeric sleep, she de-
clared herself to be quite well, and observed that she should
have no more fits. She has never had the slightest attack


Two cases of St. Vitus’s Dance cured with Mesmerism. 201


since, and continues till the present moment in perfect
health.


The third case is a cure of deafuess of some years standing.
Mr. Bateman applied to me to be mesmerised for deafness.
After operating upon him an hour each day for thirteen con-
secutive days, he assured me that he could hear even the mice
rustling amongst the straw, while at his daily avocations. Be-
fore the first operation, you could not make him hear without
placing your lips to his ear, and shouting lustily.


The last case in which I have proved the beneficial effects
of the mesmeric agency, is that of my particular friend, Mr.
J. B., who has suffered for three years from violent pains in
his side and chest, attended with great weakness and debility ;
to remove which he has tried medicine, electricity, galvanism,
change of residence, &c., in vain. At his request I mesmerised
him. He was sent into the sleep in five minutes. When re-
stored to consciousness, the pain was gone. I continued the
mesmerisation for several days, till his health was perfectly
re-established, and his pain and weakness entirely removed.
He continues in perfect health up to the present period.

With these cases, which are sufficiently demonstrative


that the mesmeric agent is not an inoperative or pretended
one, but on the contrary worthy of investigation and adop-
tion among the other therapeutics employed in medical prac-
tice, I beg to subscribe myself, &c. &c.


T. B. Brinptey.


XI. Two cases of Chorea or St. Vitus’s Dance cured with
Mesmerism. By Dr. Extiotson.


“ We regret that we cannot notice the circumstances to which ‘ Vindex’ refers. Dr. F.
need be under no apprehension of an attack in the ic magazi ffecting him in the
who record their owm dotage im it" Lonuon Mubicat Gasarre, April 12, 1645. Notices
to Correspondents.

Tue sentence which I have prefixed to this communication
will display to the readers of The Zoist who are not medical,
what deadly hostility exists in the profession to mesmerism
and its supporters. The London Medical Gazette is boasted
of as the weekly journal of the scientific, well-educated, ho-
nourable, gentleman-like, and highest class of the profession.
Persons take it in and write in it who would be shocked at
the proposal to read or to write in the Lancet or Medical


Times. It was professedly established to counteract the bad
VOL. III. P


202 Two cases of St. Vitus’s Dance cured with Mesmerism,


influence and example of the Lancet, under the auspices of
Sir Benjamin Brodie, Sir Henry Halford, Dr. Chambers, Dr.
Holland, and all the chief physicians and surgeons of the
London Hospitals, and of all the degrees of medical attend-
ants of the aristocracy and “better” classes, both in town
and country. I well recollect Sir Henry Halford saying to
a party of Oxford and Cambridge Fellows of the college,
“Gentlemen, I hope you'll all support the Gazette, and assist
in putting down that Lancet: we ought really as gentlemen
to support it :” and the party fully agreed with him and as-
sented, and have kept their word. It has from the first been
under the direction of Dr. Macleod of St. George’s Hospital,
the intimate and obsequious friend of Dr. Chambers, though
of late he has declined the ¢it/e of editor.

Whatever has been reprehensible in the Lancet, has
equally characterized the Gazette, except the employment of
the Wakleyan tongue. I will give an instance of its dignified
spirit. For very many years I have openly at some length
maintained in my Physiology, that the several intellectual, in-
stinctive and moral faculties of men and brutes are powers of
the several parts of the brain ; and that the idea of a soul in
addition is an unnecessary assumption,—a mere fancy, ex-
plaining no physiological phenomenon, and not necessary to
the belief of a God, a future state, Christianity, or the practice
of the truest virtue. A surgeon at Manchester attacked me a
few years ago in the Medical Gazette, weaving a tissue of
twaddle which ran through two numbers. In the advertise-
ments in the daily papers of the contents of the numbers
of the Gazette containing the attack, there appeared again
and again some such words as, an ELABORATE AND COM-
PLETE REFUTATION OF Dr. ELLiotson’s MATERIALISM; these
words being printed in capitals—a thing quite unusual with
its advertisements. The editor knew that the world is so ig-
norant as to be at once horrified at the word materialism,
though stupidly and in total ignorance of the subject: he
knew that this advertisement would catch the eye of the
public at large who read the newspapers though they never
see the Gazette, and would make it universally known that I
was a materialist. The deed was so shocking that many
supporters of the Gazette voluntarily expressed to me their
disgust: and, after a time, one of the chief partners in Long-
mans’ house calling upon me on other business, I pointed
out the advertisement to him, but said I would not request
its discontinuance. He shook his head, absolutely distressed,
made a note of it, and declared he knew nothing of it and
it should not be repeated. . The advertisement had been


by Dr. Elliotson. 203


drawn up not by the house, but by the manager of the
Gazette.

The readers of The Zoist will not therefore wonder at the
moral Medical Gazette calling the other gentlemen and my-
self, who publish our well-authenticated cases, 1MPosTORs :
though they will smile at the idiotic assertion of the circula-
tion of The Zoist being confined to us contributors.

In the number of The Zoist for July, 1843, I published
the ready cure of eight cases of chorea with mesmerism : one
by Dr. Simpson of York, three by Mr. Prideaux of South-
ampton, one by Mr. Wood, and three in patients of my own,
upon one of whom my clinical clerk operated, and upon two
of whom I performed the operation myself. I had not another
case of the disease till last summer: but then and since I
have treated five, and all successfully: three with iron and
two with mesmerism.

In the 13th volume of the Transactions of the Royal Me-
dical and Chirurgical Society, p. 244, I proved in 1824 by
nine cases, and p. 466, in 1827, by nine more, all in my own
practice, that iron was almost a specific for the disease when
occuring in children or youth and not of some years dura-
tion. I treated subsequently many such instances of the
disease successfully with iron, and beg to refer to a clinical
lecture delivered at University College Hospital and pub-
lished in the Lancet for March, 1831.

I should have treated all the five patients with mesmerism
had it been convenient, as they would have been saved the
trouble of taking physic three times a day and their parents
the expense of it. But two of the little girls resided too far
from me, and a third was the daughter of Roman Catholics
who were unwilling to have it employed upon their child.


1. Miss Wilson, residing at 19, Duke Street, St. James’s,
twelve years of age, had laboured under chorea for a month
when she was brought to me on the 4th of last January.
The left half was more affected than the right, and her left
arm hung nearly powerless. She felt ill one day without
evident reason, and was observed to start and her left arm to
drop ; and the next day, a school-fellow having cut her finger
and the blood streaming away copiously, she ran up stairs ter-
rified, looking like a ghost, and from that moment the disease
set in strongly. I found that at first aperients had been
given her, and then sesquioxide of iron for ten days, and
that her bowels were still relaxed and she was as bad as ever.

Her speech was very inarticulate ; she could not work with
her needle, nor use her left hand in feeding herself, on ac-

P2


204 Two cases of St. Vitus’s Dance cured with Mesmerism,


count of its hanging at her side and turning round ; could
not walk without stumbling, so that she was not allowed to
go up and down stairs alone, or be out of sight: slept for the
most part badly, sometimes hardly at all, and in her sleep
her mother thought she was “nudging” her and wanted
something.

Her mother being an excellent person and left a widow
with a family, I offered to mesmerise her myself, and did so for
half an hour daily, by slow passes downwards before the face.

She never showed signs of the least sleepiness, or any other
sensible effect, except that one day at the beginning she was
sleepy and one day after three weeks she felt powerless; and
yet she began to mend in a few days, and was perfectly well in a
month.

In a few days she sat more quietly while I mesmerised her:
and in less than three weeks she could talk perfectly, and
without crying, as had previously always been the case; did
needle-work with her mother ; walked well ; her spirits, which
had flagged greatly, were good; and her strength much in-
creased. She soon slept all night and tranquilly, improved
rapidly, and recovered her look of health and strength. No
medicine was given nor any other means adopted but that
of mesmerism.


2. Master Pell, of Buttocks Booth, Northamptonshire, 11
years of age, was brought to me on the 23rd of last December
on account of St. Vitus’s dance, occasioned by his having
been briskly electrified for amusement at school.

He could scarcely be understood ; and could not feed him-
self with his right hand.

As he lived so far off, I prescribed iron in treacle: and
advised his return into the country, assuring his mother that
he would be cured with it. The treacle, however, relaxed
his bowels, and thus he became much worse. I ordered the
iron to be taken in milk, and then it agreed perfectly. The
father wrote an account of this to me, adding,


‘*T was very sorry and — much disappointed at your not allow-


ing him to be mesmerised, as I sent him up for the express purpose.
After reading your statements on mesmerism, and the cures you and
others had made by mesmerism, particularly in St. Vitus’s dance,
and having seen Master Linnell so perfectly cured by you of that
complaint, I had determined to use no other means than mesmer-
ism to cure my son, unless that failed. And if it is so certain a
cure as is represented in your and other’s writings, I felt confident
that if I sent him to you to be mesmerised he would have been
cured, as his was of recent date, and I am still of that opinion, and


by Dr. Elliotson. 205


feel quite confident from having seen Master Linnell again this
morning. If you will allow me to put him under your directions
to be mesmerised, I will bring him up again next week myself; or,
will you be so kind as to name a proper person: to mesmerise him if
you cannot undertake it yourself? I shall feel more confident if he
is mesmerised under your particular directions, and shall be most
proud to pay yon any fees that you may desire.
** Your answer by return will much oblige,
«Your humble Servant,
* GeorGE Pe.”


I was so pleased with the father’s manly good sense in
believing facts and acting upon them, while surrounded by
medical men at Northampton who set so shameful an example
of disregarding them and sneering at those who establish
them,* that I wrote him word I would mesmerise the lad
myself if he would bring him to town; but on my invariable
conditions that my services should be gratuitous: for from
the first I resolved that the medical world should not have it
in their power to say that I advocated mesmerism for emo-
lument.

Accordingly, on the 14th of January, I began to mesmer-
ise him by passes, for half an hour daily: sitting on a chair
between him and Miss Wilson, and thus mesmerising her
with my right hand and him with my left at the same time.

In general no sensible effect was produced. But one day
near the end of a fortnight he was sleepy, and again after
rather more than a fortnight he was very sleepy and his eyes
half closed ; and one day after a month, he was so nearly asleep
that his eyes almost closed, the breathing became hard, and
his right eye ran, though it did not shut: and on two or three
other occasions he looked heavy. But this was all, and, when
nearly recovered, no sign of drowsiness was ever witnessed.

In less than a fortnight he was much quieter while being
mesmerised, and began to improve rapidly, recovering his
appetite, which had been impaired, and no longer requir-
ing aperients; sleeping well at night, whereas previously his
nights were bad; and able to be trusted to go up and down
stairs alone. In six weeks he was all but well; and he soon
returned home: shewing no trace of his disease unless when
suddenly alarmed or greatly fatigued.


* Dr. Robertson at a public meeting in Northampton, stated his convic-
tion that mesmerism was altogether delusion and humbug: that it was the
theory of a man who had ever been regarded by the profession as a quack ;
that its so-called facts were mere assumptions and fallacies, only answering
the purposes of men like its founder. A surgeon in the same town, named
Terry, (see Zoist, No. ii., p. 200,) wrote equal wisdom in the provincial
newspapers.


206 More Surgical Operations without pain.


The simple and easy cure of St. Vitus’s dance with mes-
merism is quicker in general than that with iron. But I
understand that none of the English medical journals, the
Gazette, Lancet, Medical Times, Dr. Forbes’s or Dr. Johnson’s
Journals, ever hint these important facts of cure to their
readers. Their individual conduct would make us laugh, did
it not present human nature in so sad a point of view.

I am very anxious that the public should notice the fact
established in these cures of St. Vitus’s dance, that sleep,
even sleepiness, is not necessary to the cure of a disease.
The mesmerisation tends to strengthen and calm, whether
sleep comes or not. Unfortunately there is a general errone-
ous fancy that mesmerism can do no good and exerts no in-
fluence, unless sleep is effected. On the other hand, I have
in several cases induced profound sleep, and various of the
most beautiful phenomena, without much benefit. I have
been doing this now daily for upwards of two years in three
cases of epilepsy, and the amendment is yet very trifling.


XII. More Surgical Operations without pain.


We are delighted to announce that a fourth amputation has
taken place in the mesmeric state ; and, like the three former,
it was performed in the country. Ye metropolitan hospital
surgeons and teachers, led and cheered by Sir Benjamin
Brodie! Ye fellows and members of the council of the College
of Surgeons! blush at your bigotted, your stupid, your cruel
opposition to the reception of a mighty and all-important
fact. When will you perform an agonizing operation in
mesmeric insensibility ? How long will you refuse to spare a
single wretched patient the pain of your instruments? In
spite of you the day will come, on which you all must at
length with shame crouchingly consent to do your duty, and
follow the example of those who have become your leaders in
the provinces! And oh, ye members of the Medical and
Chirurgical Society! be assured the day will come, when de-
tails of mesmeric cures and operations in the mesmeric state
will be read at your meetings and published in your transac-
tions. The longer you all delay, the greater will be the hu-
miliation of what you vain-gioriously call your honourable
and enlightened profession, and the greater the triumph of
those whom you now speak of as fools in all your gossipings
at dinners, at evening parties, in your hospitals, and at your
consultations. ,


More Surgical Operations without pain. 207


I. Amputation of an Arm in the Mesmeric State.

The fourth public Lecture and Exhibition of Mesmerism
was delivered by Mr. Davey in the Assembly Rooms at the
Royal Hotel, Torquay, on Monday the 19th, before a highly
respectable audience. The greatest interest was excited by
the recital of a surgical operation, which was succesfully
performed under the influence of mesmerism a few days pre-
viously. The following statement was read by the chairman,
Dr. P. L. Phillips, a member of the Royal College of Phy-
sicians, residing in Torquay, who, with many of his medical
brethren, had witnessed the operation :—

Mrs. Northway, of Shaldon, having suffered severely, and
for many years, from disease at the wrist, probably of the
nature of ‘‘ Fungus hematodes,” and being much reduced in
health, not only by the pain and suffering, but from repeated
copious hemorrhages, came to Torquay about three weeks or
a month back for the purpose of having the fore-arm ampu-
tated, hoping previously to get into a better state of health
than she had lately enjoyed, and which may be judged of
by the fact of her having frequent fainting fits, apparently
from exhaustion. Hearing of mesmerism at this time, she
readily yielded to the suggestion of allowing Mr. Davey to
endeavour to bring her under the influence of mesmerism
previous to the performance of the operation. For the first
three or four times little or no effect was produced on her;
but gradually the influence of the mesmeriser became more
and more powerful, and about the eighth or ninth time I
saw her put into a deep sleep, during which she exhibited
very strongly the phenomena of sympathy or community of
sensation with the mesmeriser—she swallowed when he drank
water, though he did it noiselessly and with averted head ;
she shrank when I pricked his hand with a needle, &c., &c.
On the 15th instant, the operation was performed, but under
circumstances by no means favourable to the mesmeriser.

In the first place, whether from the heat of the room,
which was excessive, or from the agitation of the Mesmeriser,
who had never seen an operation before, or from both causes
as is probable, and also from the agitation consequent upon
taking leave of her husband, who was obliged to proceed on
a voyage in the morning,—though aware that the operation
would be performed within a few days ;—from all these causes
probably Mrs. Northway was in a much less profound sleep
when we were admitted to the room than she had usually
been of late; she moved slightly and moaned once or twice,
and her pulse was at least 130 in the minute, but betrayed
no mental agitation.


208 More Surgical Operations without pain.


Secondly.—After the tourniquet had been applied without
her evincing the least degree of sensation, it was found ne-
cessary to wheel the patient all round in her chair; and
whereas previously her face had been from the light, it was
suddenly brought opposite to a south window, and at the
same time the blind was drawn up so as to admit by far the
strongest sun which has shone this year—yet there was not
the least movement of the eyelids, as I conceive there must
have been in a person either simulating sleep, or in a sleep
of an ordinary character.

Thirdly.—It was found necessary on applying the tourni-
quet, to remove the bandage from the diseased wrist, and to
examine there for the pulse; all which, under ordinary cir-
cumstances, would have been attended by acute suffering,
but which, in the present case, appeared to be in no way
noticed.

Fourthly.—In order that the patient might not have any
idea of what was in view, nothing had been prepared for the
operation in the room, and therefore some time elapsed,
beyond that occupied in the change of position and the cut-
ting off her gown sleeve, between the application of the
tourniquet and the application of the knife ;—still not the
least indication of consciousness was detected, though about
a dozen gentlemen were most accurately observing the pa-
tient. She continued the whole time as a person in the
deepest sleep.

The last operation of the mesmeriser having been to pro-
duce rigidity of the arm, the incision for the circular opera-
tion was made without producing the slightest movement in
the arm, countenance, or body—the whole was in a perfectly
passive state, exactly as in a dead subject. Subsequently a
considerable change occurred—the operation was proceeded
with very deliberately, (perhaps the instruments might not
have been as sharp as they sometimes are,) and the patient
became uneasy and moaned repeatedly and heavily, and once
louder than at other times; the head was thrown from side
to side, and the body once or twice was somewhat contorted
for a moment; but at no time was there any continuous
muscular action, no setting of the extremities (as testified by
a gentleman who had placed his knee against the feet of the
patient), no fixing of the teeth or countenance,—all was per-
fectly passive, except the occasional movements before men-
tioned, and which resemble exactly, as did the moans, what
might have been expected in a person sleeping deeply and
dreaming uncomfortably, but without any distinct object in
the dream. It was particularly remarkable that the moans


More Surgical Operations without pain. 209


and the movements were indulged in freely, without the
slightest apparent effort to restrain them, affording a striking
contrast to the deportment of many who have borne opera-
tions with courage and determination, enough to suppress
all signs of suffering. It is further to be observed that the
patient had on former occasions of being under mesmeric
influence, both moaned and twitched her arm, and that upon
waking she had said that she had been dreaming of having
tight bandages on her arm, and of a dog gnawing the little
finger of her diseased hand—shewing, as I conceive, that the
sentient nerves of that arm were in a peculiarly excitable
state, and therefore very likely to be excited by the operation
more than in ordinary cases. At the conclusion of the
operation the patient became partially conscious, and com-
plained much of the tightness of the bandages which had
been applied; but it was not until she had taken some wine,
and been demesmerised, that she appeared in the least degree
conscious of what had been done. Whilst recovering, she
told the operator, in answer to his question, that she would
not have the operation performed till the day after the morrow,
which had been originally mentioned to her as the day when
it would probably take place: but upon coming to a full per-
ception of what had occurred, she became highly excited and
hysterical, complained much of the strappings, and declined
to be put to sleep again, but requested to be allowed to walk
about a little. After a short time, however, she reclined on
the sofa, and allowed herself to be subjected to the mesmeric
influence which acted within a very few seconds as a most
truly astonishing charm, and quite beyond what I could have
supposed. Ina few minutes she was asleep, slept soundly
for an hour and a half, woke very comfortable, declaring that
she had not had the least consciousness of what was passing.
Upon the whole the impression made upon the spectators,
(mostly professional gentlemen, with scarcely an exception)
was that the sense of consciousness was entirely suppressed,
though the excitability of the sentient nerves was only dulled,
~—that the patient was saved ali mental suffering, and the
operator all the difficulties arising from the struggles of the
ee Exeter and Plymouth Gazette, May 31,
5


* We are informed that Mr. Jolly performed the operation, and that there
were seven medical men present. ‘The gentleman (not a surgeon) who held
the opposite arm, was compelled to leave his post, and the assistant, Mr.
Jolly’s son, states, that he permitted the arm to remain on the arm of the
chair without restraint, and that it did not move. Dr. M. Hall, we entreat
you to write and ask the poor woman why she did not move it? Ask her
how she dared to disobey your physiological laws?”—See Remarks in Dr.
Elliotson’s “* Surgical Operations without Pain, &c.’”’ p. 19,.—Zoist.


210 More Surgical Operations without pain.


II. Removal of a Tumor from the Neck in the Mesmeric State.


No. 32, Warren Street.
Jan. 23, 1845.

My dear Sir,—It seems to me simply an act of justice to
Dr. J. V. Bodinier, the distinguished surgeon who performed
the late remarkable operation in Chambers-street, to comply
with your request and give you an authentic detail of the
case, as I witnessed it. In so doing, I will briefly state the
facts and leave you and your readers to draw their own con-
clusions, premising, however, that I have ever been a disbe-
liever in animal magnetism, and until that operation had
never witnessed any experiments which were satisfactory, or
which in my opinion could not be explained without recourse
to mesmerism.

On Thursday, Jan. 16th, I was requested by Dr. Bodinier
to witness the extirpation of a tumor from the neck of a
female, Margaret S. at No—Chambers-street. I went to the
house at 25 minutes past 11, and found in the basement a
female, aged about 22 years, with dark brown hair, dark
eyes ; she seemed at that time quite bright and disposed to
talk ; in the parotid region was a lymphatic tumor, which had
existed for five years, but had increased rapidly within a few
months. At half-past eleven Dr. B. commenced what are
termed “ magnetic passes ;” in five minutes her eyelids
drooped, and in ten minutes she sunk into a profound sleep ;
the respiration and pulse being natural, and this too although
the house was far from being quiet ; as the members of the
household were constantly passing into and out of the room.

I remained there till 12 o’clock, during which time Dr. B.
requested me to examine the tumor which was to be extir-
pated, and described upon the female the manner in which
the operation would performed. Being obliged to visit some
patients, I was absent from the house till a quater past one,
when I returned with Professor J. W. Francis, and Mr. J. 8.
Redfield, the publisher. We found the patient still asleep.
In a short time we were joined by Drs. Mott, J. Kearney,
Rodgers, Delafield, Taylor, Nelson, Dr. Alfaro, a most emi-
nent physician from Madrid, Mr. Parmly, of Bond-street, a
gentleman from Buenos Ayres, and one or two others. At
half-past one, the time fixed for the operation, the gentlemen
descended to the basement and saw the patient, and all
seemed satisfied that she was soundly asleep.

Dr. Bodinier now stated, in French, that the operation
to be performed would not be a brilliant or rapid one ; that
in extirpating tumors from the parotid region the patient was


More Surgical Operations without pain. 211


often deformed for life by the division of the facial nerve, and
that to avoid this, instead of commencing the incision at the
lobule of the ear, he should begin half an inch below it, and
behind the angle of the jaw. Everything being prepared,
he divided the integuments with a convex bistoury at the
point proposed, making a wound about two inches long, in
the direction of the folds of the skin, to avoid subsequent
deformity. The tumor was now dissected from its lateral
attachments, the facial nerve and the upper angle of the
wound being held upwards by a blunt hook; it was raised
from its bed, upon the carotid artery, with the blunt edges
of a pair of curved scissors, and removed from the neck ; it
was the size of a pullett’s egg. The operation lasted two and
a half minutes; there was but one opinion as to the skilful
manner in which it was performed, and the muscles of the
face were not paralized.

During this operation, I stood at the female’s head, press-
ing the tumor downward at the first incision, and afterwards
holding the blunt hook. The patient continued to sleep during
the whole of it ; there was no contortion of face, no quicken-
ing of respiration, no motion of the head or hands, but she
seemed in a placid and tranquil slumber ; and I was told by
those who examined her pulse that it was slightly slower after
than before the operation.

The tumor removed, one stitch of suture was taken, the
needle being introduced through the skin, the patient still
remaining asleep, and the wound was dressed. Dr. Bodinier
now stated that in order to spare the patient pain, she would
be kept asleep till quarter past four, when he would be happy
to see any of the gentlemen present, who might wish to see
her awakened. I left the house at half-past two, and returned
at ten minutes past four; found there, Dr. Taylor, Mr.
Parmly and several others, who were strangers. At a quarter
past four the female was aroused by Dr. B. To my inquiry
as to “ how she felt,” she replied, “rather tired, her limbs
ached.” TI asked, “If she had suffered any pain during her
sleep?” She answered “No.” “ Whether she had been
cut ?—She said “ No, the operation was to be performed the
next day,” as Dr. Bodinier had told her previously.—Showin
the tumor, I inquired “ Whether she would be willing to
have it replaced?” You can imagine her joy at finding
herself rid of her old friend, without pain and without consci-
ousness. I have seen her since the operation. The wound
has healed kindly, and she is now about the house.

Who is Dr. Bodinier? A young man of great surgical
skill, who has been able by his learning and attainments to


212 More Surgical Operations without pain.


bear off the honours of the profession at Paris, where every
thing is thrown open to talents, and neither wealth, family
influence, nor religious creed avails one anything; where
“ Palmam qui meruit, ferat” is the motto, and it is carried
out by the system of public concours, which places every
candidate for appointment to a hospital or professorship in
his true position. Dr. B. has been so fortunate as to have
been connected as an interne with the Hospital St. Louis—
which contains 1000 beds, the Hospital la Charité with 700
beds, the Hospital la Pitié with 800 beds, and that noble
charity the Hotel Dieu, the scene of Dupuytren’s fame.

He has invented an instrument for the removal of cataract
which has been favourably received by the Academie Royale
de Medicine, and has been much commended in Germany
and England, and with it he has operated for cataract more
successfully than any other surgeon. In 1842, he obtained
a medal at Paris, and since that time has published several
memoirs in the annals of the scientific societies of that great
metropolis, which are highly creditable to him. He now
comes to pitch his tent amongst us, and his skill and talent
entitle him to our friendly consideration.

Yours respectfully,
A. Sipney Doang, A. M. M. D.
Commercial Gazette, New York.


There is also an account in the Davenport Gazette, Towa,
of Feb. 20, 1845. .

We have heard that a very interesting operation has been
performed, two or three days ago, on a young woman, a
chamber-maid, in a well-known family in Chambers-street.
She had a tumor in the neck, increasing daily. Dr. Bodinier,
who visited the family, happening to notice the infirmity of
the girl, proposed to remove the tumor, and to save her the
pain of the operation, he offered to perform it during the mag-
netic sleep, as he had already done successfully (in two other
surgical operations,) last June, in Paris. His offer being
accepted, the girl proved to be a good subject for that state
of singular sleep—into which she was put without much
difficulty at the first trial. In order to secure as much success
as possible she was previously put to sleep about ten times,
for an hour or two each time, every other day. On the day
appointed for the operation, some twelve or fourteen of our
most distinguished surgeons and physicians, among whom
were Doctors Valentine Mott, John W. Francis, E. Delafield,
J. Kearney Rodgers, A. Sydney Doane, Nelson, Taylor, Alfaro,
of Madrid, L. Parmly, and others of equal standing, were


More Surgical Operations without pain. 213


invited to attend. The girl was put to sleep at half-past one
o’clock in the morning, in the presence of Doctor Doane
(No. 32, Warren-street) and a few other persons, and in a
very short time she was in a complete state of insensibility.
At half-past one o’clock, all the doctors above named being
present, Dr. Bodinier performed the operation, which lasted
about three minutes during which the girl did not show the
least sensibility ; nor could the least contraction be seen on
her face, or any part of her body; she was exactly like a
corpse. All being completed, the girl was left asleep for two
hours longer, and then, in the presence of five or six of the
above-mentioned doctors, she was in less than three minutes
awakened from the most profound sleep.

When she was first asked how she felt, she said she was
tired of having remained so long in the same position, but
she seemed to be unconscious of what had taken place until
she was shown the tumor which had been extracted, and
which was about the size of a pullet’s egg. It was some
minute or two before she began to feel the itching of the
wound. She was perfectly well, except exhibiting a state of
feebleness produced by the loss of blood. We are told that,
since this time, she has been without pain from the wound.

This is, we believe, the first regular surgical operation
performed in this city during the magnetic sleep.


III. Removal of another Tumor from the Neck of an elderly
Medical Man.


A marvellous story of a surgical operation, performed in
the case of a magnetised person, is related in the Cleveland
Plain Dealer. The Editor states that he witnessed, on the
25th of last month, a most difficult operation, performed by
Professor Ackley, assisted by Professors Delamater, Kirkland,
and others, before a class of students, at the Cleveland Me-
dical College. The patient was a Dr. Shriever, from Colum-
biana County, Ohio, quite an elderly man. It was an opera-
tion for tumor, situated under the lower jaw and partly in
the neck, near the right ear. In reference to the proceed-
ings of the operator, the Plain Dealer has the following
statement :—

We happened to arrive just as the Professor was putting
his knife to the skin. He made two or three frightful
gashes, seemingly cutting the throat, and not a muscle of
the old man was observed to move. We were astonished,
and we think the whole medical class, and even the faculty
were not less so. The secret was—the patient was in a


214 More Surgical Operations without pain.


magnetic sleep. This fact, of course, was known by the
Professors, but not by the spectators generally. There stood
by the bleeding patient (not sufferer) the magnetizer, wlio,
with the magic of Mesmer, had thrown his subject into
pleasant dreams, and now, while the knife of the bold sur-
geon was dashing away at his vitals, and dripping with gore
at his throat, he could say to the trembling nerves, “ be still,”
and all was quiet !

No agonizing groans were heard, as is usual from the
conscious patient, to alarm and terrify the operator ; but he
went quietly on, without haste, and consequently with better
effect. It lasted some fifteen minutes, during which time
there were frequent consultations among the Professors, as it
proved to be a malignant case. It caused a frightful wound
and a profusion of blood. The patient was removed to ano-
ther room, still unconscious of pain and the operation ; and
when we left he was assuring the magnetizer that he felt
quite happy.— Morning Courier, Montreal, May 31, 1844.


IV. Extraction of Teeth in the Mesmeric State.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—I beg to offer to your notice, and if you think fit
for insertion, the following case.

1. Miss C— had suffered from a spinal complaint for ten
years, and the powerful remedies used to facilitate a cure,
acting upon the teeth and gums, caused intense suffering,
and finally decay of almost all, and loss of many of the
molars: the pressure being transferred to the incisors, they
were soon reduced to stumps, and mastication being imprac-
ticable, indigestion followed as a matter of course.

The case growing serious, it was determined to have re-
course to artificial substitutes, to do which, with accuracy,
it was requisite to remove fen teeth and stumps, and that
the operation might be done without pain, Dr. Elliotson
recommended that Mr. Purland should be applied to for
assistance.

The result is as follows :—

April 4, 1845. Mesmerised for the first time. In five
minutes there was a quivering and moving upwards of the
eye-ball, in two minutes more the lids fell; the head went
gently backwards, and volition appeared to be destroyed, the
arms falling heavily if raised. In five minutes she sat up
and began to talk, said she saw the magnetizer, and a beauti-


More Surgical Operations without pain. 215


ful waving light—2dluish ; felt sparks when touched ; could see
the fingers if passed before her closed eyes; felt the hand
hot, but was very easy and comfortable.

Continued to mesmerise her daily, till Wednesday the 16th,
during which the same state was induced, with occasional in-
sensibility of only a few minutes duration; manifested the
sympathy of taste with extraordinary precision, and is clair-
voyant, seeing, or rather knowing, how many persons are in
the room, and if any are strangers ; discerning objects at the
top and back of the head, and reading fluently ordinary sized
print with the eyes closed; one strange fact occuring, viz.,
the book being royal octavo, The People’s Phrenological Jour-
nal, the finger was moved along the lines, within six lines of
the bottom of the double columns, while she read correctly
the lines at the top of the page.

Finding the patient had no recollection of anything which
occurred during the mesmeric sleep, we determined to com-
mence the operation, and on—

Wednesday, April 16. I extracted the stumps of two
bicuspidati right, inf. max.; right lateral; and stump of
canine sup. max.

Thursday, 17. Second molar right, and second molar
left, sup. max. (These two teeth are very formidable, the
fangs being much hooked and divergent.)

The patient having to see company on the 18th, on—

Saturday, 19. I extracted two centre incisors; left la-
teral; and stump of left canine, sup. max.

In all ren! four stumps and six teeth.

At first it was thought advisable to operate only when the
patient was, or appeared to be insensible, but, as those mo-
ments were few and far between, we resolved to proceed in
the sleep-waking state, and the result proved Mr. Vernon’s
opinion to be correct, viz., “that if the patient felt any pain,
she would not know anything about it when awakened.”
Indeed so far from feeling pain, it seemed a diversion to her,
and when demesmerised her astonishment was great on being
told she had lost four teeth !

Before closing this letter, I must remark upon the extra-
ordinary appearance of the gum the day after the operation.

I extract some thousands of teeth per annum, and in the
majority of cases the gum does not close firmly in less than
three or four days, but in this case—and it is general when
mesmerically treated—not merely closing, but positive adhe-
sion takes place in a few hours; I have extracted teeth for
persons when mesmerised, who invariably had a bad mouth
and pain for a week when the operation was performed in the


216 Dr. Busxton’s Case of the Production of Sweating.


ordinary way, but who never experienced any inconvenience
when treated mesmerically.
I have the honor to be, Sir, your obedient servant,
'  ‘'T. Purvanp,
Surgeon-Dentist to the Mesmeric Institute.


59, Mortimer-street, May 5, 1845.


( From the Times of March 24, 1845.)


2. We, the undersigned, members and visitors of the
Mesmeric Society, witnessed the extraction of a tooth from the
mouth of Anne Wakeland, by Mr. Purland, surgeon-dentist,
59, Mortimer-street, Cavendish-square, she being in a mes-
meric trance produced by Mr. W. J. Vernon; and we hereby
certify and believe that the patient did not exhibit or feel the
slightest pain during or after the operation, of which, when
awakened, she expressed her entire unconsciousness.


A. H. Forrester (Alfred Crowquill), 4, Portland-pl. North, Clapham-rd.
W.J. Vernon, 27, Duke-street, Manchester-square.

M. Bomguier, 21, Beaumont-street, Portland-place.

Henry Powell, 102, New Bond-street.

Edw. Stevens, Hermitage Lodge, North Fulham.

Emilia Hall, 27, Duke-street, Manchester-square.

A. Foureautt, 21, Beaumont-street, Portland-place.

Robert Rouse, 1, Wigmore-street.

Caroline Gould Panormo, Charlotte-street, Fitzroy-square.

George Williams, 13, Earl-street, Lisson-grove.


XIII.—Dr. Buxton’s case of the Production of Sweating by a
peculiar human influence.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


55, Wimpole-street, June 16th, 1845.

Sir,—At my request, my friend Dr. Buxton was kind
enough to draw up the accompanying letter. The subject of
it appears to me to be of great importance, as illustrating pe-
culiarities in the influences, capable of being exerted by one
living being upon another. The general physiological fact of
the influence of one nervous system upon another, acknow-
ledged by Cuvier, (Legons d’Anatomie Comparée, 1805. IX.
c., Tom. 2de., p. 117), so curiously doubted by the herd,
among the cunning practitioners of the medical art in this
accomplished, learned, and enlightened country, where many
of the chief physicians are found delighting in sneers at the


by a peculiar human influence. 217


ignorance of some who are their superiors in cerebral organi-
zation—in acquirement—and, consequently, in reasoning and
reflecting power, is ‘now pretty generally allowed by all who
have attended to mesmerism in a spirit of just philosophy.
While assent is refused to the elements of this kind of know-
ledge by those who, with sordid feelings, suppose their inter-
ests to be at stake, it is gratifying to observe that facts are
accumulating among the real lovers of science, and that a
noble disregard of self accompanies the desire of knowing
those things which may be beneficial to our fellow-beings.
The feeling pervading Dr. Buxton’s communication contrasts
well with the cunning charlatanism of the men who have de-
rided the “ impossibilities” of truth; and his proposal for the
formation of a society of perfectly candid medical practitioners,
evinces the generous and confiding tone of his own mind,
rather than a deep knowledge of Esculapian human nature.
The public announcement in the pages of The Zoist, of the
existence of the Matthei family, may lead to more exact in-
formation about these remarkable individuals; and it is to be
hoped, that facts on the varieties of mesmeric influence may
be gathered, and published to the world.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
JouHN ASHBURNER.


Dear Srr,—In investigating the effects produced by
mesmerism on patients, not one of the least interesting points
is, what classes of phenomena different mesmerisers are likely
to induce, and, consequently, whether some individuals are
not more capable of curing certain cases of disease than others.
It appears to me, that the only way this can be ascertained is,
to obtain from several a list of their mesmeric patients, with
the effects developed in each case subjoined, and then com-
pare these lists. This plan would, evidently, draw the atten-
tion to matters of the highest practical and scientific interest ;
it might be carried farther; and those who had brought for-
ward the lists might also exemplify phrenology, by adding
accounts of their respective cerebral organizations, procured
from some well-known practitioner, and by various other
means illustrate the sciences of mesmerism and phrenology.
We could not, however, expect such divulgements to appear
in print with the names appended ; it could only be done in
private. As far as I am individually concerned, I would not
object to all the facts relative to me being made public, if
such a publication could serve the cause of science.


We can, as yet, speak with so little certainty as to the
VOL. III. Q


218 Dr. Buxton’s Case of Production of Sweating,


probable results of mesmerism in various given cases, whether
it will cure, palliate, or produce no effect; whether it will re-
quire a longer or shorter time, or will, before curing, first
apparently aggravate the symptoms; or whether some other
mesmeriser than the one selected is more fitted to undertake
the case—that it makes me very desirous of seeing the sub-
ject taken up by a number of persevering professional men
conjointly, who might meet and report to each other the dif-
ferent cases which have come under their notice ; in fact, that
a medical mesmeric society should be constituted, having for
its object the investigation of the remedial powers of mes-
merism. I believe that if such a society were well established,
it would tend to elucidate this abstruse and nascent science
more than all the efforts of any single individual, however
talented.

Allow me to append to these remarks the following ac-
count of Matthei and his father, concerning whom I received
these details while travelling in Germany in October, 1842.

The father was a shepherd, living near Arnstadt, in the
dukedom of Schwarzburg, Sondershausen, and found by
some chance, according to his son’s account, that he could
produce in diseased animals profuse sweating and other symp-
toms of nervous agitation, as trembling and evident anxicty,
by some manipulations. After having cured cattle of various
disorders, he grew bolder, and succeeded in inducing similar
effects in man, and in curing patients of different complaints.
Of course his fame spread, and he has sometimes performed
his manipulations on a hundred persons in one day without
feeling exhausted. What manipulations he resorted to, I did
not ascertain. These facts I obtained from Drs. Niebergall
and Franke, then in practice in Arnstadt, both of whom had
bestowed attention on this subject. °

It had also been investigated by a deputation from the
government of the dukedom, who had given the man leave to
practice this plan of treatment. The two gentlemen I have
mentioned (on whom I called separately) said they had often
seen Matthei (the son) practise it, the only thing he did
being to take the hands of the patient in his own for about
one or two minutes. A very profuse perspiration was sure to
commence in about a quarter of an hour afterwards. How
he could induce it, they could not discover; they said the
only thing they observed about him unusual, was a certain
atmosphere, with a somewhat unpleasant odour, but did not
know whether this had anything to do with his power or not.

They told me he has cured or much relieved numerous
cases of chronic rheumatism, gout, and dropsy, but that


by a peculiar human influence. 219


some cases of nervous derangement and paralysis from apo-
plexy had become worse under his care, and that other crises
frequently occurred as well as perspiration, such as diuresis.

Very much wishing to see these wonderful effects myself,
I shortly afterwards went to Dessau. In my way I meta
student of Jena, who gave me a similar account, and said
that he once went to Matthei for a severe tooth-ache. Matthei
only took his hands for about two minutes, and then desired
him to withdraw. In about a quarter of an hour he began
to perspire exceedingly, and so continued for five hours.
Such a sweating he had never experienced, though exceed-
ingly fond of fencing and other active exercises. The tooth-
ache was cured.

At Dessau I went to Matthei’s residence. He is quite in
humble circumstances, and to my disappointment found that
he was then at Madgeburg, some 60 miles off, attending a
patient there. I saw, however, his wife, son and daughters,
all of whom, they told me, could exercise similar power. I
begged the son, a young man of about 20, to produce the
effects upon me; but he declined attempting, saying they
could not be induced upon a person in vigorous health. They
shewed me numerous certificates of cures of various diseases,
bearing the stamps and seals of different governments, Hesse
Cassel, Dessau, Schwarzburg, Sondershausen, &c., and gene-
rally referring to cases of gout, rheumatism, palsy, &c. They
assured me they could affect one another, e.g. if one of them
had a bad cold, one of the others would throw the former into
a violent perspiration simply by taking hands for two minutes,
and thus enable the patient to recover speedily. They said
they could not inform me how it was they had such power—
that they had no secret, but regarded it as a special gift from
heaven; and that Matthei’s wife had acquired it since her
marriage. Matthei had exercised this since the same event,
25 years ago. He is short, plain, and not at all remarkable
for personal strength. He had often “shaken hands” with
above 100 patients a day ; once or twice with as many as 200,
but this weakened him, causing him to spit blood and feel


exceedingly spent. Unbelief makes no difference in the
effects.


Should this be an instance of mesmeric influence, and I
do not see why it should not be so considered, I think it
alone will demonstrate that different mesmerisers are endowed
with very different powers, as there is not, to my knowledge,
any one who would lay claim to such a diaphoretic power as
that above described. He does not appear to have any un-

Q2


220 Some of the higher Phenomena of Mesmerism,


usual soporific power, as in only two of all his numerous pa-
tients was sleep the result of their visit. I very much ques-
tion whether he knew anything more of mesmerism than the
name.

I remain, dear Sir,
Brownlow Street, Yours very truly,
10th June, 1845. Joun Buxton.


XIV. A Case shewing some of the higher Phenomena of
Mesmerism. By Mr. Jaco.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


S1r,—I beg to forward you the following case which I received from
Mr. Jago, with permission to send it to The Zoist if I thought proper.
I remain, &c.
June 20th. Joun EL.iotson.


Bodmin, May 9, 1845.
TO JOHN ELLIOTSON, ESQ., M.D.


Sr1r,—I have much pleasure in sending you, for publica-
tion in The Zoist, the following statement of a cure of mes-
merism, of which Mr. Norway informs me you have already
had some account. I am glad that an opportunity of making
this case properly known has presented itself, because con-
siderable misapprehension exists in the minds of many who
have heard but little about the matter. In a provincial paper
it was stated, “that the young lady while in the mesmeric
sleep conversed fluently with me in French, though she had
never learnt that language.” How far this is true will be
seen. Mesmerism is so wonderful that it requires no exag-
geration.

My endeavour has been to state facts as they have been
found, and to avoid as much as possible any thing which
might be considered hypothetical, The readers of The Zoist
will be able to judge for themselves, now that all the circum-
stances are placed before them. I think it but fair to state
that I am much obliged to Miss D. for her kindness in con-
senting to the publication of her name with this case. It
would much benefit mesmerism if her example were more
generally followed. I cannot do better than give you the
particulars as they are set down in my note-book.

Miss Hannah Dennis, temperament nervous and sanguine,
nervous predominating; head well formed and rather large.


by Mr. Jago. 221


The organs most developed are Benevolence, Conscientious-
ness, and Adhesiveness ; they are very large. Veneration,
Cautiousness, and the intellectual and perceptive faculties
large; Firmness, Love of Approbation, and Self-esteem full ;
has been mesmerised twice before by Mr. S——w, who was
here some time ago. This gentleman, who is a most powerful
mesmerist, put her to sleep the very first time in three or four
minutes.

Miss D.’s health is at present very good indeed, the
violent and long-continued head-aches with which she used
to be afflicted have entirely left her since she has been mes-
merised. Her susceptibility to the mesmeric influence is
most marvellous; she generally becomes deeply mermerised
in half a minute, sometimes in fifteen seconds. The slightest
touch of the finger, or merely pointing at the distance of
half an inch from any of the phrenological organs is sufficient
to produce the corresponding manifestations.

The second time that she was mesmerised by me, she was
conscious of every thing that was doing.

Her description of what she felt on that occasion is rather
remarkable. The following are her replies to questions I
have asked her :—

“Why did you not laugh and open your eyes when they
tried to make you do so?”

“JT wished to laugh but could not,—it seemed as if I
could exert no will of my own,—I could do nothing but sit
still.”

“How could you tell what was doing around you while
your eyes were closed ?”

“T don’t know, but I could tell every thing that was
doing, I could hear the slightest sound, my head seemed so
clear.”

“Did you perceive me touching your head while you
were in that state ?”

“ Yes ? 2”?

“If you were conscious of all that passed around you,
what was the reason that, when I touched your head, you
lifted it up or leant it towards me, and what caused you to
alter the expression of your countenance so frequently ?”

“That is a mystery to me. I could tell when you touched
my head, but J did not lean my head towards you or raise it ;
it seemed to do so of its own accord, without my being able to
prevent it. Once or twice I tried to speak and open my eyes
but could not,—I wished to do so very much indeed, because


Dr. came into the room at the time, and I did not like
his being there.”


222 Some of the Higher Phenomena of Mesmerism,


At another time while Miss D. was mesmerised, the
organs of Imitation and Language were excited. It was
amusing to hear the exactness with which every word, ges-
ture, or sound was imitated. She not only mimicked my-
self but those who were present. If a question were asked
her, she would repeat it; if any one coughed she did the
same, or laughed she would laugh too. If any one in the
room spoke she would repeat the words too. This is singular,
because at other times she could only hear myself. I spoke
to her in French, the imitation was exact, even in the accent
or pronunciation of any particular word. Once, while look-
ing over a pack of “ conversation cards,” I met with this Jittle
word, which I was:silly enough to learn,—


“ Notlazomanityteopixcatatyins.”


This I spoke to her, thinking that I had hit on something to
puzzle her, but I was mistaken—without any apparent effort,
and as it were mechanically, she accurately repeated every
syllable of the unmeaning word. She has since told me she
never heard or saw the word before.

It will be said that any one could do these things though
not mesmerised, but the following results cannot be so ex-
plained away.- While her eyes were still closed, and my
finger on Imitation, I placed one of my hands in such a posi-
tion that she could not see it, and moved my finger and
thumb as if snapping them, this was imitated, and when I
silently moved my lips she did so too. On awaking her scon
after, she declared that she knew nothing of what had passed.
I have frequently, when waking her, demesmerised her head
and chest only. On these occasions she would sit very
quietly looking around and conversing with the rest. On
being asked to rise from her seat she expresses her surprise,
and declares that she cannot, because of the heaviness she
feels in her limbs, and she remains like one chained to the
spot. This experiment has been made repeatedly, and with
the same results on different individuals.

That to which I would principally call your attention is
the following, but before I write it I should state that my
subsequent experiments with Miss D., and with others whose
names I am not at liberty to mention, have verified the whole
of what is here asserted.

“March 7, 1845. Mesmerised Miss H. Dennis. This
experiment has succeeded better than my former ones. A
few passes from head to foot threw her into a deep mesmeric
sleep. Excited Adhesiveness by a mere touch of the finger,
the usual result immediately followed—and on laying the


by Mr. Jago. 2238


finger on Firmness, the head was raised, the hands clenched,
and the lips compressed. Excited Language, she replied to
every question I asked her. Touched Veneration and Lan-
guage together, her countenance immediately wore an inex-
pressibly solemn expression, and clasping her hands she
began to pray. Several times during this experiment I asked
her what o’clock it was, in every instance she told correctly.
If any one touched her besides her mesmeriser it seemed to
give her great pain. She could hear no one but myself speak
to her. Her mother and sister spoke to her, and tried to
make her laugh—not the slightest change of feature could be
detected. She did not hear them was the reply, when I
asked her why she gave them no answer. Excited Time and
Tune, the usual results followed. Touched Form, she began
to laugh, on removing the finger from this organ she ceased
laughing. This peculiar effect I cannot understand. In
nearly every experiment I have found that the exciting of
Form has produced laughter. Has that portion of the brain
a function differing from what is generally assigned to it?
The better experience of others will decide.

The greatest care was taken not to mention the names of
the organs as they were excited. It may be necessary to
state that Miss D. knows nothing of phrenology. Finding
that she was very deep in the mesmeric sleep, I varied m
experiment to see what other manifestations could be elicited.

A person present was asked to put something in a cup,
and without saying what it was to bring it to me in such a way
that I might look in it, but that it would be impossible for
Miss D. to see what it contained. The cup was brought on a
level with my eye. Having looked over the edge of it and
seen what was in it, I desired that it might be taken away
again; then turning to Miss D., and placing my finger on
the organ of Language, I asked her, “ What’s in that cup?’
She instantly, and without any doubtful tone of voice, said,
“Cotton.” It was a little ball of cotton.

Anxious to test this to the utmost, I asked a person to
go out of the room and put something in a cup, and bring it
to me that I only might see what was in it as before. This
was done, and the cup again placed on the table, which was
at the opposite end of the room. Turning to Miss D., I
asked her, “ What’s in it now?” ‘“ Wafers.” This was per-
fectly true. “How many are there?” “Two.” “What
colours are they?” “Green and red.” The last answer is
most extraordinary. By candle-light I thought the wafers
were a white and a red. My question was repeated, “ Are


224 Some of the higher Phenomena of Mesmerism,


you sure that one is green?” “Yes.” “Are you quite sure
of this—think?” ‘“ Yes,” she replied rather sharply. Be-
lieving that this answer was incorrect, I desired to see the
wafers again—one of them was a delicately pale green.

Astonished at these results, I requested that the cup
should be placed on the table with something in it as before,
but that neither myself nor Miss D. should be told or be
allowed to see what it contained. This was done. I then
asked, ‘‘ What’s in that cup now?” She paused as if think-
ing, and in about a minute said, “I don’t know.” “Do you
not really know—think again?” “No; I do not know.” I
now directed a person to bring the cup to me as before, that
I alone might see its contents. This was done, and in such
a manner that it was impossible for Miss D. to look ; in fact,
during the whole of this part of the experiment, her head
was leaning a little forwards and her eyes were quite closed:
Care was taken to hold the cup above the level of her forehead
each time that it was brought near me, so that had her eyes
been wide open she could not have seen what was in it.

After I had looked at what had been put in the cup, I
asked her, “ Do you know now what itis?” “Yes, itisa
thimble.” This was correct.

Supposing her by some inscrutable means to be seeing
with my eyes, I thought she might be able to describe any
object which was known to me. I therefore began to question
her about that of which I was certain she could have no pre-
vious knowledge.

“ Do you know my dressing-case?” “Yes?”

“ How many bottles are there in it?” “Two.”

“What colors are they?” “A white and a green.”

“ Are you sure that one of them is green?” “Yes.”

I had considered that bottle to be d/we, and therefore sup-
posed she had given me an incorrect reply, nor did I until
the following morning convince myself that it was green. It
is that particular shade of green which many find it diffi-
cult to distinguish from blue. Her answer was right, and
though the question was repeated three or four times she
persisted in giving me the same reply.

“ How many drawers are there in the case?” ‘ One.”

“ How many locks are there?” “Two.”

“ What sort of case is it?” ‘ Bound with brass.”

Had it been before her she could not have given a more
correct description.

The experiment was again varied, and I thought that if
my ideas were known to her it mattered not in what language
they were clothed. Guess my astonishment on finding that


by Mr. Jago. 225


she understood and replied to every thing I spoke to her in
French. To avoid my being accused of exaggeration I send
you the very conversation that took place between myself and
Miss D. while she was under the mesmeric influence.

“ Hannah, me comprenez vous quand je vous parle Fran-
cais?” = Oui.”

“ca métonne beaucoup. Je vais vous demander quelque
chose, voulez vous bien me repondre?” “ Oui.”

“ Quel age avez-vous, Hannah?” “ Vingt-deux.”’

“ Trez vous avec moi & Paris?” “ Oui, oui.”

* Trons nous demain?” “ Oui.”

Finding her answer to be with one exception constantly
the same, I endeavoured to discover whether she would by
her actions shew that she understood what was said. I was
sitting by her side.

“* Hannah, Mettez votre téte sur mon épaule.”

This request was immediately complied with.

“ Hannah, Levez votre téte, sil vous plait.”

She did so directly.

** Quelle heure est il? dites moi en Anglais”

“ Half-past nine,” she replied in English.

I varied the experiment,—

“* Aimez vous la poesie Francaise?” “ Oui.”

“ Ecoutez-moi.” I recited the following verse :—

‘* Muis cette voix et ces beaux yeux.
Font Cupidon trop dangereux,
Et je suis triste quand je crie,
Bannissons la melancolie,”’

As soon as I had finished I inquired—

“ Qu’en pensez vous, Hannah? N’est ce pas bien belle, ah !
oui, oui,” was the reply in a tone of voice full of emotion.

This was all the French that was spoken during the ex-
periment. Soon after I awoke her. She declared that she
recollected nothing that had passed while in the mesmeric
sleep. The same French verse and questions were now re-
peated to see whether she could understand them while de-
mesmerised. She declared that she neither understood the
questions nor the verse, and assured me again and again that
she never learnt a word of French in her life. On her word I
rely most confidently. I have known her for years, and am
convinced that she would not deceive me. The experiment
was an unpremeditated one, and though the results are so
startling, I do not hesitate to place them before the public.
It may please some to say that I have deceived myself, and
others less scrupulous may choose to assert that there must
have been some collusion in the matter. Taunts and ridicule


226 Case of Ellen Dawson,


I have already met with, perhaps I may have to contend with
more, but the conviction that my statements will be corrobo-
rated by other experimenters, renders me quite indifferent to
what may now be said. My only anxiety has been to give
publicity to the whole of the experiments. Apologizing for
the length of this communication,
I remain, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
Frep. W. P. Jaco.


P.S.—Since writing the above I am rejoiced to find that
my statements are corroborated by the following case in Miss
Martineau’s Letters on Mesmerism, where it is said that a
poor uneducated girl, while under the mesmeric influence,
understood any language which was spoken to her.


**On Saturday evening, when she was deep in the trance, and
therefore abundant in manifestations, a lady present took a sudden
fancy to speak to her in French, when she instantly, and as it were
mechanically, repeated in English what was said. ‘This startled all
present (four persons), for we knew that this girl had never been
taught any language. The experiment was repeated again and again,
and always with the same result. The finger of the mesmerist was
then on Imitation. When it was shifted to Language, she did not
repeat what was said, but replied to it. The lady, and a physician
present, then spoke repeatedly in Italian, and with the same results ;
and then Dr. spoke to her in German, still with the same
result.”


XV. Case of Ellen Dawson. By Mr. W. Hanns.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—Ellen Dawson, whose case I am about to relate, became
my patient in the month of May last. She was then suffer-
ing from rheumatism and hypertrophy of the left ventricle of
the heart. I prescribed for her, but after two days the spinal
chord became affected, the pulse rose to 140, the tongue
coated, and the secretions unhealthy, and she complained of
pain and numbness down the left arm. These symptoms
yielded for a time to the usual treatment, such as opium,
calomel, iodide of potash, and saline aperients. However, I
could not succeed in permanently quieting the heart, and my
patient, after enjoying an improved state of health for a short
period, gradually became worse, the hypertrophy increasing
to an alarming extent, attended with a return of the pain and
numbness down the left arm. For sometime I continued to


by Mr. W. Hands. 227


attend her; but ultimately despairing to accomplish a cure,
or even mitigate her sufferings, I recommended her removal
to an hospital. To this her father objected, and he then for
the first time made me acquainted with the following parti-
culars, namely, that his child became subject to epileptic fits
at the age of eight years, which continued at intervals for
three years, and were frequently of so violent a nature as to
deprive her of her senses for days together; that Messrs.
Walker and Young, surgeons, kindly attended her, and that
she was afterwards under the treatment of Drs. Chowne and
Goulding, of Charing-cross Hospital, who ordered her a se-
ton in the neck; subsequently she became an in-patient of
Guy’s, where she was leeched, bled, and blistered. These
painful and harassing remedies producing no permanent
benefit, the father was induced, on a friend’s representation
of the curative powers of mesmerism, to take her to the Baron
Dupotet, then in this country, who humanely undertook her
case, holding out to the father the sanguine hopes of event-
ually curing her. She accordingly became a mesmeric patient
of the Baron’s.

The father assured me that when his daughter first went
to Baron Dupotet, she was in such an extremely debilitated
state that she was obliged to ride to his house; that her fits
occurred almost every alternate day, and her intellect was
evidently becoming impaired; but after being mesmerised
three times she could walk to his house. Although the
Baron did not succeed in producing the mesmeric coma for
two months, yet her health and cerebral faculties rapidly im-
proved as the treatment proceeded. She had but two fits
whilst under his care, and those during the sleep and there-
fore unknown to herself.

When the Baron left England, the mesmeric treatment
was continued by Mrs. Hennings, of Dulwich, who had been
a frequent visitor at Baron Dupotet’s, and kindly volunteered
her services. She took the patient into her own house.

After a time Ellen’s health being sufficiently established,
she returned to her parents, who apprenticed her to the gold-
lace business, which occupation she followed until incapa-
citated by the illness for which I attended her.

On receiving the above information, I at once suggested
a return to the magnetic treatment, to which her parents
readily assented. She continued under my care, and was
mesmerised daily for about a week. Observing a progressive
improvement in the patient, I was encouraged to persevere.
It should be remarked, that before mesmerism was tried on
her, Ellen could not walk unsupported, but after the third


228 Case of Ellen Dawson,


or fourth sitting she was able to come to me unattended.
For the first fortnight she slept soundly for nearly an hour
each time, and whilst in that state the pulsations of the heart
invariably became more regular. After the fourth week her
eyes assumed a brighter appearance, and recruited health and
vigor were perceptible.

At this period I made some experiments on the cerebral
organs. To Alimentiveness, Destructiveness, and Combative-
ness she answered immediately. On one occasion, after exhibit-
ing these cerebro-mesmeric effects to several gentlemen, it was
suggested that my own thoughts might be the means of in-
ducing these phenomena; but this was conclusively disproved
by the following experiment. I requested one of my ser-
vants, who of course knew nothing of craniology, to touch
various parts of the patient’s head whilst I turned my back,
and the results were equally satisfactory. *

Ellen now began to prescribe medicines for herself, and
one evening ordered six ounces of blood to be taken from the
vein at the back of the left hand, adding, that she should
faint, and that the syncope would continue for an hour, but
we were not to be alarmed. I bled her,—but in tying up the
arm she remarked to me that only five ounces of blood had
been taken, and therefore, that she must be bled again. This
was strictly true, but I thought that the quantity I had taken
would be enough. After a time the fainting came on, and
lasted half an hour; when she recovered she scolded me for
not having done as she directed, observing, that the synvope
was not long enough, owing to my not having taken sufficient
blood.

On another occasion, after suffering from severe head-
aches for some days, she desired me to remove one of her
teeth, otherwise her fits would return. Perceiving her teeth
were too closely wedged together, I did as she wished, and
the head-ache ceased immediately, nor did she experience
any pain either in the bleeding or extraction of her tooth.

One day Ellen being in the sleep-waking state, I observed
her take up some publications which lay on the table and

* This experiment is worth something, but it by no means settles the ques-
tion. After the cerebral organs have been repeatedly excited by contact,
the same part of the head touched by any one, even a person ignorant of the
locality of the organs, may cause the manifestation of the usual phenomena.
This we should consider the result of suggestion. The proper course is to
obtain a patient ignorant of cerebral physiology, and an operator equally
ignorant—shut them in a room away from every person who knows the posi-
tion of the cerebral organs, and then observe carefully the phenomena which
result. This subject, we remember, was alluded to by Dr. Elliotson in his


address to the Phrenological Association, and it will be found in our third
number, page 241.—Zoist. .


by Mr. W. Hands. 229


read the titles of them, by which I perceived she was clair-
voyant. In order to test this faculty, I filled the tops of some
pill-boxes with cotton and tied them over her eyes with a
fillet of ribbon, taking care that the edges of the boxes should
rest upon the skin; still, she read and distinguished colours
as before. I now placed her in a room from which I had
shut out every ray of light, and then presented to her some of
the plates in Cuvier’s Animal Kingdom ; she described the birds
and beasts, and told accurately the colour of each, as I proved
by going into the light to test her statements. She also dis-
tinguished the shades and hues of silks, as indeed did her
sister, who is also clairvoyant. This fact is most important,
since it proves the Newtonian theory of the reflected rays to
be false, while that of Dr. Young is correct. Colours are per-
manent, and we become sensible of them by waves or pulsa-
tions, and they must be appreciated by a portion of brain
adapted for their reception,

I wished to try if she could become acquainted with ob-
jects at a distance, like Alexis ; and I frankly own that none
of the facts in chemistry, experimental philosophy, or physi-
ology, ever gave me such delight as I experienced on discover-
ing that she could do so.

In my imagination I /ed her to Berkeley, the locality of
my birth, and where Mrs. H. was then on a visit. This was
140 miles from Duke-street. Knowing that Ellen was at the
house by her description of it, I said, “ Let us knock at the
door and go in.” She assented. “ Now enter the dining-
room on the left.” “Yes.” I then observed her counte-
nance light up, and with a look of delight she exclaimed,
“There is Mrs. H.” I wished to know what she was doing ?
“ Playing at cards,” was the reply. “What game?” She
could not say. I find she cannot distinguish one card from
another. I now requested her to describe what she saw. “A
board,” said she, “ with holes in it, and some pegs.”” Who is
Mrs. H. playing with? “ Such a nice bonny red-faced old
man.” (I knew this to be the host of the house.) “ Who
else do you see?” “Two young ladies and a young gentle-
man.” These were the daughters and son. I now asked the
disposition of each. Ellen felt (?) their natural qualities and
correctly described them. (It cannot be said we see mental
character.) After replying to the above inquiries, Ellen sud-
denly exclaimed, “There, Mrs. H. has won the game! she is
getting up from her chair.” At this time (9 o’clock), as I
subsequently learnt, Mrs. H. did rise from her chair, saying
to her adversary, “I have beaten you completely.” I now
desired Ellen to accompany me into the churchyard. She


230 Case of Ellen Dawson,


there described several tombs which I distinctly recollected.
She expressed surprise at the tower being erected at a dis-
tance from the church, which is the case. I asked her to
enter the latter. She described the monuments, especially
those of the Berkeley family, and was vastly amused by the
carved dog at the feet of one of the recumbent figures.

I now said let us leave the church. In f¢ravelling along,
she perceived the castle. I wished her to visit it, and soon
found from her observations she had entered the hall. “Oh,
what a large room!” she exclaimed, “look at the beautiful
painted windows.” I asked what she saw at the bottom of
the hall, and she described the figures in armour, the flags,
swords, and spears collected there ; I told her to go down the
steps into the housekeeper’s room,—she there saw, or rather
felt (?), a bald-headed old man, and a woman with spectacles.
I knew these parties from the description. She now entered
the dining-room, and there saw and described each painting
it contained, particularly the one called “the Tribute Money.”
We now left the castle, to walk in the garden, where she
made her observations as she passed along. At last, looking
towards his Lordship’s stables, she inquired “ What large
house is that?” I replied, “ Let us go and see.” Journey-
ing there she exclaimed, “ We cannot cross this water.” [I
said, “ We can get over the brook by the bridge.” “Oh, I
see,” rejoined Ellen. When she had crossed it, I requested
her to enter the above-named house. Having done so, she
told me “it was full of horses.” I now led her across the
yard, and bade her observe a door. She told me it was
covered with skins. I asked “what skins?” She replied,
“ Foxes’ heads.” Well, let us open the door and goin. At
this she drew back with horror, and cried out, “ I am afraid
to go in there, for there is a bear in the corner.” Being in
this court, I wished her to go into the kennel. She again drew
back, trembled, and said, “ No, no! it is full of dogs, they
will bite me.” After I had induced her to enter, she became
pleased with the dogs, described their characters, and asked
why they were all marked with n. Those who know Berkeley
Castle must be well aware Ellen was correct in all she de-
scribed.

We now (¢ravelled into the park, she there saw the deer,
and especially remarked an old hollow tree. I asked her who
had often crept through it when a boy. She replied, “ Mr.
H.” (In the mesmeric state she always takes me for her
mother.) This I have done many hundred of times, and sat
in a portion called “ the cradle,” but the cradle is now down,
and the tree is supported by a fork of timber, which Ellen


by Mr. W. Hands. 231


noticed. We now proceeded forwards, and presently she
cried, “there is another castle!” This is a large magnifi-
cent summer-house. I asked her to describe it, she said it
had four towers. I wished her to go up one of them, and
when at the top of the stairs to look down ; she described her
journey up “as going round and round.” Those only can
duly estimate the delight she experienced on stepping out
upon the top of the turret, and seeing a splendid panorama
of the country, who, like Ellen, have been bred entirely in
London, and have never seen so magnificent a prospect. She
described and commented on the beautiful river Severn, and
said she even heard the roaring of the waters; she likewise
noticed the woods, the castle, and town, and the various ob-
jects in the distance.

A few days after this Mrs. H. returned by railway from
Bristol. One of her boxes was left behind in that city, and
she was told it should follow her by the next train, and that
it would be in town by eight o’clock. Ellen came to my
house whilst the servant was gone to inquire about the box ;
I put her in the sleep, and asked if she thought it would be
lost, or whether it would come by the eight o’clock train?
Her reply was that it would not be lost—that it would not
arrive at eight o’clock, but would come by the ten o’clock
train; that we should not receive it that night, but at break-
fast time on Sunday morning. Such proved to be the case.
She also described many of the things in the box, especially a
large doll, its dress, the colours, and even told Mrs. H. who
it was for; although she had never seen the child, but had
only been placed en rapport with her at a previous period. At
a subsequent time Mrs. H. travelled with Ellen, and led her
to a house where she had been visiting, when she questioned
her about the inmates. The clairvoyante became much in-
terested in one of the daughters, and Mrs. H. asked “ where
is that young lady’s mother?” Her countenance instantly
assumed the most striking picture of pity. She made all pre-
sent feel that grief which those only experience who have lost
a mother, and exclaimed, “ She is dead and in her grave.”

“What did she die of?”

“ Dropsy. Why did they bleed her?”

She died a few hours after the last bleeding.

Mrs. H. now led Ellen to another locality, and bade her
notice a beautiful little boy, with whom she appeared de-
lighted. On asking her where its father was, again the
same melancholy overspread her face, and in a tremulous
voice she replied,—

“ He is dead.”


232 Case of Ellen Dawson,


“ What did he die of ?”

“ Consumption.”

“ Mrs. H. said, “ Think again.”

Ellen’s face put on an appearance of fright, and she ex-
claimed, “‘ No! take away the bottle. He poisoned himself.”

He did so with prussic acid. She also remarked that had
the deceased been bled a day or two before he would not have
done it, adding, nevertheless, “ it was to be.”

I have since led the sister, Mary Dawson, to the same
subject, and she actually threw herself backward, the eyes
dilating (she never closes the eye-lids, either in the natural
or mesmeric sleep), her appearance all alarm and terror, and
she exclaimed, “ It was in this way he fell.”

On another occasion I travelled with Ellen to New York,
and in crossing the seas she described the waves, the storm,
the vessels going up and down, at one moment in sight and
then disappearing. On entering New York Harbour she
read several names of vessels, as the “ Nightingale,” ‘ Victo-
ria,” &c. I knew when she was in the Broadway by her
description of the shops having steps to go down to them, the
row of trees, the people, their dresses, and the blacks. I
wished her to go to No. 115, where my brother was lodging,
and asked what she saw in the shop, “ Pianofortes and
guitars,” by which I knew it was Dubois’s. I next desired
her to go through the various rooms, but my brother was not
in the house that night. I took her there on a subsequent
evening, and when she got into the drawing-room I asked
what she saw,—

“A gentleman,” was the reply, “it is your brother.
What a beautiful ring. How it shines.”

“ What colour is it?”

“ White and black.”

“ Which finger is it on? ”

** The forefinger.”

It was as described, a black enamelled diamond ring. By
this, and the personal description, I knew it was my brother.

I now, at random, said let us leave New York and go into
the forests and see the Indians. In ¢ravelling over the
country she became frightened at some animals. I asked
what they were like? From the description given I knew
they were buffaloes. We proceeded onwards, and presently
she came on an Indian village. She described the huts and
the dresses, and also what the Indians were doing. The men
were smoking curiously fashioned pipes—the women en-
gaged in household duties with their children at their backs.
She further described their singular cradles, and the toys the


by Mr. W. Hands. 233


the mothers hang upon them for the amusement of their off-
spring. Both the sisters afterwards travelled over the sur-
face of America, picturing passing events, and describing
various places as they journied along. Had they dwelt in the
country for years they could scarcely have done so more
vividly. It may here be well to remark that these children
are uneducated, and have never read of these places. Had
this been the case they would not have been so much taken
by surprise, nor have expressed their wonder on seeing what
they did.

On another occasion, the children being at my house, we
agreed to travel to Windsor. They described the scenery and
places on the journey, and read the different station-boards
on the railroad—made remarks on the castle—went through
the different rooms, and depicted the furniture and paintings.
After this we returned to Slough, and travelled thence to
Swinden. They still read the station-boards on the way.
At Swinden they noticed the division for the first and second
class, and named the viands and articles on the tables. Leav-
ing the place we continued our rout towards Bath, and pre-
sently I felt them both cling to me. I asked them what was
the matter? They exclaimed, “ Oh, it is so very dark and
cold. I knew by this they were then in the Box Tunnel ; and
I should add, to disarm objectors who may insist on all this
being thought-reading, that I was not then thinking of the
Tunnel; in truth, at that time I was thinking of the name of the
next station. It could not, therefore, have been my thoughts
or feelings that they reflected. Presently they cried, “ There
is the light, | am so glad we are out of that horrid place.”
Travelling onwards, they described Bath as beautifully clean
and white, remarking that the houses were not built with
bricks, but white stone. On arriving at Bristol they noticed
the contrast between those cities, the latter being both dirty
and noisy. Leaving this city for Berkeley, they saw the
station, and described the turnpike-house; and Mary, on
coming to the heath, exclaimed, ‘There is Berkeley written
on that board.” Here again I was not thinking of the sign
post.

One striking and beautiful proof of the bona fidé charac-
ter of these descriptions, is the fact, that when these children
travel to Australia, China, or other remote places in the
opposite side of the globe, they are overcome with surprise,
and express their astonishment at finding it is night and the
inhabitants in bed whilst yet it is broad day-light with us.

In the mesmeric state I have noticed in my patients, that
their notions of personal identity changes with the transition
VOL. III K


234 Case of Ellen Dawson,


from the natural to the mesmeric condition; I am therefore
obliged to introduce to them again each individual who was
present when they were magnetized on a former occasion.
Sometimes I present a person by his right name whilst they
are in the natural state, and by a feigned one when they are
sleep-waking. Under these different names they accordingly
address them ; as Mr. Smith in the one case, and Mr. Thomp-
son in the other. When mesmerised the sisters do not know
their father and mother. I have more than once seen the
parents grieved on finding their children were unable to re-
cognize them—I have five patients who pass into the clair-
voyant state, all of whom take me for their crony or gossip.
Ellen, for instance, who is timidity personified, calls me
mother; but Mary, who has a large brain and who has a
strong liking for her father mistakes me for him.

It is indeed amusing to hear them altercate about my
identity and my clothes (for though they mistake my person
they know my apparel); the one wondering why her mother
and the othcr why her father, should wear Mr. Hand’s dress
and be at his house. It is most interesting to observe how
beautifully refined the feelings become,—how alive to intel-
lectual impressions,—how observant of truth,—how sensible
of politeness,—and how great the delicacy and modesty of
patients in the magnetic sleep.

Another curious phenomenon is, that if any one she
knows, or has been placed en rapport with, will breathe even
at a distance on a piece of paper, she can correctly tell me
who has done this, or whose likeness it is; although weeks
may have passed since she was in magnetic communion with
the individual. I have tried this many times; the last expe-
riment was with a Miss B , of Kensington. A week had
elapsed since she had breathed on the paper, yet the clair-
voyant instantly recognized and named the party.

With the relation of the following extraordinary circum-
stances I shall conclude this communication. On a future
occasion I will forward to you some other details of this
interesting case.

Some time after Dr. Davy had left England, I wished
Ellen Dawson to follow him on his voyage to Ceylon, but I
experienced some difficulty in placing her en rapport with him.
I first directed her attention to Hanwell and then induced her
to enter that part of the edifice formerly occupied by Dr. D.,
and from her description of himself and family, particularly
the twins, his two youngest children, I knew she was in
affinity with them. From this place we travelled to Gravesend,
where he embarked, and having desired her to follow the ship,


by Mr. W. Hands. 235
she complied, and after a short time she exclaimed, “Oh, I
see them, how the wind blows.” Ellen felt (?) the waves,
and passed her observations on the storm,—she described
other vessels in the Bay of Biscay, labouring through the
sea—now in sight and then disappearing. She said that
Dr. D. was very ill from the effects of the pitching of the
ship; and observed that she could hear the captain swearing,
&c. I asked if they would ride out the gale in safety? She
said, “ Yes, but they are very frightened and do not think
so,—How I pity those two dear little children.”

On a subsequent evening we again ¢ravelled out to sea,
stopping at St. Helena. Ellen pictured the island to me. I
wished her to follow in the wake of the packet. This night
they were off the Cape in an awful storm—she said the cap-
tain was in a dreadful passion again, that she heard him
swearing, and then called him a brute. She said the ship
had been taken aback, that the mast had fallen overboard,
that the windows had been beaten in by the sea, and that the
water had entered the cabin. She described Mrs. D. as
clinging to the children, and expecting to be drowned every
minute. I enquired what she thought would be the result?
Ellen replied after a time, “ The vessel will be blown away
for six weeks—but they will at last arrive safely.”

Some weeks after this they were becalmed, and Ellen
remarked how hot the weather was, and that they were short
of water. I again asked if they would arrive in safety; she
replied, “Yes, but with a great deal of difficulty.” On
another occasion I led Ellen to Ceylon, and found that they
had landed, and were then at breakfast. She noticed the
difference of time and described the servants, &c., &c.

Some weeks after this Miss Davy, Dr. Davy’s sister,
called at my house, and was expressing her anxiety at not
having heard from her brother. I told her not to be uneasy
for I knew that Dr. Davy was safely housed at Colombo. I
then related to her what Ellen had said—she laughed at the
statement—and here the subject ended. Shortly Miss Davy
received a letter from Dr. Davy, the contents of which sur-
prised her, for all that Ellen had stated was found to be per-
fectly correct.

The following is an extract from Miss Davey’s note to
Mr. Hands, communicating the arrival of her brother at
Ceylon.


‘They had a dreadful passage. In the first place, in the Bay
of Biscay they were in a storm for nine days, and fully expected to
be lost. When they reached the Cape of Good Hope they expe-
rienced dreadful weather, and were driven in all directions for siz
R2


236 Ellen Dawson’s Cerebral Sympathy,


weeks. The main-mast was lost—the cabin windows driven in, and
their clothes during the whole of this time were wet, in fact they
were in the greatest danger. By the time they approached their
destination they were becalmed for several days, their provisions
failed them, and each person was limited to a pint of water. When
they left the ship they were nearly lost, for they were exposed for
several hours in a small boat and at last landed with the greatest
difficulty 80 miles from Colombo.”
I remain, Sir,
Your obedient Servant.

W. Hanps.

23, Duke Street, Grosvenor Square.


XVI. Ellen Dawson’s Cerebral Sympathy, by the Honourable
Miss Boyle.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—I beg to forward you the following letter, which I have received
from the Honourable Carolina Courtenay Boyle, Maid of Honour to the
Queen Dowager.

I remain, Sir, &c. &c.,
Joun Extrotson.
Beckett, Farringdon,
Jan. 24th, 1845.

Dear Sr1r,—I hasten to thank you for your recommend-
ation to Mr. Hands, and to tell you that we made an agree-
ment for his attendance on the lady whom I mentioned to
you as still labouring under that fearful disease hypochondria.
You must allow me further to trespass on your valuable time,
as I am very anxious to give you some account of the clair-
voyance of Mr. Hands’ patient, Ellen Dawson, who is now
under his care for disease of the heart. The first day I called
upon Mr. Hands, after we had made our arrangements for
the new patient, our conversation turned upon mesmerism
generally. He asked me if I had ever seriously considered
the subject. I told him that about eleven years ago I became
interested about it, in consequence of hearing a remarkably
clever and deep-thinking person affirm it to be “ an indispu-
table fact that such an agency exists,—that a few years would
prove its great practical advantages,—and that then all honest
doubt must fade away under its beneficial and blessed results.”
Since that time I have given up much of my time to the se-
rious and careful examination of this deeply interesting
subject.

Mr. Hands asked me if I had ever been placed en rapport
with a clairvoyant. I told him never satisfactorily, but that


by the Honourabte Miss Boyle. 237


I much desired an opportunity, and only waited until I could
name my own time and select my audience, being generally
disgusted with public mesmeric exhibitions, where so many
fools go to mock at that which they have never seriously con-
sidered or endeavoured honestly to understand, and where
they so much oftener prove their own ignorance and preju-
dice than the failure of the persecuted clairvoyant. How
much better were they calmly to investigate the truth of a
subject so fraught with interest to their fellow-creatures! On
Monday last then I repaired to Duke Street, where I found
a young, pale, sickly-looking girl, with whom I immediately
shook hands. Mr. Hands withdrew about three or four yards,
gazed earnestly, and pointed at Ellen, who sat in an arm-
chair close to the window, and in less than three minutes
she was in a mesmeric sleep. Mr. Hands now placed my
hand in her’s, and after a few minutes had passed, the fol-
lowing conversation commenced :—

“ Ellen, do you like to hold my hand, which is so very
cold?” “Oh yes, do let me keep it in mine, I like so very
much to hold your hand, if you like me to do so.”

“ Have you ever been to France?” “No, never.” “ Well
suppose you and I travel to Normandy; I went there last
year.” “Oh did you? yes, so you did.” (Here Mr. Hands
remarked to me, “ You had better as it were travel the road
with her, to ascertain if she is actually there with you.”)

“ Now then, Ellen, to Havre.” Ellen, though with great
hesitation, accurately described to me the Hotel de l’Europe
there, the person sitting in the bureau, the horses in the
stable within the court, close to the back staircase and kit-
chen. I must here remark, that I was very eager to question
her about Rouen, and therefore hurried her, being in no way
interested in this part of her description. So we went on by
the steamer to that place, and from the inn there to a church,
and thus the dialogue continued.

“ Well, Ellen, here we are at a beautiful church,—let us
go into my favourite church: I have seen many, but none
that I ever admired like this.” “So it is beautiful—oh such
beautiful long aisles: stop, and I will tell you all about it.
Oh! how beautiful those three very long aisles are—there are
three all alike, as I see them—and so high! And now I can
see into a font—a large sort of basin.”

“A font, Ellen? What is that for?’ “ Why on the
right-hand side going in, and close to a pillar: it is where
people put in their hands and take up water and cross them-
selves. O! how curious !”

“What do you see so very curious, Ellen?” “Why I


238 Ellen Dawson’s Cerebral Sympathy,


can see in the basin the whole church reflected: how very
odd.” “Yes, that is odd, Ellen; nevertheless, it is perfectly
true: and now, to oblige me, do not answer too fast—you
must think before you speak. Are there any people in the
church, Ellen?” “No: oh yes, there is a little boy.”

“ What is he doing?” “ Why he is standing by a chair
near a pillar, with a rope in his hand.” “ How is he dressed ?”
“ All in white.” “ What is he?” “I think he helps the
priest.” You are quite right, I am so much pleased with
you.” “ You ask him why he does not pull the rope and toll
the bell: he says the priest calls, and you say you will toll it
for him if he will let you.” “ And what does he say to that ?”
“ He smiles, and now he gives you the rope and shews you
how to spring up and down on the chair to toll the bell ; and
now he goes away.” “What now?” (Laughing) “ Why
you do spring up and toll the bell so well, it strikes out so
loud.” “ Strikes what?” “ Why twelve o’clock.” “What
nonsense,—a lady strike twelve o’clock by tolling a church-
bell at Rouen!” “And so you do, to oblige the boy, and it
amuses you very much too, you know it does; and why
not ?”

“ You are quite right; now let us goon.” “The boy is
come back and takes you into a sort of hall, not large: there
are two men, one is in black, one shews you the church
dresses,—oh, how very beautiful! I see red and yellow and
gold—such stiff silks, they quite stand up alone when you
make them. And now you look at the wardrobe, and you
admire it so much.” ‘“ What nonsense, Ellen ; one wardrobe
is surely very much like another, is it not?” “Not this
wardrobe, for the shelves are pulled round in a curious way
before they are taken out ; there it stands against the wall,
and the man has found it in a drawer.” “ What has he
found?” Here Ellen paused and said, “‘ Well, I cannot see
what,—oh yes, now I do, a red powder ; he takes it out of a
drawer and he gives it to you. I see something silver with
long chains, and there the priest takes it up. He is standing
with something else in his hand.” “Let us go nearer. I
wish very much you would tell me at once what he has in his
hand.” “ Well then I can only tell you it is something white
and flat; and now he puts a little laced handkerchief over
the cup, over the top part.” ‘ But look, what does he hold
in his hand? I will know: did you ever see anything like it
onacake?” “ Yes, to be sure, on the bottom of an almond
cake, only larger, like a very large white wafer.”” (This was
the Sacristy, into which I had been invited by Mon. le Curé,
and everything the girl described was accurate: the priest


by the Honourable Miss Boyle. 239


was preparing the bread and wine for the mass. I went alone
to the church of St. Owen, and I left the church alone.
“Now, if you like, we will go to my home in Somerset-
shire. Have you ever been to Bath?” “TI can see Bath; it
is such a pretty place,—all those houses are so very pretty.”
“ Now we are at the White Hart Hotel, and there is a car-
riage to take us by a very beautiful road and along some
lanes to my house, and through a little park.” (Eagerly)
“Oh! the dogs, that dear great dog.” “ What dogs?”
“Why your dog—there he is at the door. (Ellen was in
great glee, and quite like a happy child.) He is so glad to
see you: how he does jump at your face—how large he is—
and how he follows you!” “Yes, Ellen, up to my room,
does he not?” “Yes. Oh! what a pretty room it is.”
“ What do you see in it? ‘Tell me all about it.” “A ward-
robe ; it stands just as you go into the room: it is a high
wardrobe, with clothes in the drawers.” “No, Ellen, there
I think you are wrong; I think they were all taken out the
morning I came away.” (However, my maid here made me
a sign that Ellen was right.) “ But there are only clothes in
the drawers ; I see something red in the closet part of the
wardrobe—yes, it is lined with red, and there are colours :
and there | can see a tall white figure standing.” ‘“ How is
the figure standing?” “ Like this’—(and here Ellen rose
from the chair, and put herself in the exact attitude of the
statue in my wardrobe. I was then at a loss to know what
she meant by colours; however, when I reached home, I
found Ellen was right there—by the statue was a purple, red,
yellow, blue, and green box, which I had quite forgotten.)
“What are the colours of my curtains?” ‘ Why the bed
curtains are striped green, and so are the window curtains,
and I see red chairs. I can’t see all the things at once.
There is what looks like a very odd bookcase lined with dark
red outside.” (The case is carved, and shews the lining
through the open gothic work.) “ What books are in it ?”
“No books at all. Oh! how many things there are on the
mantel-shelf.” “But what do you see in my bookcase?”
“Tt is not a bookcase, it opens, and there I see a white
figure which looks just like a baby in a night shift, a long
loose dress ; yet it cannot be a baby’s figure, because there
it has a coronet on its head and flat hair.” “Is that then in
the bookcase? I wish you would attend.” (Ellen thinking)
“Yes, it is.’ “Well now you are quite wrong.” “ Well let
me see again. Oh! no, (eagerly) the baby stands up to the
right of the bookcase: and now I can see a sort of a bust of
a young lady.” “ How is her hair done?” “Flat: oh no,


240 Ellen Dawson’s Cerebral Sympathy.


that’s the figure to the right,—it’s done in thick bushy curls
off the forehead: she has a glove on, and there is gold and
colours close by.” Ellen was right, the baby figure, as she
called it, is even with and on the right of the carved case, and
represents St. Margaret in a long loose robe fastened at the
throat, very much like a child’s night-gown ; she has a coro-
net on her head ; her hair is flat. The oak case contains a
bust of my’ only sister, exactly as Ellen described it: the co-
lours are letters on a gold ground, and my sister’s shield em-
blazoned with the Boyle and Courtenay arms, red, white and
yellow.

Ellen was evidently puzzled with the number of things
on and around the chimney-piece, and could not at first, or
until my will became very strong, decide as to their actual
relative position. We then went to the window, and she told
me the dogs were at play on the lawn. She described the
Scotch terrier accurately, likewise my sister’s and brother’s
two fawn-colored greyhounds.

We then went to the cottages in the village. She there
described a lunatic chained, and an epileptic patient, and
told me in detail how to cure each, and in what manner I
should get the lunatic sufficiently tranquil to be mesmerised.
She also told me of a conversation | held eleven years ago in
the church of Santo Spirito at Florence ; described the person
I was there with, and who has never been in England, and
what objects (some of which were peculiar, and which she was
a long time making out or seeing, as she told me) were around
us at the time.

Strange, passing strange, I admit; nevertheless, strictly
true, I most solemnly declare. Ellen Dawson’s discrepancies
were those of one anxious to tell all, yet speaking too eagerly
to be quite accurate ; besides which, she invariably corrected
herself, and her details were then strictly true.

And now, my dear sir, I will conclude. I could tell a
great deal more, yet scarcely, if anything, “ more strange,
more true,” than that I have already told. All I will add,
is, that I trust I have interested you whilst I have so long
trespassed on your time. If I did not believe in Ellen
Dawson’s clairvoyance, I could never again hope to believe in
the evidence of my own senses, as no truth ever came home
to me in so forcible a manner. I need not assure you that
my maid was never out of my sight from the moment we
entered Mr. Hands’ dwelling; she was never there before,
neither has she at any time spoken one word to the girl.
Ellen was unwilling I should leave her, but I had no more
time to spare. I had passed two hours and a half with her,


by the Honaurable Miss Boyle. 241


and I left the house more than ever satisfied of the truth of
mesmeric clairvoyance, and determined to bear my testimony
to its wonderful power. Sincerely wishing your life may
long be spared to work out your benevolent purpose of restor-
ing the afflicted, and persuading others to apply the same
means for their restoration,
I remain, very sincerely,
Your obliged friend,
Carouina Courtenay Boy.e.


XVII. Dr. Forbes’s struggle against “The pressure from
without.”


In resuming our notice of the article on mesmerism, in the
April number of the British and Foreign Medical Review, we
believe we cannot begin better than by comparing it with the
previous article in the same journal in April, 1839.

According to this authority in 1839, animal magnetism
was a thing of the past, an idle, empty juggle, the offspring
of knavery and credulity, which, after appearing for a time,
to dazzle and bewilder hysterical females and fashionable
ennuyés in search of a sensation, had disappeared to make
room for some newer folly; and, having passed entirely from
the scene, was only worthy of notice because its brief history
offered some psychological curiosities, and presented some
instructive as well as amusing examples of the gullibility of
the ignorant unscientific public. We discover no trace of
even a latent suspicion that the whole affair was anything
more than a gross delusion, mixed up with which there might
perhaps be discovered a few of the phenomena of nervous
and hysterical disease. There seems to be no doubt on the
mind of the writer that, for a time, at least, and as far as
regards England, the delusion had been dispelled ; and the
position assumed is that of an historical critic, passing un-
qualified sentence of condemnation upon a system of fraud
and absurdity, which, being broken up, had left the dis-
abused public mind in a fit condition for receiving a lecture
upon its too easy credulity. ‘There must surely,” says the
writer in one of his opening paragraphs,

“‘There must surely be a sufficient number of persons of sane
mind in the profession who have thought as we have thought, to
exempt us from the suspicion of affecting wisdom after the fact,
when we say that from the first dawn of these diverting but degrad-


i


Be or a ee


242 Dr. Forbes's struggle against


ing scenes to the last, from the first burst of blank surprise in the
good unscientific public of this country, through all the phases of
advancing credulity among the more scientific, down to the last com-
plete and melancholy explosion, we have never varied from a most
hearty, entire, and unconcealed disbelief of very nearly all the phe-
nomena exhibited by all the patients, and related by all the practi-
tioners without exception. Several were plainly referrible to the
boundless singularity of nervous and hysterical malady, and many
were as evidently feigned. That there was gross deception some-
where we were always sure, the only doubt we had was as to the
precise point where the deception began. We beheld always with
astonishment, sometimes with concern, and sometimes with con-
tempt, the credulity, real or pretended, of the magnetizers. We
observed, with some little disgust, here and there a practitioner
willing to become the provincial wonder, and only restrained by his
prudence from declaring what a mixture of ignorance and cupidity
prepared him to assert and to do. But above all we lamented to see
the great delusion supported by one of the ablest physicians of this
country, filling the most important chair in the largest medical school
of the kingdom.*


To shew how different is the tone of the later article, we
extract a passage, also from the opening paragraph.


‘* Animal magnetism, however encompassed with error,”’ is ‘ the
abuse of a truth, rather than an absolute fiction.” ‘‘ Mesmerism
has hardly received fair play at the hands of many of our professional
brethren, or in the pages of some of our contemporaries.” “Its
pretensions to some extent, however, are too well supported both
by the number and the respectability of the witnesses to justify an
opposition made up almost exclusively of ridicule and conteinpt.
Preposterous enough doubtless are many of the statements we are
doomed to encounter in the perusal of mesmeric books, yet some of
the facts recorded in these publications, and seemingly well authen-
ticated, possess a wide range of interest regarded in many points of
view. But independently of this, when it is considered that men
like Cuvier, La Place, Hufeland, and Treviranus, have not refused
their testimony as to the reality of some of the facts of mesmerism,
we hardly think it right to dispose of the whole question, unex-
amined by the facile process of a self-complacent poo, poo!+”


The first question that suggests itself on comparing these
passages, is, whence this change? The great names quoted
have not been arrayed on the side of mesmerism since 1839.
Of the list of works placed at the head of the later article,
most are of a date prior to and some even noticed in the ear-
lier. We have had no special visitation to convince us of our
error. No new theory has been developed, by which the


* See British and Foreign Medical Review for April, 1839, p. 304.
t See Mesmerism True, Mesmerism False, p. 6.


“ The pressure from without.” 243


modes of mesmeric action have been made clear; no new
facts, by which the existence of the mesmeric medium can
be more satisfactorily demonstrated. To the mere literary
critic, pronouncing a judgment, not from his own experience,
but from the collected evidence of others, we know of no
speciality which places mesmerism in a different position now
to that which it occupied in 1839. Nothing that can render
a verdict just now which would have been unjust then. The
testimony of Cuvier, La Place, Hufeland, and Treviranus,
and of numbers of the first men of science in Europe, had
been given in favour of mesmerism before the year 1839 ; and
if the editor of the British and Foreign Medical Review could
then declare, and did really believe, mesmerism to be an ex-
ploded humbug, we are puzzled to know why, in this year
1845, he is toiling, in a laborious article of sixty mortal
pages, to persuade the public that there is some little truth in
the matter after all. How is it that he has at last discovered
that there is really some vitality in mesmerism,—that it is not
so dead as he thought it,—moreover that it is really not so
wicked or foolish a thing as it has been represented “ in the
pages of some of our contemporaries! !”’ and that he finds in
it, upon mature consideration, sufficient evidences of life and
respectability to warrant him in giving it a condescending
pat, warning it so affectionately to keep out of bad company,
and promising to look in upon it occasionally and see how it
is going on? In 1839 the editor declares, that ‘“ to devote
an article to the consideration of animal magnetism, now that
the English practitioners are, one and all, ashamed of its
name, would be a work of supererogation, if the delusion,
unabashed, were not yet parading itself over some parts of
the continent.” In 1845, he finds it advisable to get up an
article of sixty pages, to prove that perhaps after all it is
something, though perhaps it is not.

The fact appears to be that the first article was a great
mistake. Written at a time when, from a temporary reac-
tion, fashion had set her face against mesmerism, and fashion-
able doctors were seeking to hunt it out of society, a slashing
article in the leading medical journal seemed no unlikely in-
strument to give it its coup de grace, and help it out of sight.
But a very short time sufficed to shew that neither fashion-
able doctors nor slashing articles could put down what was
essentially true.

From the moment the British and Foreign Medical Review
pronounced it to be an exploded delusion, mesmerism has
been hourly gaining strength; not among fashionable idlers,
but among men respectable, often eminent in literature and


244 Dr. Forbes’s struggle against


science ; above all, among the younger and more intelligent
members of the medical profession. ;

Great and numerous as have been the follies and antics
perpetrated during the last six years in the name of mesmer-
ism in this country, every week has brought an accession to
the number of believers in its reality ; not pseudo-believers
of the gobe-mouche class, who have received the marvel as
much for its marvellousness as for anything else, but sober
and earnest thinkers and observers, who have seen that the
absurd explanations which ignorant men have chosen to give
of phenomena ill-understood have nothing to do with the
reality of the phenomena themselves ; and who, having satis-
fied themselves by careful investigation of the existence of
the power, have wisely been putting it to practical use, with-
out waiting until it shall be clearly defined, and its modes of
action ascertained. We have satisfactory evidence that, in
all parts of the country, mesmerism is being daily called in
to the aid of medicine and surgery, and that it is found a
most powerful and effectual help. There is a strong common
sense generally pervading the people of this country, and when
they see—and there is now scarcely a district in which such
things are not easily to be seen—when they see disease ame-
liorated, pain and suffering mitigated, operations of greater
or less importance, from the taking off of limbs to the extrac-
tion of teeth, performed without sensible pain to the patient,
—they not only will not be persuaded that mesmerism is a
delusion, but they will insist upon having its efficacy tried
upon themselves.

Hence, in addition to those of the medical profession, and
we are happy to find they are many, who have from their own
impulse, inquired into and adopted mesmerism, many are
being driven into an examination of its claims, by the de-
mands of their patients themselves. A few of the older and
richer practitioners may yet affect to laugh at what they have
been taught to look upon as a farce. Few men who have
reached a certain age care to inquire into anything new, more
particularly when its adoption would require from them a
great change of views and habits—the growth of years. But
the younger members of the profession cannot remain idle.
If they do not commence the inquiry from inclination they
will have it forced upon them by the pressure from without.
They are asked on all sides questions about mesmerism, which
they find they must prepare themselves to answer with some-
thing more serious than a jest. It is becoming recognized
everywhere as, at any rate, a legitimate subject of inquiry,
and if, as is the case with all improvements, the hospitals and


“ The pressure from without.” 245


public institutions, which are for the most part under the
control of the older members of the profession, are slow to
receive it, it is still becoming largely recognized by the young,
the active and the intelligent, those who are to form the
future medical staff of the country. For the British and
Foreign Medical Review to have remained longer silent would
have been dangerous, perhaps suicidal; but how to take up
the subject,—how to speak with anything like respect of that
which, six years ago, had been treated with unqualified con-
tempt, but which was now daily making head and growing
more and more formidable? The editor was in an awkward
position, which we do not think is at all improved by the pre-
sent article. It appears to us that his step from “ mesmerism
an exploded delusion,” to “ mesmerism true—mesmerism
false,” has not been very gracefully made, and we do not
think the ground he now rests upon one whit more tenable
than that which he has abandoned, or, that the position
which he has assumed is one which will satisfy any body. As
we said in our former notice, we believe the ignorant and
bigotted will refuse to receive mesmerism at his hands, as
they have refused it at the hands of others. Those who have
been, for any length of time, engaged in an enquiry as to its
reality, are far in advance, both in information and practical
experience, of anything they can find here; while those who
are only entering on the enquiry will feel, we are convinced,
nothing but disappointment at that which, appearing at the
outset to promise so much, ends by leaving them, as nearly
as possible, where it found them.

Against the first sixteen pages of the article we have little
to object, except the cautious begging tone in which the
reader is asked to admit that, as the evidence stands, no good
reason exists for rejecting the simpler (“the hysteric”) phe-
nomena of mesmerism, “ meaning hereby the sleep, coma,
altered sensibility, spasm, or temporary paralysis of muscles.”
The ground upon which the reader is called upon so to believe
being, not so much that there is abundant evidence to prove
the fact of their existence, as that, in the records of ordinary
medical experience, numerous cases occur of similar pheno-
mena being manifested spontaneously, in the progress of va-
rious diseases, and that, as the manifestation of these phe-
nomena in the one case is not questioned, there need be no
insuperable difficulty in admitting them in the other.

Now we object altogether to resting the admission of the
reality of even the simpler mesmeric phenomena upon any
such grounds. The question is not whether similar pheno-
mena are asserted to have been observed, but whether the


246 Dr. Forbes’s struggle against


evidence is such as to warrant us in believing that they exist.
“The cases related by Drs. G. M. Burrows, Gooch, Cooke,
and Fitzpatrick,” say some mesmerists, “ pass unquestioned,
why should not those, in their main particulars at least, of
Dr. Sigmond, Mr. Ward, and Mr. Toswill, as well as many
others equally well authenticated?” The answer made to this
by many is, that they disbelieve the existence of the pheno-
mena in one case equally with the other ; that the fact of the
cases of Drs. Gooch, Burrows, and others, being recorded in
medical works is no proof of their truth ; and that they place
no more reliance on them than on the cases quoted by Mr.
Ward and Mr. Toswill; and we have lately seen what sort of
reception the case reported by Mr. Ward met with at the
hands of the members of the London Medical and Chirurgical
Society. We object to seeing the admission of the reality
of any of the facts of mesmerism begged upon the ground
that similar things have been admitted before. If they are to
be admitted, let it be upon the only proper ground—the suf-
ficiency of evidence to prove their truth. If there be not
sufficient evidence, let them not be admitted until more be
accumulated.

As, however, the writer does put in a claim for the ad-
mission of the reality of the minor mesmeric phenomena,
we are not disposed to dwell longer upon the manner in which
the claim is urged. Unfortunately, however, this want of
straightforwardness and decision is manifested throughout.
We meet with little else than insinuations of possibilities and
probabilities ; nothing that can lead us to a conclusion that
the writer’s own mind is made up on any of the questions he
opens, and very little to help another in coming to any con-
clusion at all.

Leaving the minor phenomena then aside, as things that
may be admitted, and throwing a passing glance on somnam-
bulism in its simpler forms, the reality of which state, as
induced by mesmerism, he is also disposed to admit, for the
same reasons that he could admit the reality of the simpler
hysteric conditions ; viz., that it has been almost universally
admitted as a condition arising spontaneously, and therefore
may possibly be induced artificially ; the writer passes to the
consideration of the probability of the induction of the higher
states, in which are said to be manifested the phenomena of
lucidity.

And here the state of the case changes altogether, and we
are met, at the very outset, by a sample of that evasiveness,
and that defective reasoning, which attend us to the end, and
which are so evident that we are surprised how any bias, how-
ever strong, could have led the éditor to overlook them. One


“ The pressure from without.” 247


would have thought that a critic, anxious honestly to inves-
tigate the reality of asserted phenomena, would have taken a
number of the cases in which these phenomena were reported
to have been manifested ; would have examined into the cre-
dibility of the witnesses,—the precautions taken to exclude
error; and in fine, after summing up the evidence, would
either have shewn us where it was defective, or else have ad-
mitted the reality of the phenomena. But nothing of the
sort is even attempted. The writer sets out by exhibiting
lucid somnambulism, not in specific cases where it has been
observed, but in the vague, often rhapsodical generalizations
of writers on the subject, some of whom have never observed
at all. Any one who really wished to know what were the
phenomena exhibited in lucid somnambulism, and what the
powers of the lucid somnambulist, would not ask what such
writers as Colquhoun, Teste, and Caldwell, said of them, but
how they were exhibited in cases of which we had detailed ac-
counts. Is there an art or science, of the powers and scope
of which the most grandiloquent nonsense has not been writ-
ten? But do we hold the art or science accountable for the
follies of its professors and advocates? The writer himself
asserts that “in reviewing most of the individual cases of
lucidity, even as detailed by the mesmerists themselves, there
is found to be a wide discordance between them and the
positive assertions running in books concerning the general
fact.” If, therefore, Colquhoun, Teste, and Caldwell, give
descriptions of mesmeric lucidity which are not borne out by
the facts on record, these writers are amenable to criticism for
their exaggerations ; but a critic who considers it his duty to
pronounce a judgment upon the reality of the facts, is bound
to form his opinion from an examination of the collected evi-
dence, not from the vague generalizations. It may have been
more convenient to take the general assertions, it would have
been more honest to have taken the records of facts.

Having, however, taken as his text the general averments,
the writer proceeds to ask whether,


‘* Any amount or ordinary evidence ought to be deemed adequate
to the proof of their reality? If it should even be made out that
the testimony in favour of /ucid somnambulism is as — as that
in support of simple somnambulism, are we as much bound philoso-
wre to admit the one as the other? We contend for the negative.

vidence as before maintained must ever correspond in strength with
the extraordinary and anomalous character of the thing to be proved;
and thus while attestation of ordinary vafhe and extent may yield
proof with respect to matters which harmonize with ascertained facts,
none that is not of the very highest order can, or ought to be deemed


248 Dr. Forbes’s struggle against


decisive with regard to statements of a contrary kind. But we think
it may be safely asserted that the testimony in support of the glar-
ingly improbable facts in question is even /ess strong than that which
is considered requisite to establish an ordinary philosophical propo-
sition. It is neither complete nor free from suspicion, and when its
fallacy cannot be demonstrated, it is yet so susceptible of being ex-
plained away as to lose its conclusiveness. Evidence to be complete
must not only come from valid witnesses, individually considered,
but the statements must be decisive and coincident amongst them-
selves. If, however, we consult the generality of the recorded ex-
amples of lucidity, we shall notice that almost invariably there are
no careful and precise details shewing that suitable precautions have
been taken to remove the sources of fallacy, and that the cases them-
selves for the most part are confessedly a compound of hits and
misses.” *


To demand an increase in the amount of testimony in
proportion as the occurrence of the fact becomes more rare,
is a very convenient way of getting quit altogether of a
troublesome difficulty. But we conceive that all candid in-
quirers, such as are not disposed to push their philosophical
scepticism to the extent of unphilosophical unbelief, will be
satisfied with such a calculation of probabilities as is recom-
mended by La Place, and taking such a calculation as the
basis of their judgments, we believe they will find a sufficient
amount of clear, unquestionable testimony in favour of the
occurrence, in various forms of the higher phenomena of
lucidity, to render it more probable that the phenomena
should be real than that the testimony should be false. What
amount of evidence, or of what nature, would convince the
writer of the British and Foreign Medical Review, we are at
a loss to conceive. The terms ordinary and extraordinary,
may mean something or nothing, certainly will present dif-
ferent measures to every mind that adopts them, and although
the writer says, “if we consult the generality of the recorded
examples of lucidity, we shall notice that almost invariably
there are no careful and precise details, shewing that suitable
precautions have been taken to remove the sources of fallacy,”
he wisely omits altogether to quote any of the better authen-
ticated cases, and confines his illustrations to citations of such
as have been disputed, or to notices of such experiments as,
having been made by disbelievers in the existence of the phe-
nomena, have been reported to be failures.

We have not space to quote cases at length, nor is it
necessary for us to dg so, but our readers, and all persons
even ordinarily read in mesmeric literature, will easily re-


* Mesmerism True, Mesmerism False, pp. 26, 27.


“ The pressure from without.” 249


member numbers; such as those given in The Zoist on the
authority of Dr. Elliotson, Dr. Engledue, Mr. Brindley, and
others, and those quoted by Mr. Lang in his work on mes-
merism, in which mistake is an impossibility ; either the cases
must be genuine, or the witnesses must be false. There is
no lack of “careful and precise details,’—no susceptibility of
being “explained away.” Patients are reported, upon the
testimony of respectable witnesses, to have described events
taking place at the moment in other and distant places, and
to have given accurate descriptions of rooms and houses into
which they had never been, and which, in some cases, had
been purposely prepared by persons present, who alone, at
the time, were aware of their condition. Why does not the
writer fairly take up some of these cases, analyze them, and
shew us where the evidence is defective, or the inferences are
unwarranted? It is easy to throw a doubt upon cases where
the patients have to discover objects placed before them with
no other screen than bandages over the eyes, but where
patients are reported to have the power of seeing through
wooden screens, or brick walls, there ought to be no diffi-
culty, with honest witnesses, in arriving at the fact.

That there have been many impositions practised, upon
both the unlearned many and the learned few, we are quite
disposed to admit, though we deny that all that are considered
to have been so, were so. That many cases are advanced
upon insufficient evidence there is no doubt, but there are
abundance of others which we defy the opponents of mes-
merism, after the most rigid examination, to dispute or to
explain away, and we cannot understand by what process of
logic the recognition of such cases could be refused, were it
true that so many others are inadmissible.

The writer also takes exception to the want of uniformity
in the observations of different mesmerisers. One mesmeriser
meets with one class of phenomena, another with another,
and he concludes from this that the phenomena exist more in
the imaginations of the observers than in reality. Now, in-
dependently of the fact, common to observations even upon
inanimate matter, that the attention of inquirers is generally
directed to classes of qualities, and that it is seldom that one
observer exhausts the qualities even of a plant or a stone ; and,
independently of the fact, that every disease presents peculiar
modifications of its general symptoms in different individuals,
small-pox and measles, for example, presenting variations of
character in different patients even of the same family,—it is
believed that, in the case of mesmeric experiments, the one
organization exercises a powerful influence over the other ;
VOL. IIT. s


250 Dr. Forbes’s struggle against


and the phenomena which are induced and observed may de-
pend, and we have no doubt do depend, materially for their
modifications, upon the qualities of the operator, who is not
merely the observer, but the producer of the phenomena.
We have ourselves little doubt that this influence of the ope-
rator upon the patient is not only one of the reasons why
different mesmerisers produce sometimes different classes of
phenomena, but we believe it to be also one of the reasons
why so many persons produce either no effects at all, or only
such as are trifling and unimportant. We have seen attempts
made to produce mesmeric effects, by persons anxious to learn
from their own experience, and who had also seen much of
mesmerism at the hands of others, but which attempts were
generally failures, the operators either producing little or no
effect, where the subject had not been previously mesmerised
by another, or where the patient had been before subjected
to mesmeric processes, producing, instead of the usual results,
very unpleasant consequences. We remember to have seen
a case in which a lecturer on mesmerism, arriving in a town
with two subjects, who were at the time mesmerically under
his control, placed them in the hands of two amateurs, in
order that the latter might try the effect of their respective
manipulations. In the case of one of the patients, the effect
was satisfactory, and after the manipulations had been several
times repeated, was acknowledged by the patient to. be more
complete than that produced by the original mesmeriser
Nay it was even found that, after a time, the original mes-
meriser had lost his power over the subject, and could scarcely
affect her at all, and it was only upon the amateur ceasing to
mesmerise her, that the original mesmeriser, after a week’s
labour, regained his usual power. With the second patient
the result was very different. The effect produced was de-
cided but disagreeable ;—the patient could not be awakened,
but remained in a state of extreme rigidity, until the middle
of the following day, when he awoke spontaneously, and it
was some time, if we remember rightly, near a fortnight, be-
fore he could be again placed in the mesmeric sleep. From
numerous occurrences such as these, which are related, and
many of which we have ourselves witnessed, we feel convinced
that the moral and physical condition of the operator has
great influence in modifying the phenomena induced, or in
many cases actually prevents their manifestation.

It may seem very philosophical to sneer at Monsieur
Marcillet’s excuse for the non-manifestation of the usual phe-
nomena by Alexis, that the latter was affected by the atmos-
phere of incredulity which surrounded him; but in a matter


“ The pressure from without.” 251


in which we know really little or nothing of the motive powers
which produce and modify the phenomena, we hold it to be
much more philosophical to watch, and, if possible, to detect
by observation, some of the laws which regulate their produc-
tion, than to decide that they shall be producible at all times,
and by all persons alike. It is a manifest absurdity to expect
that the most curious and delicate moral and physical pheno-
mena, the result of a peculiar unusual condition of the most
refined organized existence, should be producible at any mo-
ment, and under any circumstances, with as much regularity
as the tricks of an automaton toy. Throughout the article
we observe the same plausible evasion, the same absence of
all attempt to grapple with the direct and conclusive evidence,
the same picking of holes in those cases which do seem to
admit of a doubt. In speaking of the facts which are con-
sidered to prove the existence of a mesmeric medium, as a
thing distinct from imagination, the writer passes over all the
collected evidence of persons mesmerised at distances, with
the following brief notice :—


‘** Examples, however, of magnetic operations with successful
results upon patients near and at a distance are recorded where they
themselves have been altogether unacquainted with what was in-
tended, where, by the unexpressed will of the operator sleep and
other effects have been induced on the part of subjects intimately
en rapport with their magnetisers. After the copious details on
other branches of this inquiry which we have already given, we have
no space for the analysis of these instances with a view to detect the
possible source of fallacy; nor indeed do we think it necessary.
Considering the extraordinary credulity and excitable enthusiasm of
the professed animal magnetisers, knowing moreover the little care
and precaution which are commonly taken to shut out any probable
error or mistake, we candidly acknowledge that we receive all these
accounts with the greatest suspicion. Of course when men like the
Rev. Mr. Townshend attest these things (and this gentleman in his
book gives several instances of unconscious mesmerism), we have
every confidence in the integrity of the narrator, but on grounds
which our limits will not allow us to submit, we think that due mea-
sures had not been taken to secure an absence of all anticipation of
a coming effect. Besides a distrust in the general accuracy of mes-
meric details, we subjoin certain reasons of our own, resting upon
experience for discrediting these particular stories.” *


We regret that the writer has not found it convenient to
give us his reasons for doubting the reality of the cases to
which he alludes,—had he done so, we should have been en-
abled to examine into, and to pronounce upon their validity.


* Mesmerism True and Mesmerism False, pp. 53, 54.


s2


252 Dr. Forbes’s struggle against


Of the doubtful cases, and cases of supposed failure which he
quotes, as having fallen under his own observation, we can
say little ;—the absence of names in some preventing us from
investigating or noticing them as we could wish. We feel,
however, so certain that we recognize in one a case with
which we are familiar, and with the details of which we
have been furnished, that we shall run the risk of quoting it,
as given by the writer, and as it lies before us, in an account
rendered to us by the operator himself.
Hear the British and Foreign Medical Review,—


* Another friend of ours informed us that he had, on two or
three occasions, induced powerful mesmeric effects, operating in a
room separate from that in which the patient (a young woman also)
remained, and quite unknown to her. Ever ready to be convinced of
the reality of these assumed facts, we agreed, upon our friend's in-
vitation, to investigate the matter, proposing, however, a test of our
own, and one calculated, as we conceived, to meet the exigences of
the case,—Total failure once more followed.”


Compare this with the account given by the operator
himself :—


“* Having a patient under my care, who was exceedingly suscep-
tible to mesmeric influences, and on whom I had often produced
effects suddenly and across the room, I resolved to try whether or
not I could mesmerise her from another room, at a time when she
did not know I was even in the house. Accordingly, the next time
she called, I took care to be shut up in an adjoining room to the one
in which she was shewn,—my intention being known only to une
person, a lady, whom the patient was always in the habit of seeing,
and who was requested to watch the result of the experiment. In a
short time after the patient had entered the adjoining room I began
the passes, and in about ten minutes, on going into the room where
she was, I found her asleep. This experiment I repeated some time
afterwards, taking up my position in a different part of the house,
in fact in a yard outside the house, and this time concealing my in-
tention from every one; again the patient was put to sleep. I now
proposed to two friends that they should be present at my next trial,
which I suGGestep should be made in much the same way as be-
fore. My two friends calling at the house as if to see me were
shewn into the room, where the patient, along with the lady who
had witnessed all the previous experiments, was to await my arrival.

** When I knew that the party were all assembled, I effected my
entrance privately to an adjoining room, and commenced the passes,
after continuing which for a considerable time, I entered the other
room, and found my patient, the lady, and my two friends, all seated
near to each other round the fire. My patient was in a very drowsy
condition, the eyes only half open, and, on my making one or two
passes near her, she fell at once into a profound sleep. Seeing that
positive sleep had not been produced’ from the other room, I con-


“ The pressure from without.” 253


sidered the experiment so far as my two friends were concerned, to
be inconclusive, to my own mind it was as conclusive as if I had
found her asleep. The drowsiness and stupor were evident; to ac-
count for them by supposing ordinary sleepiness to have overtaken a
young girl, in the presence of a lady and two gentlemen, by whom
she was held in conversation was impossible, and if, in spite of the
precautions taken, we suppose she was aware of my being in the ad-
joining room, and that the effect was the result of imagination, why
was it so partial? Why should the imagination produce an effect
different to the one looked for?

**I considered that an effect had been produced by the passes,
but that it had not been so complete as usual, owing to the presence
and interference of unusual disturbing causes. As regards my two
friends, however, I was quite content to look upon the experiment as
a negative one, and I should have thought no more of it, if I had not
heard it spoken of afterwards as a complete failure, supposed to be
consequent upon the increased precautions taken by one of the wit-
nesses to prevent the conveyance to the patient of any knowledge of
my presence and intentions. Now I distinctly state that the pre-
cautions taken were suggested by myself, and were precisely of the
same nature as I had before taken in trying the experiment alone.
I have been confirmed in my conviction that the partial failure of the
experiment was owing to the operation of unusual disturbing causes,
for, on questioning the lady who was present, as to her recollections
of what took place, she gives it as her decided conviction that the
girl was several times upon the point of sinking, and that she must
certainly have slept had she not been frequently roused by the gen-
tlemen present directing their conversation to her.”

We leave our readers to judge how far such a case can
justly be quoted as a total failure. The writer, however,
though loud and rigid in his demands for precision and accu-
racy on the part of the mesmerisers, makes some strange
omissions and mistakes, which we should not look for in one
who expects such minute correctness in others. We do not
see how the case of Alexis can be considered to be fairly
stated, when, Dr. Forbes’s account of his experiments being
published at length, the only notice which is taken of the
counter-reports by Dr. Elliotson and others, is the remark
that,—

“In the last number of The Zoist, that for January of the pre-
sent year, Dr. Elliotson has collected a variety of attestations, to
show that Alexis was truely and faithfully all that before his arrival
in London he had been represented, and indeed, on a careless exami-
nation, and afar off, all does appear circumstantial and definitive
enough, but the critical eye sees defective evidence, and room for de-
lusion or collusion in almost every one of the recorded cases.”


Again we ask why this general assertion of delusion; why
are the cases not laid before us in something like the detail


254 Dr. Forbes’s struggle against


in which they are exhibited in Dr. Forbes’s report, and the
defects in the evidence clearly demonstrated.

We find here and there exaggerations and straining of
cases, which indicate either a very great want of attention or
a very weak cause, Thus we have the writer speaking as
follows of Dr. Elliotson :—

** We have moreover scientific and erudite men gravely proclaim-
ing somnambulists to be the surest prescribers of diseases, and main-
taining that practitioners should hold them in readiness as guides
and directors in the management of obscure cases; and the British
metropolis contains at least one physician who indulges in these
lamentable extravagancies! Of Dr. Elliotson we would not speak
but with unfeigned regard, he has our sincerest esteem for the ser-
vices he has rendered to practical medicine, and beyond his high
— as a physician and a scholar, there is a boldness and

irectness of purpose in his proceedings which we love to see. He
himself will not respect us the less because we decline to follow him
blindly, or any other individual however estimable.” *

Not being able to remember that Dr. Elliotson had ever
written or done anything which could afford just grounds for
such a charge, we made all diligent enquiry to learn upon
what it rested.

We need not say that no where could we find any
foundation for the calumny, which becomes the stronger as it
is made without reference to anything on which it rested, so
that the majority of readers would at once accept it as a
thing of course. We have heard it rumoured, and we believe
it to be true, that the grounds for this charge were found in
the following passage of Dr. Elliotson’s opening address to
the members of the Phrenological Association, in 1843, pub-
lished in The Zoist for October of that year.

‘I may perhaps be allowed to mention, incidentally, that Gall,
before his death, shewed a disposition to give more credit to mes-
merism than previously. Dr. Foissac states, that Gall, finding his
end near, requested Dr. Foissac to take a somnambulist to him for
the purpose of consultation, and that the youth, though not in-
formed of the name or disease of Gall, correctly pronounced that he
had an organic disease of the heart, and a great tendency to
paralysis, and prescribed certain treatment, which however was
refused.”

We have here no expression of opinion at all, simply an
historical relation, and we certainly should not be disposed
to place much reliance on the accuracy, either of observation
or description, of a writer who, in bringing a personal charge,
could do so in such utter absence of anything on which to
found it.


* Mesmerism True and Mesmerism False, p. 60.


“ The pressure from without.” 255


But we have no space to follow the writer further. Had
we been disposed to devote to him an article as long as his
own, and trace him, seriatim, through his divisions, we
believe we could have shewn that not one of his positions,
where a position has really been assumed, is tenable ; but,
as we have said, the forms he assumes are so shadowy, that it
is difficult to define them, and we find it next to impossible
to lay hold upon anything which is tangible and definite.


“The simpler phenomena of mesmerism are possible, perhaps
probable,—the higher phenomena are improbable, perhaps impossi-
ble; we think you may, if you are so disposed, admit the former to
be true, at any rate do not damage your consistency by rejecting
them in toto, since we can assure you you give your assent, every
day, to things quite as incredible, and of which, you know no more
than you do of these.

** As for the higher phenomena,—wait a bit,—we may, perhaps,
give you some further information upon them by-and-bye, we have
not yet made up our minds on the subject, we shall investigate it
further,—at present, as it stands, we think it very wild, very extra-
vagant, very improbable, Nor PROVED, we will not say disproved or
impossible; we said that, in speaking of the whole affair, just six
years ago, in 1839, and the world has been practically laughing at
us ever since, by daily turning mesmerism to good account, in the
treatment of disease and the performance of operations. We must
not therefore say, even of the higher phenomena, that they are not,
cannot be, but we entreat you to suspend your judgment until we
find it convenient to acknowledge them, which, for your guidance,
we may Say, MAY POSSIBLY BE SOONER THAN YOU EXPECT.”


Such is the present position of The British and Foreign
Medical Review with regard to mesmerism. Will it prove
satisfactory to its readers, or to the medical world in general?
we believe not. The article of 1839 satisfied a great many,
who wished to be saved the trouble of examination, and were
glad to find an authority for pooh-poohing the whole affair.
Now, the number of total disbelievers is small ; a body incon-
siderable and unheeded, they may safely be left to their
bigotry and ignorance. The British and Foreign Medical
Review has to cater for inquirers and believers, in different
stages of advancement, and what is its course? With a body
of evidence in support of the minor phenomena of mesme-
rism as complete and conclusive as any that exists in support
of facts of a similar nature, which are not demonstrable at
pleasure, but depend, for their manifestations, upon special
conditions; all that this authority, after asserted careful
investigation, can say is, that they are probable and ought not
entirely to be rejected. With a body of evidence, if not so
great in amount, which we have no right to expect, since


256 Dr. Forbes’s struggle, &c.


the phenomena are more rare, yet quite as strong in cha-
racter, in favour of the higher phenomena, all that can be
done is, to pass by all the strongest and most conclusive
evidence, select some of the doubtful, misrepresenting part of
that, and then conclude that the existence of the medium
and the manifestation of the phenomena are improbable, and
must not, for the present, be received. With an abundance of
cases already collected, in which mesmerism, whatever may
be its nature, has been proved to be of the greatest service,
in the treatment of disease and the performance of surgical
operations, and with such cases multiplying daily, we are told
that no belief is to be attached to the greater part of the
accounts of the cases of cure, and that mesmerism is little
likely to be of practical use, either in medicine or in opera-
tive surgery.

How soon it may suit The British and Foreign Medical
Review to move another step we cannot say. If its convic-
tions are to depend upon personal experience, it may be some
time, for mesmerisers are growing tired of exhibiting their
cases to observers who always, somehow, have their eyes shut
to things which can easily be perceived by others. If it can
be convinced by any amount of testimony, we conceive there
is already sufficient, which its writers must be supposed to
have overlooked, since they have made no use of it, to
warrant a move onwards to-morrow. After all, perhaps, a
great deal will depend upon the manner in which the article
under review is received, and as we predict that, beyond the
author’s and editor’s immediate circles, it will not satisfy, we
venture to hope that, at least before another six years are
passed, The British and Foreign Medical Review will crown its
consistency, by demanding from its readers a belief in all the
wonders of mesmerism, as unconditionally as six years ago it
demanded a rejection of even the most simple mesmeric
truths.


Y. E.


( 257 )


BOOKS RECEIVED.


Cosmos ; a Survey of the General Physical History of the Universe.
By Alexander Von Humboldt. Translated.
All those who have perused “The Natural History of the Vestiges of Creation,” must
read this,
A Discussion on Mesmerism between Mr. E. T. Hicks and Mr. J. Q.
Rumball, at the Theatre, Gloucester, on Thursday, April 17, 1845.
Torrington Hall, being an Account of Two Days in the Autumn of the
Year 1844, passed at that magnificent philosophically-conducted establish-
ment for the Insane. By Arthur Wolbridge, author of Jest and Earnest.
The Seeress of Prevorst, being Revelations concerning the Inner Life of
Man, and the Interdiffusion of a World of Spirits in the one we inhabit.
Communicated by Justinus Kerner, M.D. Translated by Mrs. Crowe.
A Few Notes on Mesmeric Phenomena. By Aleph.
Revue Magnétique. Paris. No. VI. We have not received Nos. II.
III. IV. or V.
Journal du Magnétisme. Paris. No. V. Nos. III. and IV. have not
been received.
Gedanken itiber Phrenologie. Von D. H. Cotta. Dresden und Leipzig.
La Phrénologie en 1845. Par G. Victor Idjez. Bruxelles.
Musée de Phrénologie. Ditto, ditto.
Edinburgh Phrenological Journal. April.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


S.S. Cannot ‘‘ Snarling Sinner” see the necessity of castigating the
man who palms the most absurd nonsense upon an uneducated public, though
we agree with S. S. that the party is scarcely worth notice? If individuals
who support great principles calculated to produce the greatest good to hu-
manity are attacked and abused by a man who is profoundly ignorant of the
most important physiological truths,—shall we not as editors of a journal
founded expressly for the purpose of supporting and teaching cerebral phy-
siology and mesmerism expose his ignorance and presumption? On our
part the controversy was anything but personal. Great principles—honesty
and truth were involved. Weare obliged to S. S. for his reference to Plato.
He will perceive in our next number that we were aware of the passages,
and will find them quoted in the continuation of the paper entitled, ‘‘ On
Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.”

A Subscriber at Sheddon is right.

We regret being obliged again to defer the favours of Mr. Topham,
Mr. Majendie, Mr. D. Hands, as well as some from Mr. H. S. Thompson,
Dr. Elliotson, and other gentlemen.


Hocker and Connor. We are requested by Dr. Elliotson to state that
casts of these murderers may be procured of B, Casci, No.3, Harford Place,
Drury Lane, who is a very honest and respectable person, and not only
casts well and cheaply, but invariably gives satisfaction by his decorous
conduct when he casts deceased relatives.


Preis


Madein +e


HOCKER, THE MURDERER

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.
No. XI.


OCTOBER, 1845.


I. The Cerebral Development of the murderer Benjamin Ellison.
By Dr. Exxiotson.


Gait made his grand discoveries by observing individuals
with intellectual or moral points of character so remarkable
for strength or deficiency that no one could entertain a doubt
upon it, and by comparing the development of the brain as
indicated by the development of the head. Sometimes the
head, sometimes the character, first arrested his attention :
but then there could be no more doubt upon the character
than upon the head. By “ their fruits” did he “know them,”
—what manner of ability or inability, and what points of
moral character, were really theirs.

-The majority of the medical world, and nearly all the
teachers, are as ignorant of true cerebral physiology as of mes-
merism, and equally prejudiced against it, speaking of both as
a native of New Holland would of geology,—no more appre-
ciating the facts of either science than the poor uncivilized
creature does those of the various geological formations which
are always before his eyes, and talking in a manner that
proves them with all their professional self-sufficiency to be
as far below full knowledge, aye, and true civilization, as the
savage is below the amount which they possess. And remark-
ably ignorant of cerebral physiology is that portion of it who
set up for the profitable occupation of taking care of the
insane,—for which every one fancies himself qualified, and
almost every well-informed medical man is, as far as I have
witnessed, just as well qualified as the majority of those who
have the reputation of being great insanity doctors. If the
VOL. 111. T


260 Cerebral Development of the murderer, Ellison,


assumed or presumed superiority of knowledge or skill in indi-
vidual doctors in reference to any particular disease is generally
sheer nonsense, it is unquestionably so in general with respect
to insanity. The only difference between insanity doctors and
other doctors is, that they are also boarding-house keepers,
differing in this from common boarding-house keepers that
they board people out of their senses, while common boarding-
house keepers receive and keep people not out of their senses.

This prevalent gross ignorance makes it important to set
before medical no less than other men, the cerebral develop-
ment of every person who becomes an object of general atten-
tion for undoubted points of ability or character; though the
functions of the organs which may be confirmed have been
as long established in the conviction of cerebral physiologists
as the function of the eyes or ear. And here let me quote
a passage from the 373rd and 374th pages of my Human
Physiology.

** Although any phrenologist may always without fear assert posi-
tively of the head from constant positive exhibition of mind, and
always fearlessly assert negatively of the mind from negative exhibi-
tions of the head; he would not assert respecting the mind from
positive exhibitions of the head, nor respecting the head from nega-
tive exhibitions of the mind.” Because “ constant strength of certain
parts of the mind is accompanied by strong development of certain

arts of the brain and consequently of the skull: and deficient deve-
opment of certain parts of the brain, and consequently of the skull,
accompanied by deficient strength of certain parts of the mind.”
*‘ Inquirers, however, must not always expect the reverse,—to find
strength of development always attended by strength of certain parts
of the mind ; nor deficiency of the manifestation of certain parts of
the mind always attended by deficient development of the head.
Because the development of the head may arise from other causes
than brain, or the quality of the brain may not be healthy; and, on
the other hand, deficiency of the manifestations of a certain part of
the mind may arise from mere want of excitement or from disease.”
“* Yet in the far greater number of instances, the development of the
head agrees with the mind.”


The unfortunate wretch whom I am about to consider was
so remarkable for strength of certain points of character
that Gall’s doctrine required certain parts of his head to
be very large,—and they were very large: and the defi-
ciency of certain parts of his brain was so great that Gall’s
doctrine required that certain parts of his character should be
deficient,—and they were deficient.

All the particulars of character but one I have derived
from the West Briton Advertizer and the Cornwall Gazette ;
the drawings and the statement of development have been


by Dr. Elliotson. 261


most kindly sent me by a gentleman upon whom I can rely
and who assures me that they are perfectly accurate. I shall
always feel very grateful, as I do on the present occasion, for
well authenticated facts in either cerebral physiology or
mesmerism.


Benjamin Ellison and Mrs. Seaman had lived together about
two years in an outskirt of Penzance called Rosevean Road. They
passed as relations, but they had been living together as man and
wife. She was the widow of W. Seaman, of Swansea, gentleman,
entitled to a pension of £30 a year, and had some other small
property. He described himself “as of Leeds, gentleman ;” had
received a good education and been respectably connected with
the manufacturing interest of Yorkshire; and had left his wife
and children six years ago on account of disagreements in pecu-
niary matters, and not been heard of by his friends for some years
till his committal. He was sixty-one years of age. He had some
shares in the Bradford Bank, on which £1,500 had been paid.
He had executed a settlement and will in her favour, and she in
his favour. They lived together, without a servant, in a retired
and secluded manner. The house in which they lived formed
one of a row, and the neighbours on each side were, one a man of
the name of Hill, and another named Trenwith. The house con-
sisted of a front-room, a back-room, a place behind, and rooms over-
head, with a courtlage behind, which was connected with the houses
on the right and left. The last time the unfortunate woman was
seen alive was on the morning of Monday, the 7th of July last, about
eight o’clock, when she was seen by a witness to be dressed in the
same clothes in which she was afterwards found dead. On that day,
according to the admission of Ellison, she was still alive at the hour
of twelve, but after eight o’clock in the morning no one except him-
self saw her until she was found a corpse. On the ensuing morning,
that of the 8th of July, about nine o’clock, he himself gave an alarm to
Mary Hill, the neighbour who lived in the adjoining house. Upon Mrs.
Hill going in, she found Mrs. Seaman lying on the floor of the front-
room, dead. On the wall at the side and end of the room, to the
height of three or four feet, were large patches of blood, the appear-
ance being that of a person having staggered against the wall in fall-
ing and left there the marks of blood from a wound. - It appeared
also that the person had staggered against another wall at no great
distance, and left there a mark of blood in falling. The floor was
covered in several places with blood. The body had been evidently
removed from the place where it fell in the act of death, because it
was found in that part of the room where the blood was not, and
there were particular circumstances about it. The body had been
evidently laid out, and the clothes tucked around it. A piece of
black cloth or gauze was laid over the face, and it was extended on
its back, like a body stretched out after death. It appeared to the
surgeon, that the body had been laid in its then position after the
rigidity which follows death had taken place. The arms and hands
T2


262 Cerebral Development of the murderer, Ellison,


were raised, and at the same time contracted, so that it would seem
the body had not been laid out shortly after death, when the limbs
would assume any shape, but after rigidity had taken place, when it
would be impossible to stretch the arms out of their previous posi-
tion. In the opinion of the surgeon, the body, when he saw it on
the morning of the 8th, had been dead many hours. The only
appearance of violence to the house itself was at a small window
which looked into the kitchen from the courtlage. This window
was 13 inches by 20, large enough certainly for any one to get
in, but other circumstances lead to infer that the murder was not
committed by any one who got in at that window from without.
It did not appear that the murder had been committed by any
one whose object was plunder. No one appeared to have gone up
stairs, and in the room down stairs there was no property worth
taking. Whatever property they seemed to have was in a desk and
box up stairs, which contained some little valuables in silver; but
this desk was not opened nor these little articles taken away, and
there was no trace of any one having gone up stairs; for it would
appear utterly impossible for any one, who did that deed of death, to
ascend without leaving some traces of the blood with which the
apartment below was covered. The party who committed that deed
was contented with the deed itself, and did not commit it for the
purpose of carrying out any object of plunder. The surgeon was
distinctly of opinion that death must have been inflicted upon
Monday, the 7th of July. Upon each side of the house where
Ellison and the deceased lived, were the houses of neighbours imme-
diately adjoining. The partitions separating the houses were thin,
and noises were easily heard from one house to the other. But no
noises of any sort or kind were heard in the night or morning of
Tuesday, the 8th of July. On Monday morning, the 7th, about
eight o'clock, the woman was seen alive. This was a remarkable
day in the town of Penzance ; it was a day in which there was a pro-
cession through the town, the first stone being laid of a new pier,
and also of a market-place. There was a procession, with music,
and guns firing. The proceedings took place between the hours of
ten and somewhere about half-past twelve, and during that period,
except where the procession passed, almost all the houses in the town
were deserted by their inhabitants. People were flocking in vast
multitudes to see what was going on, and among others the inhabi-
tants of Rosevean-road shut up their houses and went down to the
beach and market-place, where these rejoicings were celebrated. The
neighbours living on each side of Ellison had left their houses en-
tirely deserted, so that whatever might have taken place in his house
there was no one in the adjoining houses to hear it. Mrs. Richards, at
the hour of twelve, when the guns were firing, had occasion to pass
Ellison’s house, and heard screams and groans coming from the house
at that time. Now it was not till after that hour he was seen out of
his house. The first seen of him that day was when he called, be-
tween one and two, at the house of a person of the name of James
Richards, a mason, living in Rosevean-road. He proposed to go


by Dr. Elliotson. 263


with Richards that afternoon to see the sights upon the beach, and
said he had no one to go with him, as Mrs. Seaman was engaged in
packing up. Ellison had before stated that Mrs. Seaman was about
to leave Penzance and go to London. He left Richards’s house, and
shortly after called at the house of a Mr. Glasson, where he enquired
whether there was a meeting in the evening of the Temperance So-
ciety. He was a person belonging to that society, and abstaining al-
together from fermented liquors. At that time he was observed by
Miss Glasson to be very much coloured, and in a state of singular
excitement, which drew her attention. He next went to the house
of a person named Wolff, and there also he attracted attention by
his peculiarly fevered and excited appearance. He again called at
James Richards’s at five o'clock, and enquired for Richards, who
was not come home. After five o’clock, the next that was seen of
him was at half-past seven, within a few yards of his own house, and
going in the direction of that house. He was also seen at half-past
eight by a person named Honora Robinson. She was standing near
her father’s gate, and he had some conversation with her about some
flowers. She observed him afterwards go to the front door of his
own house, and as far as she could judge, seemed to try the lock of
the front door ; he did not appear to go in, but turned again. Mrs.
Seaman was at that time dead; her death had taken place somewhere
in the morning between twelve and one o'clock. After being seen at
half-past eight by Honora Robinson, at nine o’clock he was again at
Richards’s house. Richards was not yet home, upon which Ellison
asked if they would let him wait for him, and walked into the par-
lour. This was within two minutes’ walk of his own door, but he
preferred remaining in Richards’s parlour till the family went to bed.
Mrs. Richards then said, “ My husband is not come, and we are
going to bed ;”’ and then, of course, he withdrew. The next seen of
him was at the hour of half-past ten, by a person named Elizabeth
Bramble, coming, as it appeared, from the direction of his own
house. He had at that time a bundle of considerable size under his
arm; and she observed him go in the direction of Causeway Head,
which would lead down to the beach. It appears that he saw the
woman, and crossed over to the other side of the street, and shifted
his bundle from one arm to the other. He went away in that direc-
tion, and half an hour after that period he went to a place called the
Temperance Hotel, kept by a person named Thomas. He asked for
some refreshment, and had some tea and something to eat, after
which he asked if he could have a bed, alleging as a reason that it
was getting late, and he did not like to go home at that hour. They
said he could have a bed; but before he went up stairs he enquired
whether a man of the name of Eddy, a lodger in the house, was at
home? He was answered that he was, upon which he said that he
desired to see him. They went together into the smoking-room of
the hotel ; but before he went in, Ellison said to Eddy that he had
something he wished to communicate to him. When they got into
the smoking-room, Eddy naturally asked what it was? He did not
answer. Jle hesitated, and as he sat down he leant his arms and


264 Cerebral Development of the murderer, Ellison,


hands upon the table, stooped his head almost to his knees, and
upon the man pressing him again as to whether he had anything
particular to say to him, he abruptly said, ‘‘ How do you like Liver-
pool and Birkenhead ?” where it appears Eddy had previously been.
Eddy was struck with his singular manner, and could not account for
it. After a time he rose, but Ellison still sat, his manner anxious
and considerably agitated ; indeed he made no communication at all,
except that he was going to sleep in the hotel. He went to bed,
and nothing more was seen of him that night. On the ensuing
morning, about six o’clock, he came down to the son of Mr. Thomas,
who kept the hotel, and asked him to clean his boots. The lad ob-
served that they were remarkably wet, apparently as though they
had been washed ; but there was much dirt on the night before. He
left the Temperance Hotel, and the next place to which he went was
to the house of a man named Matthews, who kept a hair-dresser’s
shop, and he went there for the purpose of having his hair and
whiskers cut, and to be shaved. In the hands of Mrs. Seaman was
found hair: in her right hand a considerable quantity of hair, and in
the left a single hair, which, as compared with that in the right
hand, was white or grey. The hair in her right hand was of a
brown colour, but a single white hair was found in the left. When
Ellison went to Matthews, he desired to have his hair and whiskers
cut, and when Matthews proceeded to cut it, he found that the hair
had already and recently in parts of it been cut, evidently by the
hand of a person wholly unaccustomed to the business of hair-
dressing. ‘There were one or two patches on the head where the
hair had been cut close, and evidently jagged by the hand that did
it; and it became necessary for the hair-dresser to cut it very close
to get below the jagged parts. He also had his whiskers cut, and
there was a difference between the colour of the hair and whiskeis,
the whiskers being turned white or grey in parts of them. When
in custody, on the circumstance of the hair being found and its ap-
parent correspondence being called to his attention, he said to the

liceman, ‘it is true you are correct with regard to the resemblance
in point of colour of the hair, but then you see my hair is much
shorter than that found in the hands of the deceased.’ He omitted
to state to the policeman that he had, on that very morning, had
his hair cut by the hair-dresser. Having left the hair-dresser’s shop,
he next went to the house of Richards, who being a mason, and
working on the quay, came home to his breakfast a little past eight
o'clock. Shortly after he got home, perhaps about ten minutes past
eight, Ellison entered also, and told him he had slept out that might
on account of his bed being packed up, and he was now returning
home. He then left, as he stated, with that intention. Richards
had to return to his work at half-past eight, and he did not leave his
premises till nearly that time, as the quay was not far distant. There
was, therefore, between the time Ellison left and the time that
Richards left his premises, full a quarter of an hour. But it was
not before nine o'clock that Ellison gave information that Mrs. Seaman
was dead. About the hour of nine, he went to the house of Mary


by Dr. Elliotson. 265


Hill. He went by the back-door through his courtlage to Mrs. Hill’s
courtlage, his object being to go to her back-door. The door was
a-jar. They were neighbours, and one would have expected that a
man who had just discovered the body of the woman with whom he
was living, weltering in its blood, would not stand upon much cere-
mony when going to a neighbour and calling for her aid under such
distressing circumstances. But he knocked at the door, which was
a-jar; and asked her to step into his house with him, as he wanted
to speak to her. She came out and went with him, and as they were
crossing the yard, he said for the first time to her, ‘I slept out last
night, and some one has got in and killed poor Mrs. Seaman.’
Mrs. Hill went in and found the body in the manner described.
Upon the table there were tea-things evidently set out for breakfast
or tea. The kettle was upon the coals, where a fire had been lighted,
but had been extinguished, and the whole was apparently set out for
partaking of some meal immediately. Mrs. Seaman, when dis-
covered, was in her day clothes. Up stairs nothing had been touched,
and the bed, which was the only one in the house, and used by
Ellison and Mrs. Seaman, was perfectly untouched ; it had not been
slept in the previous night, or if it had, it had been remade. A
woman’s night clothes lay on the pillow, and a man’s cap hung over
the rail of the bed. The first thing that struck Mrs. Hill was how
any one could have got into the house, and she said to Ellison, ‘ but
how has any one got in? He then drew her attention to the window
that looked into the courtlage, and said, ‘Oh they have got in at
the window, they have broken a pane of glass ;’ and the broken
glass undoubtedly was on the inside, leading to the inference that it
had been broken from the outside. There was this singular cireum-
stance,—the window was not large, only thirteen inches by twenty,
and the sash of the window opened at the middle ; therefore it was
only the upper part where a man might get in. There was room
undoubtedly, but the particular position of the window made it a
matter of some difficulty. The very lowest part was four feet from
the ground on the outside, the wall was white-washed, plastered,
and clean, and immediately under the window, where any one getting
in must have alighted, was a white deal table. Outside, the court-
lage was soft muddy ground, the 7; leading to it being mere earth.
The night between Monday and Tuesday was very wet, and the
ground would therefore have been all muddy outside the window.
One would have expected that a person who had broken the window
to get in, having to clamber up four feet of a wall, would have left
on the white wall some indications of the dirt on his feet, or the
breaking of the wall in climbing up and down. But not the slightest
trace of any such mark was discovered, and the table did not show
any symptom of any one having alighted on it with dirty feet, nor
were there in the room any marks of dirty feet. At the back door
also the latch had been withdrawn from the inside, and there was no
violence exhibited on that door. Now in the next room to the front
room, where the body lay, was found an axe, which Ellison was in
the habit of using for the purpose of cutting wood. The surgeon


266 ‘erebral Development of the murderer, Ellison,


found on the back of the head of the deceased two large wounds,
one of which had fractured the skull, apparently inflicted by some
blunt heavy instrument; and upon this axe were found marks of
blood and a bloody handle. Upon the body of the deceased were
found, in addition to these two wounds, blows upon the nose,
bruises and abrasions of the skin upon one hand, a cut on the
other hand, and bruises upon the breast. Ellison having shewn
the deceased to Mrs. Hill, left her, asking her to keep charge of
the house while he went to the police. He went out avowedly
for that purpose, but instead of that went back to Mrs. Richards’s,
and saw there the mother of Mr. Richards, the mason. She says
he asked her to go to his house, as Mrs. Seaman wanted to speak
to her, when in fact he had just left her dead body. He next
went to the Temperance Hotel, saw Mr. Thomas, and said he wanted
to say something to him. He said some one had broken in during
the night and murdered Mrs. Seaman, and then observed that Mrs.
Seaman’s property died with her, and that, as Thomas was aware,
he had considerable expectations from her, and this would materially
interfere with his interests. He stated to Mr. Thomas that the
parties who had done this act had got in by the window or door, for
both the window and back door were broken. But, it is clear that
only the window was broken, and not the back door. At the same
time it is possible that a man might speak of the door being broken
when it was only open. Having made these communications, he
asked Mr. Thomas to accompany him to a magistrate, and they went,
in the first instance, to a gentleman of the name of Carne, a magis-
trate of Penzance, and from thence proceeded to the mayor's.
Ellison made a statement of parties having broken into the house in
the night, and murdered Mrs. Seaman; and shortly afterwards he
made another statement, ‘that the person who had broken in had
stolen a quantity of wearing apparel and a watch.’ On the night
before, Ellison was seen going in the direction of the beach with a
considerable bundle under his arm. When he got to the Temperance
Hotel, within half an hour after, he had no bundle with him, but
must have got rid of it, and what it contained. On the ensuing Tues-
day morning, at an early hour, in a sort of cess or dung-pit, near the
beach, and within a few hundred yards of the Temperance Hotel, a
man named Jaspar, (a poor man, who sometimes went about picking
up rags, or anything he could find) was in pursuit of this his constant
occupation, and in passing this cess-pit he found a quantity of clothes.
There was a frock-coat, part of a pair of trousers, a waistcoat, a shirt,
a pair of drawers, and a pair of stockings. The coat was much torn,
a button had been torn off, and out of another of the buttons the
mould or hard part had also been torn, leaving the covering on the
coat. ‘The coat was similar in make and colour to the one usually
worn by Ellison; and, in the room where the body was found, there
was found also a button which corresponded with the other buttons of
the coat, and there was found also the mould of a button which fitted
in the covering on the coat. The things found by Jaspar were in a
very dirty state, having been taken out of this cess-pit, and he washed


by Dr. Elliotson. 267


them all in water, with the exception of a part of the drawers. With
regard to the waistcoat and shirt, Mrs. Jaspar took out pieces from
them, thinking they might be useful in mending her husband’s clothes,
and the buttons on the remaining part of the shirt she kept were si-
milar to a button found in the room where the murder was committed.
The stockings were like the stockings which Ellison was in the habit
of wearing, and upon detached pieces of the drawers were marks of
blood. Very recently before the murder, Ellison had gone into the
house of Mr. Keegon, a grocer, to tie up his drawer strings, which
were loose. He pulled up the legs of his trousers, and upon those
drawers Mr. Keegon observed a patch in front. Now the drawers
found in the cess-pit had just such a patch as that Keegon had
seen. When the premises were searched the ensuing day, there
were found no articles of dirty linen or anything of the sort ; nor
was there found a single towel, all the towels seen the day before
upon a line in the yard were gone from the place. Ellison had also
stated that a watch had been taken from the premises, but the
watch he had a few days before he gave to James Richards, and
asked him to take care of it. When Ellison went to the mayor, the
policeman, Martin, came in, and brought the news of the murder of
Mrs. Seaman, upon which Ellison at once said ‘I am Ellison, with
whom she lived.’ Martin said ‘you must come to the coroner’s
inquest, for you were the last person that saw her alive ;’ whereupon
Ellison said he had seen her the day before at twelve o'clock, and
he knew it was twelve o’clock, because he heard the guns firing.
Now the guns did fire about that time. Upon the body of the de-
ceased, besides the blows upon the head which caused her death,
were found certain other indications of a recent struggle and violence.
The abrasions of the skin, the cut of the hands, the discoloration of
the breast and the blow upon the nose, evidently showed that some
struggle and conflict had taken place between the parties. Now
there was found upon Ellison also certain indications of some recent
conflict. There was a scratch upon his face, visible to all persons
who saw him on the Monday and Tuesday, and upon one hand a
mark of teeth upon the thumb, apparently of teeth above and below;
while upon the fingers and back of the other hand were strong marks
of bruises. There is every reason to believe that these bruises had
been of recent occurrence, because they grew worse, and more marked
and distinct two or three days after, as it is known bruises will that
have been recently inflicted, He wore artificial teeth, and such teeth
were found in the ashes of the grate blackened and discoloured, evi-
dently having been flung amongst those ashes. After going before
the mayor, Ellison stated to Martin, the policeman, ‘Mrs. Sea-
man’s property is about £36 a year, and £100 in the funds; her
property dies with her ; she was about to be married well, and I said
to her, will you take care of me? She was about to be married to a
gentleman of great, indeed considerable wealth, and my expectations
were very great; I, with Captain Edward Thomas, was about to
have worked a mine; I was to have gone to London to manage about
the matter ; she wished to have it done here, but I did not like that,
as it is a hut we live in.’ ”’


268 Cerebral Development of the murderer, Ellison,


During the trial he calmly took notes of the evidence and ate
heartily of sandwiches.


The gentleman to whom I am indebted for my knowledge
of the case, was present at the trial from eight in the morn-
ing till ten at night, and writes to me that,


“When the jury were head to head consulting together in the
jury-box, (for they did not leave the court,) the prisoner instead of
being, as other mortals would be, in a palpitating state of suspense,
deliberately took out a card and pencil from his pocket, and, having
desired a person near him to place the candle in a more convenient
position for him to see, began to make notes. The jury were
about ten minutes consulting, and, when the foreman returned the
verdict, ‘Guilty of Murder,’ the prisoner evinced no emotion, but
merely turned towards the judge and asked permission to he heard,
which was granted. While the man was taking notes, he once held
the card out at arm’s length near the flame of the candle, the light
of which was shining right in his face. The slightest movement of
the hand or alteration in the countenance could be seen; but his
hand never trembled, and his countenance was much more composed
than the countenance of many who were present.”


The jury, after deliberating ten minutes, found him guilty of
murder. He then made a speech, declaring that the material part
of the evidence was “ palpably false.” Bramble had not uttered “a
single syllable of truth:’ Jaspar had sworn what was “totally
false :’’ Keegon’s evidence he could not conceive that “any one could
possibly believe :” Elizabeth Richards was “totally wrong :” the
doctor had deposed to the body having been dead twelve hours, when
he was clearly proved to have been absent twenty-four: “ these wit-
nesses were false, but several others were false from begining to
end ; some others were totally mistaken.” During the whole address
he “scarcely faltered, and referred with the utmost coolness to his
memorandum.”

While sentence of death was passed, he “looked solemn, but
was firm, and shortly afterwards conversed with those near him with
all his former coolness, and walked out of the dock unsupported;”
and he continued equally firm, buoyed up, the papers say, with the
hope of areprieve. But then on the following Wednesday, when he
was informed there was no hope, “ he took it very coolly, and with
the most astonishing firmness,” which did not abate till he was killed.

On the night after his conviction, he ate, drank, and slept with-
out the slightest visible change in appearance or demeanour. He
had buoyed himself up with the hope that he should obtain a re-
prieve. He drew up a very lengthy and clever memorial, recapitu-
lating the evidence adduced at his trial, and commenting thereon as
he proceeded ; admitting himself to have been guilty of manslaughter,
and endeavouring to prove that at the time he was labouring under a
fit of insanity. There was a point blank refusal of his application.
From the moment of his conviction up to the hour which terminated


by Dr. Elliotson. 269


his existence, he maintained the same coolness and firmness; and
on Monday morning he had not wasted a single ounce, as compared
with the day he first entered the prison.

Ellison had addressed a letter to his solicitors, Messrs. Millett
and Borlase, of Penzance, and, in compliance with his request, Mr.
Millett proceeded to Bodmin, and on Tuesday, the 5th of August,
had an interview with him, and he then clung to the hope of receiv-
ing a commutation of his sentence. Mr. Millett introduced the
subject of a public confession of his guilt. There was a Bible within
reach, and the convict said that he had already confessed to God, and
challenged Mr. Millett to point out a line in the sacred volume
wherein was contained anything like a command for his confessin
to man. Before Mr. Millett retired from the cell, Ellison thanked
him for his attention and kindness, and expressed a desire to see him
again shortly and that he should be with him at the time of his
execution.

The chaplain, the Rev. N. Kendal, was most unremitting in
his attention to his spiritual welfare ; for some days he exhibited no
visible sign of contrition; but for the last three or four days of his
life he appeared perfectly penitent.

Throughout the time of his imprisonment, he ate and drank
with his usual appetite; and on Saturday, he applied for more food
than the usual allowance, with which he was supplied.

On Sunday forenoon he attended divine service in the chapel
attached to the prison, when all the other prisoners attended. The
text was, “‘For we shall all stand before the judgment-seat of
Christ.” He paid marked attention and was very devout. While
the officers connected with the prison were so much affected by the
solemnity of the service as to cause their hands to tremble while
they held their books, Ellison maintained that firmness and extraor-
dinary nerve which had characterized his conduct throughout ; and,
having taken his spectacles from his pocket, he fixed them in their
proper position—held his book without the slightest tremulous mo-
tion, and joined in the responses with great fervour and apparent
earnestness. At the conclusion, Ellison partook of the Holy Sacra-
ment, and evidenced much resignation.

Early on Monday morning, Mr. Millett visited Ellison in the
condemned cell, and even then he hoped that his solicitor was in
possession of a reprieve ; but he was informed to the contrary in
suitable terms, which did not appear to have the least effect upon
his feelings. Before Mr. Millett bid him farewell, Ellison said he
felt assured that his sins were forgiven, and that he should be saved
through the blood of Christ and by the grace of God. He also
thanked Mr. Millett for not having deserted him during his last mo-
ments ; expressed a hope that he should meet him in heaven, and said
he would pray for him. His coolness and self-possession were ex-
traordinary, although he manifested a little excitement, and rubbed
his hands in a similar manner to that described by William Eddy,
when he had the conversation with him at Capt. Thomas’s Tempe-
rance Hotel on the night of the day on which the murder was com-


270 Cerebral Development of the murderer, Ellison,


mitted. Mr. Millett thought he looked very well, indeed much
better than he did when before the coroner’s inquisition ; and this
appears to have been the fact from the statement of a gentleman
officially connected with the prison, who said that he had not fuiled
from the day of his condemnation. Before Mr. Millett left, Ellison
gave him several documents relative to the disposition of the trifling
property he has left, written in a bold and with a steady hand; and sub-
sequently sent him, through the chaplain, the following statement :—
*«* Rev. Mr. Loxdale, Penzance.

‘* Pray tell him that that Redeemer whom he preaches, is precious to his
unworthy creature, Benjamin Ellison. With thanks for the faithful ministration
of His word and ordinances: and may God bless and prosper his soul and his


ministry. Amen.—I know that my Redeemer liveth. Praise God, O my soul.
Amen. Amen.”


Shortly before the executioner proceeded to his cell for the purpose
of pinioning him, the governor visited him, and said that he was come
to see him for the last time, and asked him if he wished to say any-
thing? Ellison replied at first in the negative—but upon considera-
tion, he said yes, he did—and enquired, in the most cool manner,
and with astonishing apparent indifference, what clothes he should
be buried in! The governor told him in those which he wore when
executed. Ellison then looked down over his coat and said that he
thought the one he then wore was too good, and begged to be sup-
plied with an inferior coat, which request was complied with, and he
changed coats only a few minutes before he was hanged.

Precisely at twelve o'clock, the under sheriff demanded the
body of Ellison for execution, in the usual terms. On the execu-
tioner entering the cell to perform the necessary duties that devolved
upon him, Ellison said, ‘My man, you must do your duty.’ Ellison
was then pinioned, to undergo which he stood firm as a rock—exhi-
bited little signs of emotion, and gave the old man no trouble ; nay,
he said to him that he feared his hands were too loose, and requested
that they might be tied firmer. He also told the executioner how
he should the most readily unbuckle his stock and unbutton his
shirt. Before quitting the cell, Ellison shook hands with the chap-
lain, and thanked him for his kind attention ; he also thanked the
governor and all the other officers who had visited him in the dis-
charge of their duties.

The solemn procession was then formed—the chaplain preced-
ing and reading audibly a portion of the funeral service, commencing
with ‘I am the resurrection and the life,’ &e. The other prisoners,
inmates of the goal, were drawn up in two lines, between which the
procession slowly passed. Ellison required no assistance—he walked
to the press-room, adjoining the scaffold, with a firm, unfaltering step,
and seemed to feel less his awful situation than any of the persons
whose duty obliged them to follow. On his way from the cell, he did
not turn his eyes either to the right or to the left, but was engaged
in fervent prayer. On reaching the ladder leading to the press-room
and the scaffold, he ascended with the same firmness as he had before
exhibited—still engaged in devotion. Before he left the press-room,


by Dr. Elliotson. 271


he delivered one of the most beautiful extemporary prayers that those
present ever heard, and with great earnestness and sincerity. He
prayed that his enemies might be forgiven—that the individuals who
had from curiosity assembled to witness the execution, might take
warning by his untimely end, and concluded with the words---‘* O
Almighty God, thou who gavest me my life, and whose right it is to
take away. Amen.” He then requested the executioner to be very
particular in adjusting the rope, and, with a firmness that astonished
every person who witnessed it, he walked out upon the scaffold.

Precisely as the clock finished striking the hour of twelve,
Ellison came forth. He wore a suit of shabby black cloth, boots
loosely put on, without a hat, and his shirt-collar turned out over
his waistcoat, and his neck a little exposed. He walked out with a
firm—a marvellously, incredibly, firm step—but his countenance had
undergone a change—he was pale—not a particle of colour in his
cheek or lip could we discover, and our duty brought us within a few
yards of the unfortunate man. He did not even glance at the im-
mense crowd before him—his eyes were apparently closed, but he
opened them once or twice. While the executioner was adjusting the
rope, the chaplain was near, although not in sight, repeating the
usual prayers, which were audible to those not far distant, in the
most solemn manner, and Ellison prayed most fervently—most
earnestly. There was then a most awful stillness—a quiet that com-
pelled us, involuntarily, to:look‘around, expecting to ascertain some
other than the real cause. Ellison stood erect—firm—inconceivably
so; and, while the executioner was adjusting the rope, he bent his
head to allow its being effected with greater facility, but this must
have been done as it were mechanically ; for he continued to pray
with great fervency, and his hands, which were pinioned, were
raised in the attitude of devotion as far as the rope would permit.
The rope having been properly adjusted, a white cape was placed
upon his head and pulled over his chin—Ae still standing erect—
firm as a statue, and unsupported—continued engaged in prayer ;
his lips were seen to move through the cap—the drop fell—the
females uttered a faint ery—and almost without a struggle Benjamin
Ellison ceased to exist.

There was only one thing he appeared to fear or to shrink
from, and that was the gaze of the public. In speaking of a public
execution, he said, ‘I have no desire but to resign my life into the
hands of God, who made me, but I should prefer the execution
taking place within the walls of the gaol. I have no desire to see
any one, nor to be seen.’ When he found that this request could
not be complied with, he entreated that a screen might be placed in
front of the scaffold, in order that he might be concealed from the
gaze of the assembled thousands ; but the request could not be com-
plied with.

‘Before his execution he made a statement to the governor and
to the chaplain, with a view to relieve the minds of the jury, by
whose verdict he was to be executed, and for the satisfaction of the

public, more than from any desire he felt to relate the circumstances


272 Cerebral Development of the murderer, Ellison,


of the tragedy. We insert it as we received it from the authorities
of the gaol :---

“« The confession of Benjamin Ellison, under sentence of death in
Bodmin gaol, made to the governor and chaplain of that prison
August 10th, 1845.

** He (B. Ellison) declares that the late Mrs. Ruth Seaman died
by his hands in a struggle, but he denies having committed wilful
murder, and states that manslaughter is the extent of his crime.”


His statement as to the origin of the quarrel with Mrs. Seaman
has differed; he having told the governor that it arose about the axe,
and the chaplain, that it arose about some clothing; but he has
made no statement of the particulars in either case.

We have it from authority that the prisoner made a private
confession immediately before his execution, which went seriously to
implicate another person; but at present making the particulars
known might frustrate the ends of justice.


The Firmness of this man exceeded even that of Hocker.
His Self-esteem must have been very great for him to have
ventured on a long cool speech in court, accusing every wit-
ness of falsehood ; it was again manifested in his declaration,
though on the verge of the grave, to Mr. Millett, his soli-
citor, that he had confessed to God, and his challenging that
gentleman to point out a line in the Bible before them where
we are commanded to confess to man. Self-esteem and Love
of Approbation were strongly manifested at the “ condemned
sermon,” in his coolly putting on his spectacles, holding his
prayer-book up, and joining, like Hocker, in the responses
with great fervour; in his volunteering a promise to pray for
Mr. Millett, (it being promised us that the prayers of the
righteous shall be heard,) together with his assurance that
he should meet that gentleman in heaven, as his own sins
were forgiven ; in his refusing to the last to confess that he
murdered the woman, or, if he did on the morning of his
execution, making a private confession : and in his wish to be
executed within the prison-walls, and, on finding this impos-
sible, to have a screen placed before him. His want of all
principle was evident to the last, since within a few minutes
of his execution he denied the murder; and, if he made a
private confession, he acted as Hocker did before, attempted
to implicate another person. When all this is considered, as
well as the fact of his not once losing his appetite, but ac-
tually applying two days before his execution for more than
the usual allowance, and eating it too; of not having altered
in his look or wasted an ounce up to the hour of his death,
nay, of his looking better on the day of his execution than
before the coroner’s inquest ; of his replying to the governor’s


by Dr. Elliotson. 273


enquiry a few minutes before his execution whether he wished
to say anything more, “ No ;” but, upon consideration, asking
“in the most cool manner what clothes he should be buried
in,” and then, looking down his coat, saying it was too good,
and begging to have a worse, and positively changing it for
a worse; of his saying a prayer when walking to the scaf-
fold, not silently, but aloud, and, though apparently extem-
pore and so beautiful that those present had never in all their
lives heard so beautiful a one and therefore no doubt care-
fully prepared for the occasion; and of his calmly begging
the executioner to be very particular in adjusting the rope ;
I cannot but be persuaded that he died like Hocker, a
thorough hypocrite as well as rogue and murderer. The con-
duct of both Hocker and Ellison was perfect in its line;
precisely what they knew would take; and, in the midst of
all the other facts of these two poor wretches, worth nothing.
Such signs of devotion as continual poring over religious
books, praying in the sight or hearing of others, and the
frequent uttering of established phrases, such as,—“ saved
through the blood of Christ,’”—“ our precious Redeemer,”—
“TI know that my Redeemer liveth,”—* praise God, oh my
soul,” &c. &c., are of themselves no more signs of a correct
moral state in the condemned, than they, with strict church-
going, sabbath-keeping, and serious scrupulousness about
endless innocent and indifferent things and artificial sins
created partly by the bigot and partly by the hypocrite,
are of integrity and true virtue in people at large. Indeed
the most unprincipled hypocrites have so generally, in my
experience, been the most particular in their outward observ-
ances and opinions, that I invariably either pass these over in
people as no more indicating the inner man than the color
of the waistcoat ; or regard them, except in very young, weak,
or uninformed individuals, as good reasons for being upon my
guard. And if a criminal is sincere, how little is the value of
the good feelings excited by the forcing process of ministers
of religion, and who work not only upon his moral feelings but
his opinions on matters on which a rational being can come
to a conclusion only by laborious examination of historical
evidence and by critical and philosophical enquiry, making
these latter entirely a matter of feeling, with which they
have no connection. True repentance is not an emotion,
brought on and lasting between the period of condemnation
and execution, but a thorough permanent change of feeling,
such as must require a long time for its establishment and for
proofs of its solidity. To be so earnest for a wretch’s conver-
sion, and kill him off hand in a few days—*“ to launch him


274 Yerebral Development of the murderer, Ellison,


into eternity—into the presence of his Maker,” is as great an
inconsistency as cruelty : for the longest life would not be too
long for his repentance.

If Ellison had really felt contrition, he would have given
more substantial proofs than praying hard before others and
writing pious letters, which cost no effort. He would have
made reparation to all the witnesses so shamefully accused of
falsehood by him—he would have confessed every one of his
enormous lies ; yet he does not appear to have done more than
confess that Bramble’s testimony was substantially correct,
though when first in his cell after his trial he persisted that
Bramble’s evidence was utterly false. He told the governor
that he and his victim quarrelled about the axe ; the chaplain,
that they quarrelled about some clothes :—both palpable false-
hoods. Had he been penitent, he would have been unable
to sleep well; but would have been disturbed, and have fre-
quently been awake and, as he was a Christian, engaged in
prayer in the night. But no; “even after his condemnation
he betrayed no anxiety of mind—no restlessness in his sleep.”
It turned out that he had no property, and the will found in
his house, bequeathing property to Mrs. Seaman, was a piece
of deceit.

Unfortunately no cast was taken of his head. At Newgate
permission has always been given me to have a cast taken of
those who have been executed,* but no interest that I could
make, and I made much, could procure me permission to
have a cast of Tawell. If knowledge were properly spread,
a cast of every remarkable criminal would be made and pre-
served in a scientific collection. The drawings, as far as they
represent the organization, prove his head to have harmonized
with his character. The largest organs, towering at the back
part of the summit, are evidently those of Firmness,—they are
enormously large: those of Self-esteem, just behind and below
it, and of the disposition to violence—Destructiveness, just
above the ears, very large. While, on the other hand, the
whole moral surface—the crown of the head is most wretched,
sloping down precipitately on each side from the summit:
when it does so, the high moral feelings are deficient. The
organs of circumspection, situated high up on each side where
the sides and back of the head unite, are also small, and cer-
tainly, though sly enough, he was, like Hocker, sadly deficient
in circumspection.

His character was determined by certain very large organs
and his very small moral compartment.


* I did not apply for a cast of Crouch, so unjustifiably executed. ( Zoist,
No. IV., p. 449.)


by Dr. Elliotson. 275


The gentleman who observed him with the eye of a phre-
nologist during the whole of his trial reports to me that the
organs of Firmness, the Disposition to Violence—Destructive-
ness, Love of Property, Cunning, and Self-esteem, were very
large : of Conscientiousness, very small. The organs of Vene-
ration, Courage, and the perceptive and reasoning faculties,
large: those of Wit, Ideality and Cautiousness, small. Per-
haps the former, as far as exhibited by this drawing, may be
— of good average size: those of Wit and Ideality,
small.

The physiognomy is decidedly that of a conceited, self-willed,
deceitful, treacherous, malicious, selfish, and mean person.

I cannot close this communication without recording in it
the salutary effect of killing Ellison upon the country around.


“From Sunday afternoon until within an hour of the execution
people were arriving at Bodmin from almost every quarter within 60
miles,—Helston, Penzance, Paul, and places near the land’s end,
and every vehicle that could be mustered seemed to have been in
requisition to witness the death-struggles of a fellow-creature. Before
and after the execution the main street of Bodmin was filled by one
dense mass of human beings. Twenty-five thousand persons wit-
nessed the execution.”

** We were sorry to observe that perhaps one-half or more of the
spectators were females.”

“The majority of the vast multitude remained for the purpose
of an afternoon’s carousal or holiday pleasure. The public-houses
were filled from the basement to the upper story, and in the streets,
which were rendered almost impassible for hours, coarse jests and
ribaldry were frequently heard proceeding from the crowd. Consider-
able numbers of standings were erected, with various juvenile amuse-
ments, and the town presented the appearance of a gay fair day.”


Let it not be said that the lowest only enjoy seeing a man
killed. Juniper Hedgehog thinks that public strangling


“ Brings down the pride of the upper classes,” truly stating that
“many of the nods enjoy it quite as much as the lower orders, only
that they give one or two guineas—according to the beauty of the
murder, for comfortable sitting-room.”’*


* See an exquisite Hedgehog Letter against Mr. Monckton Milnes’s wish
for a law to kill condemned criminals privately, by Douglas Jerrold, in his
Shilling Magazine for last August. ‘‘ What! Make a law for private hang-
ing! With one bit of parchment destroy what I’ll be bold enough to call
one of the chief amusements of the people? Sir James Graham knows
better than this: for he generally contrives to have an execution on Easter
and Whit Monday, just by the way of an early whet to the appetites of the
holiday-makers. First the Old Bailey and then Greenwich ; Mr. Calcraft,
the hangman—and then the fire-eater and the clown. Your bill, sir—do
forgive my boldness—was very rash, and not at all just. They ’ve taken
away bear-baiting, and duck-hunting, and dog-fighting, from what they
call the lower orders; and now you'd deprive ’em of their last and dearest

VOL, III. U


276 Cerebral Development of the murderer Ellison,


Let it not be said that nobles only like the sight of killing
and torture. We have the following account of a recent royal
treat.


A few weeks ago the Queen of Spain and her mother and suite
were recreated by seeing a long rope hung across the sea between
two ships, and in the middle a live goose, whose neck was to be
wrung off by men who jumped up for this purpose from boats which
passed under the rope When a man succeeded in wringing off the
goose’s neck, down he went into the water, and the boat returned to
pick him up.


privilege—you’d, with one dash of the pen, rob ’em of their own public
gallows? And you call yourself a friend of the people, Mr. Milnes—a
stickler for their ancient sports and pastimes ?”

* I have said your bill was unjust, shamefully unjust, unless you can
prove to me that there was a clause in it to what they call indemnify the
housekeepers in the Old Bailey for their loss of vested interests, seeing that
they make no end of money by letting their windows at a popular hanging.
Why a Hocker’s worth any money to ’em.”

“ But it really is shocking to see how a mere Member of Parliament will
set himself up against a Clergyman of Newgate! Didn’t the Rev. Mr. Davis
preach that the whole use and beauty of hanging was to be found in making
it public? According to him, if it was possible to hang a man where all
England might see him strangled, why all England would certainly be the
better for it. I’ve no doubt that the cause of so much crime is in the small-
ness of the Old Bailey, that will only accommodate such a few !”

‘If to see a hanging is no warning to the beholder, do you think that to
hear or read of a hanging would do all the good of an example? Does
what men see, or what they hear, stir’em the most? But let us suppose
that a man is to be hanged inside of Newgate. Why the penny-a-liners that
get their sops-in-the-pan out of the condemned cell,—why they would write
all sorts of pretty things, all kinds of interesting stories about the last
minutes of the criminal, and so the curiosity of the town would be more
agog than ever. The picture newspapers that publish the murderers’ por-
traits—those family papers for the instruction and amusement of the younger
branches, would give half-a-dozen pictures where they now give one. The
secrecy of the thing would give a flavour to the whole matter.

‘And now, suppose that a rich man was to be privately hanged: a
banker we ’ll say, or, saving your presence, even a member of Parliament.
Well, we know how unbelieving is man. There ’s thousands of people who
would never sleep quietly in their beds, for the thought that the said banker
or member was never hanged at all ;—but was smuggled out alive in a coffin,
and shipped abroad. Every year or so, there’d be a letter in the news-
papers from somebody who had seen the banker, somewhere in the Back-
woods, where he had married one of the Chactaws, and got a family of ten
children. No, Mr. Milnes, private hanging won’t do, the people arn’t to
be cheated out of their pleasure after that fashion.

* Besides, Mr. Milnes, all hanging’s a bungle. The gallows is con-
demned, marked to come down ; timber by timber it’s loosening, and it’s
no use trying to keep it together with small corking-pins. No, Mr. Milnes,
it will better become you, be more like your kind, good-natured-self, to
give a pull at the planks; to bring the whole machine to the ground, to
make it a thing of the past, like the bonfires that burnt witches,—and for
the hangmen thrown out of work, why small retiring allowances have been
given to worse public servants.”

See equally admirable remarks in the number for September, p. 197, &c.
Private killing makes one think of assassination, and, leading to many
feelings, would be intolerable.


.


by Dr. Elliotson. 277


This sport being over, the ladies went to a bull-fight. The
Queen sat in the middle, the Queen-mother on her right, and her
young sister the Infanta on her left. The correspondent of our
newspaper could hardly look at the horses, the bull gored them so
Srightfully, but still they were obliged to goon. One bull was so
quiet that the people called for dogs; but, though they were well
tossed, the bull was not roused till they planted fiery darts in his
neck, which burst with a loud explosion and made the animal jump
and rear. The poor horses must have suffered dreadfully, being
goaded on with their entrails trailing on the ground. The men con-
cerned in the sport were crushed several times under their horses.

The next morning the royal ladies went to church, and “ prayed
on their knees,” then left their seats, and repaired to the altar, where
they were blessed by the bishop. The Queen then wished to go to
another bull-fight, but her face happened to be swelled, and her
mother thought it unadvisable, and so she did not see “ three bulls
kill eleven horses, one killing four, and goring them dreadfully.”


Let it not be urged that Spain is a benighted country ;
the queen a Roman catholic, the blessing bishop a Roman
catholic, and the people Roman catholics. Read the past-
times provided still more lately for the young queen of Eng-
land, the mother of a lapful of sweet babies, by a protestant
court in kind-hearted, educated, sentimental, and most mu-
sical*t Germany ; a court celebrated for fostering Luther and
taking an important share in the reformation of the land from
the errors of Popery.


“This space was strongly enclosed by means of stout canvass and
nets, stretched upon poles some six or eight feet high. These de-
fences formed three sides of a square; the fourth was open to the
forest, but guarded by a living fence of chasseurs and drivers, the
former in semi-military array, with cocked hats and feathers, short
swords by their sides, and white staves in their hands. In the centre
of the railed-in space there was constructed a species of circular silvan
bower or arbour, the pillars wreathed with moss and heather, and
decorated with stag-horns—the building might have passed for a
temple to St. Hubert ; but the worthy saint would never have patron-
ized the proceedings of the day. Her Majesty, the reigning Duchess,
and the Queen of the Belgians, took up their places within it. King
Leopold, Prince Albert, Duke Ferdinand of Cobourg, and the Prince
of Leiningen remained in a sort of outer colonnade which ran round
it. In a group at a little distance, both parties attended by nume-


* Music may tame the savage breast, while it is listened to, and codpe
rate with a good nature and good training tomakemen good. But it neither
necessarily expands the intellect nor leads to virtue. Musical people are
just as gross, unprincipled, and unfeeling as the man who has no music in
his soul; neither better nor worse than equal numbers selected at random
from the unmusical. The cerebral physiologist knows that the love of music
depends solely on a very small portion of the brain, which may be defective
while the moral and high intellectual organs are large, or be large while
these are small.

u2


278 Cerebral Development of the murderer Ellison,


rous chasseurs, stood the other sportsmen, including the reigning
Duke, and most of the gentlemen of the suite.”

** Overlooking the deer-slayers rose a steep ascent, overgrown
with brushwood, on which were stationed some hundreds of peasantry
—men and women—eager spectators of the beasts killed and the
killers of the beasts.

“From among them, then, you looked down on the fatal table-
land, hemmed in by a white line of net and canvass, on the circular
bower in the midst, and the dark group of sportsmen at some little
distance. Presently you observed one, then two, then a whole herd
of deer running wildly about within the deadly square. Sometimes
the line of chasseurs and beaters retired within the forest, and pre-
sently you heard their shouts, as they returned driving fresh victims
before them. Round and round, hither and thither, leaping franti-
cally through the underwood, rushed the wretched animals. Every
now and then the crack of a rifle rang sharply, and a flying deer
rolled struggling amid the bushes, or the blood came over its flanks,
and the graceful bound was converted into an agonized limp. Again,
the herd, maddened by the firing and the shouts and hoarse horns of
the drivers, rushed close by the pavilion, or the other station ; a rat-
tling fusillade crackled forth, one or two noble stags leaped high into
the air and fell down dead; others struggled madly amid the fern
and heath, rolling on their flanks, then bounding up only to reel and
stagger, and sink in furious convulsions. Again and again all this
took place. Hardly a shot was fired until the muzzle of the rifle was
within some ten or fifteen paces, at the very farthest, of the wretched
creatures to be butchered. They swept backwards and forwards in
the maddest terror ; there was no escape, no chance, from corner to
corner, from side to side, and still the unpitiable fences surrounded
them, and still the unpitiable rifles fired, and down went the quarry
before the speeding lead. Once, and once only, a noble stag broke
through the rank of chasseurs, and escaped. That was the best
sight of the day. A joyous shout burst, all heartfelt, from the
group round me; an honest good cheer, as the hard-pressed beast
suddenly charged the line of hunters. Staves, cudgels, all such
weapons were directed against it. For a moment the beast swerved,
then recovered ; there was a hush, a noble bound ; the brave hunts-
men quailed before the excited creature, their line was for an instant
broken, and in the next the gallant deer was safe in the depths of the
woods. Not such was the fate of another. In a momentary pause
of the firing it trotted up to within ten yards of the pavilion, stopped,
and looked wistfully towards its inmates; a rifle cracked, and the
creature sunk motionless on the earth: the aim had been a sure one.

* Nothing could be more pitiful than the appearance, every now
and then, of the wounded deer dragging themselves amid the bushes.
All round the pavillion this could be seen, the creatures sometimes
writhing on their bellies and struggling in vain to stand upon their
broken limbs; at others plunging round and round, evidently dizzy
and sick, and then sinking amid the brushwood, disappearing from
the eye, but the rustling and waving of the bushes telling plainly of


by Dr. Elliotson. 279


the last agonies endured amongst them. Occasionally the chasseurs,
with long knives, cut the throats of the struggling animals, and now
and then a stag laid hold of by a group of beaters would kick wildly
out, scattering its captors, and die after the effort. Grim deer
hounds were ready in the leash to be loosed upon any maimed animal
which might by chance escape to languish in the woods. Nine-tenths
of the number driven in from the woods were coolly massacred, shot
down without an atom of display either of skill, courage, I do not
fear to add, humanity. A military band struck up merry tunes as
the work of destruction went on. The deer were literally slaughtered
to the notes of the Polka; and from the pavilion, placed so as to
command the best view of all that went on, the /adies, seated in easy
chairs, listened to the merry sound which harmonized so ill with the
doleful sight.

“The shooting over, the attendants conveyed the slaughtered
deer upon a species of litters from all parts of the field towards the
pavilion. They were laid in a row before it; I counted their number,
_ fat deer, of whom 25 were stags ; a couple of roedeer were also
shot.

“‘ The Jadies passed along the line of dead on the way to their
carriages. It was a wretched sight. The poor creatures arranged
side by side---their dull, dim, dead eyes looking as ghastly as the
wounds from which the clotted blood came oozing in black drops
down the yet warm carcase. I had as lief see a knacker’s yard.

‘* The firing lasted about two hours.”

The next day, like the Spanish royal party, “the Queen, accompa-
nied by Prince Albert and the reigning Duke and Duchess, attended
divine service in the Augustine church, the principal one in Gotha.
The rites are conducted as at Cobourg, after the Lutheran manner.

“The church was crowded, and a vast throng remained outside,
to witness the arrival and departure of the royal and ducal party.”’*


* To make the matter worse, the Germans never thought of the intellec-
tual beings who are the true glory of their nation. “‘ Within a walk of Gotha
stands Weimar, the abode of Schiller, of Goethe, of Herder, and of
Wieland-” There too lie the three first; Schiller and Goethe reposing in a
royal tomb on each side of their patron, Duke Charles Augustus, who must
have felt what true greatness was to honour them and himself thus. Ina
truly civilized state of society, the first anxiety at Gotha would have been
to conduct our queen to these heart-stirring abodes and graves which no
Englishman can travel near and not feel it a misfortune if anything prevents
him from visiting.

In boasting of civilization, let us not forget that the nation which regards
itself and is regarded by many as at the head of civilization, views military
glory as the highest distinction, and bitterly envies all merit in men of every
other nation, and that, when one of its colonels three months ago suffocated
with lighted faggots nearly 1,000 poor Arabs—men, women, children, and
infants at the breast, shut up in a cave—their cries being dreadful, till at
jength nothing was heard but the crackling of faggots,—the hellish atrocity
was defended publicly at Paris in the highest quarters by renowned persons ;
and at the same time musty holy relics, said by the Archbishop of Paris to
have been hidden ever since the first revolution, were exhibited at three differ-
ent times in Notre Dame, by his orders, for the devotion and improvement
of the Parisians.


280 Cerebral Development of the murderer Ellison.


All the Christian world is still teeming with selfishness,
hypocrisy, pride, miserable ambition, cruelty, and meanness.
During the eighteen hundred years since Christ published his
pure and plain morality, Christians have been masacreing
each other and the poor heathens, on some pretext or other,
to the amount of myriads of myriads, praising God with
pomp and ceremony for all the bloodiest slaughters. For
eighteen hundred years also have countless myriads professed
to be his sincere followers,—originally nick-named Christians,
and now pitying or hating those who do not bear the name,
—believing in a future state of eternal rewards and eternal
punishment, in ancient historical and supernatural statements
and mystical doctrines and interpretations as absolutely ne-
cessary to be believed in order for us to be good or fit to be
associated with or to escape eternal torment ; each solemnly
shaking his head at the mention of another whose super-
natural notions are not the same as his own. Surely the plan
requires some change. Matters could not be worse if men
were also to study their race and themselves, as a portion of
nature; were to do with their race as they do with the rest
of nature, inanimate, vegetable, and animal,—study it and
its laws as a branch of natural knowledge, and see that it is a
mass of organized matter, with numerous parts, all possessed,
through their composition and organization, of certain powers,
and inevitably obeying fixed laws in its formation, and in all
its operations after it is formed, and therefore to be treated
scientifically—by natural and not supernatural measures.
Let men know that they are but living brains, with various
accessories. Let them understand the true physiology of the
brain. Let them learn that what leads to health and to the
real, permanent, dignified happiness of themselves and their fel-
low creatures, is virtue; and they will, seeing the reason, as
in the case of all other natural knowledge, for virtue, love to
practise it, and love those and those only who do practise it,
—never trouble themselves about the speculative and mystical
opinions of others,—care nothing for the accidental and gene-
rally undeserved distinctions of birth, rank, titles, ceremony
and wealth, which are now hungered and thirsted after,—be
thankful if their own cerebral organization is good, but take
no merit to themselves, as they did not make themselves,—be
humiliated, and feel the necessity of the greatest efforts, if
their eyes and hands prove to them that it is bad,—prize
those whose organization they perceive is good, and sincerely
pity those whose organization is bad, though in their pity
not fecling themselves called upon to associate with bad or-
ganizations and run the chance of suffering from them, any
more than with any from whom they have already suffered.


On the Organ of Conscientiousness. 281


The newspapers conclude the account of Ellison’s execu-
tion by informing us that

** A most lamentable exhibition of superstition took place. The
people crowded around the executioner (a benevolent-looking farmer,
72 years old, with flowing silver locks) to purchase short pieces of
the rope for ls. each piece, for the cure of king’s evil, rheumatism,
and other diseases. We could scarcely believe that we lived in the
nineteenth century, when witnessing such infatuation.”


Was this more lamentable superstition and infatuation than
the belief of thousands of the religious world, and of many
evangelical preachers, even in the Church of England, that
the natural phenomena of mesmerism effected by movements
of the hands before a person’s face, as naturally as the sparks
of an electrical machine by turning the cylinder round, are
supernatural effects brought about by supernatural creatures
called evil spirits? Clergymen thus grossly ignorant are al-
lowed by their bishops to officiate in the churches and teach
the people.


II. On the Organ of Conscientiousness. By Mr. R. R. Noet.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


S1r,—The following examination of the feeling of Con-
scientiousness was sent two years ago to the editor of the
Phrenological Journal, but refused admittance on the ground
that other papers of a similar character had been returned to
their authors. As I still believe the views of the Edinburgh
phrenologists on a special faculty of Conscientiousness to be
erroneous, and the organic data on which they are said to be
based unsatisfactory ; and as I think it wrong to shut the
door to further investigations of the supposed functions of
several of the so-called fundamental faculties of the brain, I
have ventured to send you my MSS. in the hope that you
may find them worthy of a place in your admirable journal.

I remain, Sir,
Yours most obediently,
Rosavitz, Bohemia. R. R. Nog.


‘«¢ As the man is, so is his God,’ says a true proverb, and we add, so is his
conscience too.’’—ZIdeler.

Entirely agreeing, as I do, with the doctrine of material-
ism as advocated by the editors of The Zoist, it is necessary
for me to state, that I have used the terms mind, mental,


ee


282 On the Organ of Conscientiousness,


psychological, &c., in the following pages merely to express
the aggregate of cerebral nervous phenomena. Although in
the present age these terms are still generally supposed, espe-
cially when used in the abstract, to denote something purely
spiritual, yet they are by most men, whatever their views of
the essence of the mind or soul may be, employed de facto
to designate the higher manifestations of animal life, and
thus they can bear a material interpretation. On another
point, too, it is necessary for me to make a few preliminary
remarks, before I enter on the subject I have more parti-
cularly in view; namely, the examination of those feelings of
conscientiousness which are implanted in the human organi-
zation. It may be said, that it is absurd in a cerebral phy-
siologist to attempt to decide upon the existence of any inborn
fundamental faculties and their primitive organs of the brain,
by any other method than by appealing to the organic facts ;
and that any mere examination of the various propensities,
feelings, thoughts, &c., of human beings as displayed in life,
will not suffice to teach us what are these original powers.
Into this question it is not my purpose to enter at full at pre-
sent ; I shall confine myself therefore to a few observations.

Although I am far from being an unconditioned approver
of the methods followed by the metaphysical and psycholo-
gical schools, which are generally too artificial and speculative
and too little based on a many-sided observation of anthro-
pological facts, yet as the science of physiology consists in
the comparison of vital manifestations with the development
and other conditions of organic parts, a knowledge of these
manifestations must exist previously to or accompany the ob-
servation of the latter. The method which Gall pursued in
teaching his discoveries was evidently correct. In giving the
natural history of each faculty, his object was to prove that
mankind in general, as well as brutes, possess certain inborn
faculties or powers, the activity of which are displayed with
more or less energy under every possible variety of combina-
tion with other faculties, as likewise under every variety of
external circumstances, so as to stamp them with an original
specific character. Had he not acted thus, he could only
have asserted that in particular cases his observations esta-
blished coincidences between the development of certain
parts of the head and the manifestations of certain propen-
sities and modes of conduct, and he would have been far from
able to prove that the functions of the brain can be reduced
into an aggregrate of powers, each possessing a primitive
fundamental character, which must form part of an harmo-
nious whole.


by Mr. R. R. Noel. 283


Now, it cannot be denied, that actual experience of the
manifestations of the mind, if correct and extensive enough,
must give the key to the whole of the human propensities,
&ec.; and as a unity and harmony must be found to exist in
every system of nature, if it can be shewn that some of the
so-called primitive functions of the brain, when closely ex-
amined, analysed and compared with other functions, which
had been previously established, and perhaps on better
grounds, disclose a want of precision, an inconsistency (and
even repetitions) in the mode of explaining the phenomena
of the human mind, we may be satisfied that we have not only
not arrived at the right interpretation of nature, but that the
empirical facts themselves, from which we have drawn our in-
ferences, cannot have been sufficiently numerous or carefully
enough examined.

I have been led to this opinion owing to doubts which
have gradually arisen in my own mind, as to the correctness
of the views of the generality of phrenologists, on some of
those faculties which they consider to be of a primitive cha-
racter. I have not been able to find the facts of organization
on which they are said to be based, invariable and sufficiently
strong and conclusive to warrant the adoption of these views,
and have therefore felt myself justified in trying to analyse
and reflect upon my experience of human nature, as well as
of my own inward consciousness, to see whether they would
stand this test.

With regard to the fundamental principles of cerebral
physiology, the grand divisions of the brain into the so-called
animal, moral and intellectual regions, the facts are so
thoroughly established by most extensive experience, and are
so in harmony with all the known laws of physiology, that
none but the ignorant or prejudiced can refuse to acknow-
ledge their truth. I state therefore distinctly, that my doubts
have reference only to a few of the subdivisions of these re-
gions—to some of those organs which, as it seems to me, upon
insufficient grounds, are considered to be fundamental and
primitive. And if these so-called primitive faculties, when
examined in the manner alluded to, can be found reducible
into complex mental states, or operations, displaying the
functions of other more fully established organs, and the in-
fluence of different inward and outward conditions, surely the
cause of truth will be aided.

That many of the emotions which agitate the body, and
become motives to the actions of mankind, however much
of unity they may appear to display, are nevertheless of a
complex character, arising from the combined and simulta-


284 On the Organ of Conscientiousness,


neous actions of various cerebral parts, there can be no doubt.
If we are to look for distinct organs, wherever we observe any
variety of emotion, the number of these organs must be im-
measurably greater than has yet been supposed, whilst the
rules laid down by phrenologists for estimating complex men-
tal states, or the “combinations in activity of organs,” and
the influence of various bodily and external conditions, can
have little or no foundation in truth. To these doctrines,
however, my own experience has led me to attach great im-
portance, since, by attending to them, we find an easy solu-
tion of the innumerable varieties and shades of difference in
character and disposition which we daily see around us, whilst
we are thus led to study each individual as a whole—to bestow
minute attention on the action of each primitive faculty, on
the influence of the various bodily conditions, as the here-
ditary constitution, the so-called temperaments, the state of
health, &c., and those of the outward world. The intellectual
powers derive a high gratification from the process of analy-
tical and synthetical reasoning, which this manner of examin-
ing the mental phenomena enables us to pursue; it being,
however, understood that all reflection must be based on an
extensive observation of empirical facts. Surely these in-
tellectual operations are not to be undervalued? These facul-
ties which give to man his reasoning power, have their pecu-
liar laws and their relationship to the external world, as well
as the mere perceptive faculties; and however striking and
numerous those observations may be, on which the principles
of phrenology are based, we shall never succeed in satisfying
the higher class of minds, and free ourselves from the reproach
of mere empirism, so long as positive inconsistencies can be
detected in our so-called system. Mankind will ever take
delight in analyzing and reasoning upon the mental opera-
tions. All psychological writers do not display mere vague
and abstract speculations only, and if this class of thinkers
have not sufficiently attended to anthropological and physiolo-
gical facts, their works nevertheless contain much, I must be-
lieve, which the cerebral physiologist may study with ad-
vantage.

That I am capable of thoroughly analyzing and expound-
ing the phrenological doctrines of the various functions of the
brain, so as to offer a perfect theory, I am not presumptuous
enough for a moment to imagine. Probably there are many
organs yet to be discovered, so that any attempt at forming a
system must be, to say the least, premature. It is in the
spirit of inquiry only, and the wish to correct what I believe
to be erroneous views that I venture to state my objections,


by Mr. R. R. Noel. 285
and offer a few remarks on some of the generally accepted
organs. If it should be found, however, by competent judges,
that my experience is insufficient, my views erroneous, or my
reasoning defective, it will give me pleasure to have my errors
pointed out.

The phrenological faculties, of the so called affective class,
of which I have found most reason to doubt, are Concentra-
tiveness, Conscientiousness, Hope, and Imitation. As it is
of the highest importance for ethical science and moral edu-
cation, that the theory of Conscientiousness should be clear
and satisfactory, I have chosen this faculty as the first respect-
ing which I have attempted to put my views in an English garb,
that they may be submitted to the opinion of your readers.

Before I enter, however, into the subject I have in view,
I must venture to deprecate a kind of a priori reasoning which
some phrenologists seem occasionally disposed to fall into
when arguing with such of their brethern as entertain
opinions on any faculty, different from their own, viz., the
argumentum ad hominem, the easy assertion, “ You have not
the organ and faculty in question, sufficiently developed your-
self to enable you to appreciate its specific emotion—its in-
fluence on human conduct, &c.” My opinion is, that those
persons whose intellects are large enough to give them the
capacity to understand the higher truths of any science, can-
not fail, if it is their earnest wish, to observe and comprehend
such psychological facts as the conduct of mankind in general
exhibits. Even their own deficiencies in certain feelings or
intellectual capacities, when they on the whole are gifted with
a brain of average size and health, coupled with the facts
before them,—that other persons manifest strong propensities
which they themselves under any circumstances scarcely
feel, or display talents without an effort, which no labour
can develop in their own minds,—must form striking proofs
that such propensities and talents must have their origin in
special powers of the mind, or rather in organic conditions,
which in themselves are wanting, or which exist only ina
very slight degree. With regard to the faculty in question,
if it depend—as has been asserted to me by a celebrated
phrenologist—on a large development of the supposed organ
to be able to understand the emotions to which it is said to
give rise, then surely we must expect that the great founder
of cerebral physiology himself would not have denied its claim
to rank as a primitive independent power and have left its
discovery to Spurzheim. A mere glance at the heads of Gall
and Spurzheim will suffice to show how much more promi-
nent the part marked No. 16 is in the former than in the


286 On the Organ of Conscientiousness,


latter. But this is not the only fact of this nature which has
come under my observation. In the following remarks I
shall try at least to be as objective—to use a German term—
as possible. I state, however, once for all, my inward convic-
tion, that whatever the elements or sources of the sense and
the feelings of Conscientiousness may be, these are undoubt-
edly deeply implanted in human nature.

On another point, also, it is as well, perhaps, to say a few
words. By many it may be considered that the following re-
marks are far too diffuse,—that I have entered into some su-
perflous explanations in treating of the sense of Conscientious-
ness, and repeated views already expressed by different writers
of high talent and which are well known to all phrenologists.
For the sake, however, of guarding against misapprehension,
and because it seems to me that Spurzheim and Ais disciples
have strangely disregarded many of the complex operations of
the brain, the influence of an harmonious development of the
cerebral parts, and of education in its full sense, teaching that
Conscientiousness depended on one particular faculty, it has
seemed to me advisable to act as I have done.

I do not, however, offer the following views as a complete
and full examination of all that is connected with the sense of
Justice. I have attended principally to such kinds of feeling
and conduct as are usually displayed in society, and which are
generally attributed by phrenologists to the influence of the
organ in question. My observations will be principally con-
fined to the following heads :—

lst. The more ordinary or ruder ideas of Justice and In-
justice, as displayed in society in general, and reflected more
or less in all laws and institutions.

2nd. The moral appreciation of Justice or rather of Equity.
The emotions of conscientiousness and approval or disapproval
of human conduct in general, with reference to the duties man
is said to owe to God and to his fellows. .

3rd. Individual or subjective Conscience, the approval or
disapproval of our own feelings and actions, the various feel-
ings of duty, obligation, incumbency, &c.

4th. Uprightness and firmness of conduct, strength of
character, moral will, the power of acting according to the
individual views of right and wrong.

Although the highest moral sense of justice, of right and
wrong, of duty in the abstract, whether it be with reference
to our own conduct or to that of others, must necessarily
spring from the same sources; still we see in actual life, that
there is a vast difference in the common opinion of justice, in
the approval or condemnation of certain actions, accordingly


by Mr. R. R. Noel. 287


as people themselves are parties concerned, or calm spectators
only of the conduct of others. By attending to this differ-
ence, I think we shall find it less difficult to solve the problem
whether there be a separate and specific organ and faculty of
Conscientiousness or not.

Before I attempt, therefore, to examine this higher moral
appreciation of right and wrong, it will be well to glance at
the simpler and more ordinary views of justice, as displayed in
the opinions of the mass of mankind, and reflected in the laws
of the most civilized countries.

Is it not clear, that our first notions of justice and injus-
tice, are principally the result of experience? Through the
natural activity of our various faculties, we become acquainted
with their value to us. We instinctively love our existence,
our bodily well-being, our comforts, our property, the good
opinions of others, the objects of our attachment and esteem,
&c. In short, all our animal and moral wants, our domestic
and social relationships, are dear to us; and in seeking their
gratification, we desire to have liberty of action, and to be
protected from the aggressions and injuries of others. Each
faculty, however, in making us acquainted with our own wants
and desires, promotes our knowledge of human nature in
general. We find that we cannot check our neighbour’s free-
dom of action, any more than we will allow our own to be
checked ; and thus, to a certain extent, we arrive at a sense of
justice. Still each propensity in excess of development, is
apt to seek too much indulgence, and to sin against the rights
of others. As population and civilization have advanced,
written laws have been found necessary for the protection of
society and the punishment of individual aggressors. It is
clear, however, that no laws can be universally respected
which exclusively aim at the protection of certain classes only.
Nevertheless, laws vary in different countries according to the
cerebral development, and the degree of enlightenment of
the more influential classes at the period of their framing, and
according to geographical climatic influences, &c. ; and to this
day, even in the most civilized countries, they are not free
from the reproach of undue regard to the interests of the
wealthy and privileged classes. In all laws the ruder feelings
of human nature have been more or less reflected ; the justice
which they display has been generally founded on short-
sighted views of expediency; therefore retaliation, punishment
and example, have been the objects principally aimed at. The
sword has been the true emblem of punishment and revenge,
whilst the scales have figured more in mockery than as em-
blematical of even-handed justice. Thus the proverb, “sum-


288 On the Organ of Conscientiousness,


mum jus, summa injuria est,” and the distinction which
most men draw between justice and equity.

It is still clearer, that many of the primitive notions of
right and wrong, are obtained through experience of the
natural impulses of our inborn propensities, when we attend
to the earliest habits of children, and the common measures
adopted to promote their moral education. Most children, in
their instinctive attempt to gratify their desires, are naturally
disposed to infringe the rights of others. There is a wide
difference in their early comprehension of the meum and the
tuum. They soon learn the meaning of property, but still are
at first more attentive to protect their own, than to respect
that of others. They resist or resent too, any real or appar-
ent aggression, with all the instinctive energy of Acquisitive-
ness, Combativeness, Destructiveness, and Self-esteem. Now,
how do we correct these faults? Do we not go practically to
work? We teach them the necessity of doing to others as
they would they should be done by, and point out to them
how others have the power to retaliate. We teach them the
pleasure of giving, and of being kind and considerate to those
around. We arouse their Veneration, their admiration for the
noble and good. We teach them too, to fear the condemna-
tion of their elders. We appeal to their ambition, to their
feelings of self-respect, and tell them to be ashamed of doing
that which they themselves will one day clearly see, and
which every good man will consider, to be wrong. We thus
stimulate the various motives to virtuous conduct. Experience
thus takes root in the mind, and its influence grows up with
the growth of the individual. There is, however, a vast differ-
ence in the effect such lessons make, how often soever, and
how judiciously they may be repeated, accordingly as children
are individually organized. There are negative and positive
aids to the development of a true sense of justice, or of right
or wrong; and in examining these, we shall arrive at the
elements of that higher moral Conscientiousness which, as it
seems to me, phrenologists have wrongly attributed to a
special organ of the brain. A being is negatively disposed
to be just, the less the selfish propensities are developed,
whilst he is positively inclined to ree. justly, the more per-
fect the development of Benevolence and Veneration in pro-
portion to the mere animal desires. Such a being, if pos-
sessed of an average understanding, receives the good seed
instinctively into his mind; and if that combination of
faculties likewise be added, which tend, as I shall presently
show, to give self-respect and self-command, he not only
feels the beauty of justice and truth abstractedly, but is


by Mr. R. R. Noel. 289


also disposed to act as his intellectual judgment and pure
moral emotions dictate. It is unnecessary to dwell long
upon the fact, that the grand positive aid to virtue, the main
element of natural goodness, of the feelings of justice, when-
ever the happiness or suffering of others are implied, results
from Benevolence. It is this faculty which puts in its voice
against cruelty or oppression, whether we ourselves or others
are inclined to aggress; which prompts us to pity the injured,
to console and redress their wrongs; and which arouses our
combativeness and destructiveness to defend the weak. It is
at the same time that faculty which militates against revenge,
which leads us to be merciful, and which tempers the rigour
of those laws which society has founded for the protection of
life, property, and those other objects, which the activity of
the inborn faculties cause to be so dear to all. Gall consi-
dered this organ as producing the moral sense, and he was
correct in the main, for that pure element of Conscientious-
ness which is comprised under the term equity, must be
claimed as belonging to its functions.

The second grand element of the moral sense, as acknow-
ledged by all phrenologists, is Veneration. It is this faculty
which gives the feelings of reverence and respect for God and
his laws, and promotes our reliance on their wisdom and
beauty ; it inspires us with admiration for truth and virtue,
and for all that is elevated and noble. These two faculties
are, therefore, clearly sufficient to account for the pure moral
emotions ; and deducting for the opposing influence of strong
animal and egotistical desires, they will be found to form our
principal motives to virtuous conduct.

On the other hand, those in whom the animal propensities,
unfortunately, are in a state of excessive development, (the
low wide heads), are always more or less inclined to act with-
out regard to truth, or the rights of others; and if the reason-
ing faculties are likewise deficient, such persons are even
incapable of understanding the beauty of justice in the
abstract.

By attending to these differences of organization, it be-
comes clear, why those who have the moral faculties relatively
large, are most inclined to feel real sympathy with the
oppressed, and with all sufferers; and why those in whom the
inferior faculties predominate, only do so, when no self-
sacrifice is demanded, and then only in proportion to their
estimation of any particular case of injustice, through that
instinctive mental process of placing themselves in the situa-
tion of those who are the victims of the selfishness of others.
These inferior organizations, with their little reasoning power,


290 On the Organ of Conscientiousness,


and that little biased by their animal propensities, are apt to
approve entirely of the ordinary conduct of the mass of man-
kind, which more highly gifted natures detect to be far from
the standard of morality and justice.

These differences of organization, explain further why
those with low wide heads, when themselves not sufferers
from the vices of others, are naturally inclined to admire
criminal conduct, and to sympathize with evil doers. Such
characters are excited by the daring, the energy, the violence,
the sensuality of criminals; they admire, and are inclined to
emulate such bad examples, and injustice is a word which
they only then use, when society prevents the indulgence of
their own selfish desires.

But we can see yet more distinctly whether there be a
special faculty for the highest moral sense or sense of justice,
when we attend to the different impressions which different
crimes and offences make upon individual minds, to the daily
judgments and condemnations of the actions of others, which
we hear expressed in society at large. How differently are
not offences against the person, against property, against reli-
gion, against females, or children judged of? How different
are not the views of justice displayed? How strikingly in-
fluenced by sex, age, and education? Many will approve of
the conduct of arich creditor, if he cast an unfortunate debtor
into prison, as law and justice are on his side, whilst others
cannot contemplate such an act without moral disapprobation
and pain. I need not dwell on this subject, for it is well
known that conduct which will outrage the feelings of one
man will be thought leniently of by another. Individual
organization, mental culture, and peculiar circumstances
causing to be exhibited in this respect every variety and mo-
dification of feeling and judgment.

I need likewise but to allude to the fact, that most men
are bad judges in their own causes; the strength of the pas-
sions, biasing and obscuring the reasoning powers, and lead-
ing to the use of sophistry. Many a man, who, when smart-
ing under a real or fancied wrong, has yielded, though most
reluctantly, to the sound advice of a friend, has lived to ex-
press his thanks with tears of joy for having been preserved
from some act of meanness or injustice. And not only in our
causes, but in those of our relations and friends, is our judg-
ment frequently wrong. The strength of our attachments,
the law of the first impressions biasing our views, absorbing
our feelings, and turning the latter into particular channels,
easily explain this fact ; especially when we consider too, the
excitable nature of our feelings, and that very few men are


by Mr. R. R. Noel. 291


possessed of sufficient sobriety of judgment and power of re-
flection in general, to enable them to perceive and appreciate
even their usual motives.

But apart from the temporary excitement of certain feel-
ings, which, it may be said, would prevent the activity of a
faculty of Conscientiousness, as well as the exercise of the
judgment,—let us look to the conduct of even the higher
class of minds—of those who love equity and are thoroughly
capable of appreciating justice in the abstract, and see whether
their vision is always equally powerful and clear—their Con-
scientiousness equally tender and nicely poised in respect to
the whole of their own conduct as to that of others. It is
seldom that some little foible, some weak point, in fact some
one organ in excess, does not disturb the clearness of their
view as regards themselves, and cause them to overlook or
judge very leniently of some one dereliction of duty. One
man, whose character on the whole is virtuous and upright,
may be too proud and apt to wound the feelings of others ; a
second has too much ambition, or is too susceptible of the
opinion of the world: a third is austere and condemns the
innocent amusements of his neighbours; a fourth may be too
indulgent to his friends; a fifth to his children; a sixth
attends rather too much to the care of his property, and is
not entirely conscientious in its use; a seventh indulges in the
gratification of the palate to the detriment of his health, &c.

These peculiarities of conduct, which even the best men
in some degree display, seem to me to assist in showing that
there are always certain modifications and shades of difference
in individual conscientiousness,—that this is partly a negative,
as well as a positive quality, and that it is impossible to define
clearly any full and perfect sense of right and wrong, any
controller of our conduct, as the function of one and the same
separate fundamental faculty. It is easy, however, to account
for any peculiar shade of weakness in minds, that are on the
whole alive to the sense of justice, by admitting that, however
nearly balanced the various faculties may be, still some one is
in excess of development or of activity. We see, therefore,
that knowledge of the value of human actions and reflection
in general, and, particularly, that self-knowledge and strict
examination of our own conduct, must always be required to
produce perfect conscientiousness in all things.

The influence of knowledge and reflection on the pro-
gress of our moral character must be duly taken into ac-
count. Our intellectual faculties enable us to treasure up
the experience of actual life, as well as to search out and
apply the truths of science. Indeed, in one point of view, it


may be said, that if phrenology has established a separate
VOL. III. x


292 On the Organ of Conscientiousness,


faculty of Causality, this very faculty in discovering truth, in
perceiving the connections of phenomena, and in tracing out
the causes and the results of human actions, must itself derive
a gratification, analogous to that which a faculty of colour
derives in perceiving the beauty and harmony of colours, or of
form in perceiving those of forms: but without attaching im-
portance to this view, it is well known what influence experi-
ence and reflection have upon our conduct, how greatly they
modify the activity of our passions and direct them to higher
objects. That which to-day appears to us of value, to-morrow we
may despise. The being with circumscribed intellect, and very
large Love of Approbation, may remain a coxcomb all his days ;
but he who has an equal development of the same organ,
joined to a really capacious understanding, however much he
may have indulged in foppery in his youth, will certainly
choose higher objects for his ambition in later days.

Still, whilst according all due weight to the results of in-
tellectual activity, I by no means underrate the influence of
the affective faculties on the intellect itself. Such is the inti-
mate connection of all the cerebral parts, their mutual influ-
ence, their action and reaction on one another, that, I repeat,
it is greatly owing to the activity of Benevolence and Vene-
ration, and probably of some other faculties, as those called
Wonder and Ideality, that we are prompted to seek out moral
truths, and to appreciate them when discovered.

But it will be replied to what I have already advanced
to shew the complex nature of the sense of Justice, &c., that
distinct from the common views of Right and Wrong-—from
the moral emotions of Benevolence and Veneration,—which
are liable to excess of action, and to lead to abuses—and dis-
tinct, too, from the intellectual judgment, that man is gifted
with other peculiar emotions, with feelings of personal obliga-
tion, of duty and incumbency; that these are yet to be satis-
factorily accounted for, which can only be done by acknow-
ledging the existence of a peculiar faculty of Conscientious-
ness, per se, the organ of which, indeed, has been established
by the observation of Spurzheim,and Combe and their disciples.

With regard to the evidence of organization, I have already
stated, that my own experience leads me to consider it by no
means conclusive ; I therefore continue to examine this ques-
tion from the psychological point of view.

There is certainly a vast difference between the moral
feelings and the moral actions of mankind. With too many,
alas! the wish is good, but the will is weak; the selfish desires
are nearly in all heads the largest, and the temptations to im-
mediate indulgence too numerous and seducing.

There are but few men who act up to their own standard


by Mr. R. R. Noel. 993


of virtue. It is not necessary to do more than again allude to
the drawbacks to virtuous conduct, arising from the influence
of strong animal desires ; nor need I dwell upon the fact that
a large proportion of mankind, when not actually exposed to
the temptations of the world, or engaged in the conflicts of
society, and especially in such moments when circumstances
are favourable to the stimulus of their moral emotions, are
fully capable of estimating virtue and goodness in general.
The discrepancies between feeling and conduct, arising
from the causes alluded to, are well known, at least to all
phrenologists. How are we then to account for the feelings
of personal obligation, incumbency and duty, and that in par-
ticular which gives the power of self-control, and that moral
will which is shown in strength of character? In examining
this question it will be necessary to go somewhat into detail,
and to speak of incumbency, obligation, duty, &c., in general.
It must be allowed that these terms have a very relative
meaning, and that when we analyse mental phenomena dis-
tinctly, each affective faculty is found to give rise to particular
feelings of incumbency, &c., according as actions are con-
cerned, which stand in relation to its peculiar function ; thus
Benevolence, largely developed, enjoins us to do good to
others, that we may avoid its reproaches if we act otherwise.
But this will be clearly seen, if we direct our attention to
what is usually termed conscience, remorse, &c. Experience
and analogy show here again, that each affective faculty con-
tributes in producing a kind of conscience; causes us to feel
regret and pain, and in extreme cases even remorse, whenever
we have acted in a manner opposed to its peculiar emotions
or desires. Can the different kinds of self-reproaches, and
our various feelings of incumbency, responsibility, &c., be
accounted for satisfactorily in any other way? Indeed in like
manner as we feel pleasure and satisfaction whenever we have
fulfilled any task, or done any thing which we consider useful
and necessary, so whenever we see we have acted wrong, that
is, not attended to the voice of certain strong feelings and our
intellectual appreciations of what is right and necessary, al-
though with reference only to our mere personal and worldly
interests and desires, we produce disharmony in our minds, in-
ward conflicts, dissatisfaction and pain. Thus the man who
is rolling in wealth may be a prey to remorse if, in an un-
guarded moment, he has involved himself in some great and
unusual expense or pecuniary loss, &. This was Gall’s doc-
trine, and I must believe it to be correct. Even when through
temporary indolence, ignorance, or inattention, we have merely
neglected to gratify any strong faculty, we are often subject
x 2


294 On the Organ of Conscientiousness,


to great pain and regrets. The miser who has missed an op-
portunity to screw a higher rate of interest out of some half-
bankrupt debtor; the merchant or tradesman who has ne-
glected to drive a profitable bargain; the sensualist who has
not taken sufficient advantage of favourable circumstances to
pluck the blossom of chastity from the bosom of innocence ;
all these and others, in whom some one or more faculties are
strongly pronounced, are frequently more or less the victims
of long continuing feelings of regret. We do not call such
pains the qualms of conscience, because we use the term con-
science to designate deeper and more complex states,—the
pain our moral and other faculties experience when we neglect
or outrage our sentiments of duty to God or man. The
former mental states, to which I have alluded, are neverthe-
less plainly analogous to the latter.

And can it be denied that even these cases where the feel-
ings of pain and regret are of a higher or moral nature in-
variably show a specific character, accordingly as this or that
faculty is more largely developed and has been particularly
wounded? An individual with large Veneration and Caution
will suffer deeply if he have sinned against his religious be-
lief,—against the doctrines and usages of his church ; whilst
he will look with indifference on many sensual, unkind, or
niggardly actions of his life. With others it may be just the
reverse. He in whom Benevolence is the most prominent
organ, if, when under excitement, he has been unkind or un-
just in word or deed towards a neighbour, will know no peace
until he has made atonement or besought forgiveness. Of
all the feelings of regret and remorse, few are more intense
than those which arise when a person whose love of approba-
tion is excessively developed has, through his own foolish or
unguarded conduct, drawn upon himself the ridicule and con-
tempt of the world. The feeling of shame in such cases often
leads to fearful results. There is, however, a feeling of
higher shame, the fear of disgrace in the eyes of God and of
loss of his favour, the dread of future punishment,—the re-
sult of Veneration, Wonder, Self-Esteem, Love of Approba-
tion, depressed or wounded, while Caution is over excited : for
this latter faculty certainly plays a prominent part in qualms
of conscience. Such cases, as is well known, especially when
an individual has been exposed to the thunders of a church he
has been educated to respect and obey, frequently end in
deep-rooted despair and insanity. I have often inquired into
cases of so-called qualms of conscience, and must confess I
have always been able to detect in them, as the primary and
principal causes, the special colouring of some one or more of


by Mr, R. R. Noel. 295


the moral or egotistical faculties, smarting under real or ima-
ginary wounds, whilst I have not been able to discover that a
specific and pure sense of justice and duty, per se, as the
function of a distinct faculty, was in the least involved. In-
deed if qualms of conscience, after acting wrong, are supposed
to result from a LarcEe development of an organ of Con-
scientiousness,—barring cases in which it may be said to have
become diseased from some mere internal cause—can it not
be argued, without going too far, that if it be the especial
function of this organ to produce pure emotions of justice,
and to regulate the conduct, it should have prevented those
actions which have led to its remorseful state?

In analysing Conscience, we must likewise attend to the
remarkable influence of knowledge and experience in awaken-
ing the susceptibility of the various faculties to feel regret
and pain, and even remorse. We frequently see persons of a
good average organization pursuing a certain course of life,
either directly mischievous to themselves or contrary to their
moral duties, without any misgivings or ‘self dissatisfaction.
They live in ignorance of the folly or impropriety of their
conduct ; but no sooner do they become aware that it is
wrong, than their peace of mind, to a certain extent, is dis-
turbed. Habit may still lead such persons, if of weak cha-
racter, to continue their vicious courses; but self-reproaches,
regrets, and remorse, more or less, especially if they are of a
reflective disposition, will be sure to be the result. In all
such cases of change of conduct, however, the peculiar agency
of some one or more of the animal, moral, and egotistical
faculties, as well as the influence of knowledge and intellec-
tual culture—the appreciation of cause and effect—may clearly
be observed, and found quite sufficient for their explanation,
apart from any function of a faculty of Conscientiousness
per se. Besides, how can we suppose, in such cases, that a
fundamental faculty of Conscientiousness has been lying dor-
mant, until aroused by the understanding; it being said to be
the especial function of this faculty to produce emotions of
justice, to prompt the intellect to discover what is right and
wrong, to control the undue action of the other faculties, &c.
Every other affective faculty will—with the exception of short
periods of fatigue, or of inaction from absence of outward
stimuli—that is, of the objects to which it stands in relation,
display its peculiar function in some way or other, and exer-
cise an influence on the general character, whatever the degree
or kind of knowledge may be. But, although the activity of a
faculty of Conscientiousness, if there be such, must depend
less on the presence of outward stimuli than most of the other


296 On the Organ of Conscientiousness,


faculties, since its functions are said to stand in relation to
our inward mental states, we, nevertheless, frequently see
cases of remarkable alteration of conduct for the better in
persons who previously had shewn no endeavours to live ac-
cording to the rule of right, nor manifested misgivings as to
various errors which it should have been the office of a special
faculty of Conscientiousness—the moral monitor—to have
checked, until experience and reflection had opened their eyes.
It may be said, in regard to the cases just alluded to, in which
the mind becomes suddenly awakened to a sense of having
acted wrong, and pain and regret are experienced, that these
tell equally in favour of some other faculty—if an organ of
Conscientiousness be not acknowledged—having lain dormant
until it suddenly comes into activity, and produces a change
of conduct. There is this difference, however, that even if we
do not attach importance to an intellectual will,—which to
some extent we cannot deny,—=still, during a period of error,
we are not obliged to suppose the perfect inactivity or useless-
ness of a specific faculty of Conscientiousness—the prompter
to act right,—nor do we find the specific character of the
other different faculties changed, along with these changes in
sentiment and conduct. The manner of their activity and the
objects only to which they are directed, become changed.
For instance, a person with large Benevolence and Attachment
may injure the health or character of another through over-
kindness, not being aware of his error ; but if he at length see
that he has been acting wrong, he may feel regret and pain,
and alter his conduct ; the feelings of kindness, &c., remain-
ing specifically the same, the manner in which they are
actively employed only being changed. Our love of life may
lead to over-pampering the body; but we gain experience,
regret the former loss of health, and discard those habits
which we have found to be injurious.

But to return to the examination of the feelings of obliga-
tion, duty, &c. Besides those different kinds, and the higher
feelings of duty to God and man already alluded to, common
opinion seems to admit a third duty, viz., our duty towards
ourselves; and it is clear that, apart from the animal propensi-
ties for self-preservation, there is a higher egotistical power in
the mind, a feeling of self-love, of self-respect, which to a cer-
tain extent controls our other impulses, and without which even
our higher ones might lead to weaknesses of conduct, incompa-
tible with our true dignity of character and lasting happiness.
Now, does not this power result from the organ of Self-
esteem, which, according to Mr. Combe, “by communicating
this feeling of self-respect, frequently and effectually aids the


by Mr. R. R. Noel. 297


moral sentiments in resisting temptation to vice?” Experience
indeed shows us daily, that when the intellect is once en-
lightened, and the feeling of self-respect thus enlisted in the
cause of virtue, it becomes a main source of our moral
strength. How rapid is the progress of vice and folly, when
self-respect and the good opinion of the world are lost. It is
this faculty, therefore, which promotes the feelings of duty and
incumbency, as regards the preservation of our self-respect,
our consistency and honour, and which, when allied in acti-
vity to a fine harmonious development of the moral organs,
including wonder and ideality, which evidently promotes
elevation of sentiment,—the whole strengthened by firmness
and enlightened by intellect, makes up the full sum of our
feelings of moral incumbency and duty in general. It seems
to me, therefore, both inconsistent and superfluous to attri-
bute to a faculty of Conscientiousness, what has been already
included in the functions of Self-esteem.

I proceed to make a few additional remarks, to see, how-
ever, whether there can be a particular fundamental faculty,
whose office it is to be “ the regulator of all the others ;” and
if so, which faculty this is. Toa certain extent, as already
shown, in speaking of obligation and incumbency, each faculty
must be said to exercise a control over the others; for even
the animal propensities may have a beneficial influence over
our conduct, and modify the undue activity of the higher
ones. Thus if Benevolence would give all to the poor, the
instinct of property prompts us to preserve some for self; or,
if we should be inclined to be too unguarded in our commu-
nications to strangers, Caution and Secretiveness put in their
voices and prompt to prudence and reserve. It would be
easy to multiply cases in point, but this is unnecessary. Still
if we examine mental phenomena with attention, there cer-
tainly does seem to be, in addition to those enumerated,
another power over our inward desires and our actions, dis-
tinct from the influences which the various faculties exercise
over one another; and independent too, of the influence of
general health and quality of the braim—for these certainly
have much to do with what is often called character and con-
sistency of conduct, especially in one-sided natures,—viz., the
tenacity or continued activity of certain propensities resulting
from a healthy and firm quality of the substance of the brain
and nervous system. Some persons, more than others, are
gifted with a peculiar power, designated character, or strength
of purpose, or will, in the sense of determination and perse-
verance. But is not this taught to belong to the function of
firmness, which when joined to a low animal organization,


298 On the Organ of Conscientiousness,


adds fearful determination in the career of vice ; but which,
when allied to the feeling of self-respect, to a fine harmonious
development of the moral and intellectual faculties, seems
perfectly sufficient to make up the sum of moral will, and
give strength of purpose in pursuing the good? I confess
when I consider all that is taught of the functions of a faculty
of Firmness—and when added to those of a faculty of Self-
esteem—I am no better able to see how there can likewise
consistently be a special faculty of Conscientiousness, to ex-
ercise control over the others, than I am able to. detect any
one specific sense of justice per se, independent of the differ-
ent faculties and conditions which I have already enumerated.
Indeed, as regards a faculty of Conscientiousness acting as
the regulator of all the others, Mr. Combe contradicts him-
self if he entertains this idea; for he informs us that Mrs. H.
who had this latter organ remarkably developed, but Firmness
small, “was unsteady of purpose, and it was necessary for her
to have a friend, whose advice she iistantly asked and fol-
lowed, in order to preserve herself from yielding to every
internal impulse or outward solicitation.”* Thus teaching,
that Firmness is the organ which mainly gives the inward
power of self-control.

To make it still more apparent, however, that we comet
clearly define any separate and distinct influence over the
mind, resulting from a special faculty of Conscientiousness, I
now offer a few remarks on the so-styled, upright, straight-
forward, frank, plain spoken, punctual character. Mr.
Combe, in a correspondence which I have had with him on a
faculty of Conscientiousness, attached great weight to these
manifestations, as resulting from a fine development of this
organ. I do not speak of uprightness in the sensé of honesty
only, for that is partly a negative, as well as a positive virtue,
and has of course been included in the examination of right
and wrong. I allude here more especially to those characters,
who show a peculiar independent frankness in the expression
of their opinions, and in their actions in general. Now, does
not experience show, that these persons are never really just
and considerate towards others, however largely the supposed
organ of Conscientiousness may be developed, unless benevo-
lence be likewise prominent? In fact, your very plain spoken
people are apt to express their opinion of others at all times
without reserve ; they are, therefore, often rude and selfish,
and are continually wounding the feelings of others—and this
generally without producing any moral good, or their even


* See ‘The Constitution of Man.”’


by Mr. R. R. Noel. 299


having such in view. Indeed, phrenologists teach that admo-
nitions and reproofs, unless greatly tempered by affection and
benevolence, and judiciously applied, are more apt to wound
self-love, and to call forth resentment, than to strengthen the
moral faculties of those to whom they are addressed. Your very
frank characters can, I believe, lay little claim to a real sense
of justice or conscientiousness. Let us take the plain-speaking
and downright manners of the Americans, and will any one
attribute these to the activity of their sense of Conscientious-
ness? Even that candour and straightforwardness, which
has a really conscientious colouring, to judge from my own
experience is partly a negative virtue, and the result of a
fortunate combination of several organs, Acquisitiveness, Se-
cretiveness, Caution, Love of Approbation being less developed
than the moral organs, and Self-esteem and Firmness. I need
hardly remark, that much of the impunctuality and falsehood
we meet with in society must be traced to deficiency of the
last-named organs, and of reflection, and often of Caution,
joined to an over anxiety to please. The unhappy want of
strength to say No, which involves so many persons in idle
promises, prevarication, and falsehood, I have seen too often
to arise solely from a combination of very large Love of Appro-
bation and Secretiveness, with full Benevolence—whilst Self-
esteem, Firmness, and Caution, were much less developed, to
find it psychologically correct to account for this disposition
by the absence of an organ of Conscientiousness.

With regard to punctuality, I have found that Self-esteem
and Firmness—of course under the influence of Benevolence,
whenever the good of others as well as our own is aimed at—
are the faculties on which it principally depends. In confir-
mation of this view, I can point to the pleasure very punctual
people generally take in lauding their own virtue in this
respect, to the pedantry and to the disposition to torment
others in little matters which they so frequently display. In
what I have just said, I allude, of course, to that punctuality
which is the result of an inborn disposition ; for much might
be said to account for punctuality from the effects of early
training and habits of business. The merchant, the trades-
man, the commercial traveller, and the soldier, show very
different conduct as regards punctuality, to what those do
who have been brought up in habits of luxury and whose
education has been of a desultory nature.

In further confirmation of my views that Self-esteem will
be usually found prominently developed in the heads of the
more usual class of candid and plain-spoken characters—for
of course, I make a distinction between that candour often


300 On the Organ of Conscientiousness,


met with in early youth, and in those who have had little
experience of the world, especially when Benevolence is largely
and Secretiveness and Caution are but moderately developed.
I can call attention to the fact, that the Germans are remark-
able for not being plain-spoken, and for their general want of
candour, as concerns their opinions of others.* Yet in the
German heads, to judge by my own many years experience,
that part designated the organ of Conscientiousness is cer-
tainly relatively larger than in the English heads. The
German head, however, shows moderate Self-esteem, with
very large Love of Approbation, Secretiveness, and Caution.
I confess that I am at a loss to know what peculiar emo-
tions, or influences on the conduct, distinct from such as
result from the functions of Self-esteem and Firmness, a large
development of the whole hinder sincipital region of the head,
including the part called the organ of Conscientiousness, pro-
duces. Whenever the organs of Benevolence and Veneration
are found at the same time to be only small, I have not been
fortunate enough to meet with such a development of the
part of the brain marked No. 16 as Mr. Combe has shown in
the drawing of Mrs. H. I have never met with this part
large, without at the same time, Firmness, and generally Self-
esteem, being large too. Therefore, however well developed it
may appear, (estimated according to Combe’s directions), I
have never been able to discover or hear of anything like real
Conscientiousness on such occasions, excepting as regards
mere straightforwardness and determination of purpose—
qualities which belong to the function of firmness—unless
the whole of the sincipital regions, particularly the front part,
was likewise well developed. A real sense of justice, or a
tender conscience connected with a love of rectitude, I have
certainly never been able to detect, except in the latter case.
In fact, have phrenologists been able to produce evidence of a
faculty of Conscientiousness analagous to that which is brought
forward to establish the organs of Benevolence and Venera-
tion? If Benevolence be a really prominent organ in any
head, however largely developed its greatest antagonists, Ac-
quisitiveness and Destructiveness may be, still we are certain
to find, that, besides a disposition to selfishness and violence
or to irritability, its peculiar language of kindness to some liv-


* Scheibler, in his ‘“‘ Hand-book of Psychology,’’ makes the following re-
mark: ‘‘ The principal condition to the formation of character, is the acquisition
of the capacity to say No to ourselves—courage is likewise necessary to speak out
candidly and truthfully, according to the individual disposition. In this courage
the Germans are particularly deficient.’,—‘‘ The German can with pleasure be
anything and everything, himself only he is not,’’ says Jean Paul.


by Mr. R. R. Noel. 301


ing creature will be occasionally, nay frequently, displayed.
Now apart from the indefinite and relative meaning usually
attached to the term Conscientiousness when compared with
that which the word Benevolence, for instance, implies, can
any evidence of a like kind be produced, that a nice sense
of justice, that feelings of a high moral responsibility, are
displayed, when the organ, No. 16, is large, and at the same
time Benevolence and Veneration small ?

That positive and negative evidence—that evidence which
may be brought forward in favour of most of the phreno-
logical organs, whatever their combinations with others may
be, seems to me entirely wanting for a special faculty of Con-
scientiousness ; for my own part, I am forced to ask what is
the function of this part of the brain? Does it belong to
Firmness, or is it a separate faculty? These are questions,
I believe, phrenologists have yet to answer.

I can further appeal to experience, and ask what is the
natural language of the generality of your plain-spoken,
straightforward characters? Is it not of Self-esteem and
Firmness, tempered more or less by the urbanity of Benevo-
lence? Frequently, however, we see the pure independent
language of Self-esteem alone, indifferent to the feelings of
others. But while on this topic, 1 venture to enquire of
phrenologists, what the peculiar natural language of a faculty
of Conscientiousness is supposed to be? Can we distinguish
in really truthful, honest, conscientious characters, any other
physiognomical and pathogromical expression, than such as
results from the activity of Benevolence, Veneration, Firmness,
and the reflective faculties? What peculiar expression, apart
from that just alluded to, is it supposed the countenance of a
Christ may have displayed ?

In addition to what I have already advanced to show that
the emotions of Conscientiousness, and the sense of justice,
&c., cannot be clearly and consistently defined as the function
of one fundamental faculty only, distinct from the moral
emotions—from the intellectual appreciations of truth, and
from “any extrinsic motives,’ I can only further remark,
that it seems difficult to me to form a clear and encouraging
view of the highest moral power in man, and of his capacity
to progress in virtue, if these depend for the most part, as
at least results from the doctrines of Spurzheim and his dis-
ciples, on the full development and the healthy action of one
organ alone. We see that each faculty per se, even benevo-
lence, may be too largely developed, or too much stimulated
from external or internal causes, and lead to morbid results.
But if the highest attributes of humanity—the grand aim of
an enlightened and complete system of education—the deve-


302 On the Organ of Conscientiousness,


lopment of wisdom, and of the full sense and appreciation of
duty and justice, depended after all on the size and healthy
condition of one organ only, every excess in the endeavours to
exercise and increase its function would be attended with
some danger of over-excitement and disease. The excess of
activity, the abuse of every one of the other affective faculties,
can be understood; the fundamental character which each
displays in a healthy state, remaining the same whilst there
are other faculties to exercise, in various ways, control. But
let us seriously imagine the excess of activity of a faculty of
Conscientiousness per se, and what becomes of these most
important special functions which are attributed to it? Let
there be but one grain of sand too much thrown into the
scales, the balance is over, and justice is at an end. But it
will be said, the enlightened intellect weighs and decides
whether the scales are duly balanced. Still it is taught how
much the feelings influence the judgment—that the emotions
of conscientiousness and justice, the sense of right and wrong,
the moral control of the undue. action of every other faculty,
depend upon the healthy action of this one in question, and
also that i¢s over-excited and morbid state produces conscien-
tious monomanias and qualms of conscience. We see,
therefore, if these doctrines were correct, how vastly more
important the full development and healthy state of this one
faculty must be than that of any one of the others. But is it
possible, however, that the feelings of remorse, the qualms of
conscience, so clearly displaying as these do, the language of
different faculties, the influences of the age, country, and
society we live in, of our individual education, result from
one fundamental faculty, and this the same which leads to
the highest and most exalted views of justice? The truly con-
scientious mind, however it may regret any aberration from
the path of virtue, will at the same time desire to atone prac-
tically for its errors, and not think that duty enjoins the
giving way to gloomy self-reproaches, and brooding over its
sinfulness, to the detriment of health and the power of use-
fulness.

I may further venture to ask, can the justice of Christ,
and that of a Brutus, have emanated from a large develop-
ment of one and the same organ, however variously combined
with others? If so, how vast the difference in the manifesta-
tion of its function! The one all charity and mercy, but pre-
eminently just ; the other intent only to hold the sword with
iron hand, and see the letter of the law fulfilled. As true
health depends upon the harmonious vigorous action of all
the bodily organs, so must justiee, the true and full sense of


by Mr. R. R. Noel. 303


right and wrong, of duty, incumbency, &c., surely be the
result of the harmonious development and healthy action of
all the organs of the brain, and of enlightened education, and
the cultivation of the understanding. What has the exclusive
exercise of any one particular feeling—what have any one-
sided doctrines, even religious creeds, done to promote sound
views of justice? We see the ruins of temples throughout
the earth, and the houses of God still standing on high,
pointing out the activity of a special faculty of veneration.
We have hospitals, and other benevolent institutions in num-
bers, showing the activity of a special faculty of Benevolence.
But where are the social institutions proving the existence of
a special faculty of Conscientiousness? Can that justice
which man has shown to man—which the records of history,
or the laws and customs of our own age display, be traced to
other sources than to a spirit of benevolence, of religion, and
to a sense of utility, to a philosophy of necessity? Indeed,
there is no other sure and efficient mode of teaching man-
kind to be just to one another, than to prove the advantages
which will result therefrom. Did mankind think of being
just to criminals, and to the insane, until experience had
pointed out the necessity? Are not scientific imvestigations
leading us daily more and more to the appreciation of truth
and justice? Do they not teach us the laws and conditions
of health, the means of promoting the “ mens sana in corpore
sano?” Do they not instruct us, too, in the laws and condi-
tions of material wealth—and more than this, in those which
must regulate its application to social happiness? And are
not the results of all grand discoveries found to be in har-
mony with the progress of happiness, justice, and virtue?
Indeed, it may be said, that goodness, virtue, truth, wisdom,
utility, and justice, are but synonymous terms. “ Sola utilia
que recta.”

I have now attempted, though but imperfectly I fear, to
show the origin of the ordinary sense of justice, of right and
wrong, as displayed in the conduct of mankind one to another ;
to show, too, that each faculty contributes its quota in produc-
ing this sense, as likewise in exercising to a certain extent, con-
trol over the others. I have also, attempted to point out the
various causes which prevent and modify the true sense of jus-
tice, and militate against virtue in conduct. I have glanced too,
at the feelings of self-respect, and at that faculty of firmness
which contributes in producing what is called character, and
in giving weight to the motives arising from those feelings
which are in more immediate relationship with the outward
world, and to the desires of the intellect. But above all,


304 Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


treasuring up experience, reflecting on the connections of
things, on causes and effects, showing the necessity of virtue,
truth, and justice, and influencing all our propensities and
desires, we have the intellectual powers themselves, and rea-
son, the highest gift that man possesses. If these views be
correct, there can be little danger that any efforts to culti-
vate the highest attribute of humanity, the real many-sided
sense of justice should fail of producing good results, or_lead
to conscientious monomania. A sense of justice springing
from the complex sources mentioned, will indeed, for a long
time to come, be too often found under the mark, but it can
never be beyond it. '


III. Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.
(Concluded from our last.)


The story of Io’s madness has carried us far, and merits a
few words for itself.

That this was in origin an astronomical mythus appears
to be now very generally agreed. Io, it was noticed of old
(Eustath. Suidas and Hesychius), was the Argive name of the
of the moon, the horned phases of which have, in so many
countries (India, China, Egypt), apparently independently,
suggested the cow as its symbol. On this explanation the
many-eyed Argus represents the starry host, the guards and
watchers of the erratic and versiform luminary. (Euripides,
Pheeniss. v. 1122; Macrob. Saturn. i. 19.) The boast of the
Arcadians that their race was older than the moon, has heen
ingeniously and probably explained as referring to the later
introduction of the worship into Peloponnesus.

But some historical elements have become combined with
the natural allegory, and the resemblance between Io and
Isis intimate relations between Argos and Egypt; the chief
circumstances, however, on which the resemblance depends
appear to have been of secondary origin. One mythus, pro-
bably the original, confined Io’s history to Argos or Eubeea
(Suidas) ; and while the Egyptian Isis is the curing power,
Io of Argus is the cured. This renders it probable that the
story of the cure of the transformed Io was borrowed from
another Argive legend of later date, and not improbably in
its leading circumstances historical.

The daughters of King Preetus, with other Argive women,
maddened by the anger of Dionusos or Here (Apollod. ii. 2),
believed themselves transformed into cows, and ranged over
the country, imitating their lowings.


“ Proetides implerunt falsis mugitibus agros.”---Virg. Eclag. vi. 8.


Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics. 305

Such a mania, it must be understood, is not fictitious ; it
belongs to the class of which the most notorious type is
known to medicine as Lycanthropy,—the sufferers by which
imagine themselves to be wolves, frequent their haunts, and
imitate their cries. To this disorder the madness of Nebu-
chadnezzar is usually referred. An amusing instance of it is
quoted by Bertrand, DuSommanb, p. 423, of a convent of nuns
at Paris, who, by a strange contagion, mewed like cats, and
were only cured by means resembling those that stayed the
suicidal mania of the woman of Miletus.

The mania of the daughters of Proetus (accompanied also
‘ by some cutaneous disorder) was cured, it is said, by Melam-
pus, by means that are variously represented, drugs or purifi-
cations. The following are recognizable as employments of
mesmeric influence. (Apollod. ii. 2.) “He took the most
powerful of the youth (dwatwrarous twy veanwy), and with loud
cries, and a certain chorusing of inspired character (evSeou
xopeias), chased them from the mountains to Sicyon, and
brought them to their senses.” The “ vigour of the youth ”
is here evidently noticed as the chief cause of the energy and
efficacy of the mystic chorus. The production of mesmeric
influence by such means* occurs in accounts of the mysteries
of Samothrace, in which extraordinary effects were produced
on the novice by the initiated dancing round him (Dio Chry-
sostom), and in the Homeric hymn to Apollo, where the
chorus of Delians is thus spoken of—v. 156.


Mposds, TOO weya Jaupa, oov xAeos ovmor'orcicai,
xoveas Annades, Exatnberrtao Segamval

at's emer ap mewrov wey Amroaarwy’ vuvnowou,
autis Sav Antw te xa Apreui soxeaipay
MYNTaMEVal, aVOPWY TE Waraiwy noe ‘yuvaiKay,
ujavoy aeiooucty, Seayoucs de gun’ avSpumwy.
Tavtay SavIewmav Qwvae xa xpeuba MacTuv
pieicS icacw Daim Se nev avTos ExacTos


OSevyecd"’.


** A vast wonder, moreover, of which the fame shall never perish;
the Delian virgins, ministers of the far darting god, who celebrating
Apollo, Latona and Artemis, making mention of the men and women
of old, sing a hymn, and charm (or sooth) the tribes of men. They
can imitate the voices and accents of all men, and each would say
that he himself was speaking; so their beautiful song is adapted.”


The effect of mesmerism in facilitating the mimicry of
language, the articulation of new and difficult sounds, is
known to all readers of mesmeric literature.

Melampus, the mesmerist, is son of Idomenea (the seer),


306 Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


and progenitor of Polyidus (the manifold seer), to whom
legend ascribes cures of the same character as those assigned
to Hsculapius. Another Melampod is Theoclymenus of the
Odyssey—whose presage of the approaching fate of the suitors
corresponds remarkably with the mesmeric phenomena of
second-sight. In the midst of their riot he declares—
** O race devote to death, with Stygian shade
Each destined peer impending fates invade :
With tears your wan distorted cheeks are drowned,
With sanguine drops the walls are rubied round.
Thick swarms the spacious hall with howling ghosts,” &c.
Od. xx.


The legends of Melampus, and his descendant Polyidus,
are replete with stories of the wonderful medical power and
instincts of serpents ; creatures that we have seen play so im-
portant a part in the establishments of Aisculapius. The
operations of serpent-charmers of modern times apparently
depend on mesmeric influence—the effect of which on many
parts of the brute creation is well known, and are paralleled
in antiquity, not only by the legends which float in the twi-
light of history, but in the testimonies of writers so numer-
ous, and so corroborated by present experience in the general
character of their details, as to command acceptance as matter
of fact.


** The Ophiogeneis of Parion in the Propontis,” says Strabo, xiii.,
** claimed a certain relationship to serpents, and pretended to descent
from a hero who was transformed into one. (A parallel mythus to
that of the Aisclepiadee, descendants of the serpent physician of
Epidaurus.) They say that their males cure the bites of vipers, by
constantly touching (cuvexws ePamtoucvous), like the charmers
(ewwda:), first transferring to themselves the livor (qerwua),
and the inflammation and pain.”


There are perhaps few families in the rural districts of
which at least one member has not been a witness, and pro-
bably a subject, of the operations of the wart-charmer, whose
process of repeatedly touching or stroking without intermis-
sion, is precisely that which is described by Strabo, and of
which the so frequently beneficial effect is as clearly mes-
meric.

The indirect allusion of the passage is important, as show-
ing that the exwda of antiquity, or charmers, in fact em-
ployed the mesmeric process, although their influence was


* The dancing and bowling dervishes of Constantinople are believed to
cure diseases by laying on of hands, for which purpose children are brought
to them. This information is due to a rambling friend who has no more
esteem for the mesmerism of the English than that of the Turks.


Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics. 307
ascribed to the mystic verses or formulas from which they
derived their title. Alexander of Tralles, already referred to
as a mesmerist, gives some of these charms, that curiously
correspond with those of witches in the middle ages, in con-
nection with whose misfortunes so many mesmeric pheno-
mena appear. (Compare Mackay’s Popular Delusions, and
article Alexan. Trall. in Mytho. Dicty.)

*¢ Pliny xxviii. 3, mentions Ophiogeneis, of Cyprus, also a family
of which Exagon, a member, ambassador at Rome, was thrown by
the consuls (experimenti causa, says the Naturalist, but if at all it
must be supposed by his own invitation) into a cask full of venomous
serpents, who only licked him. The family had a strong odour in
spring, and their sweat, as well as saliva, had a curative power.
Persons were cured by being sprinkled with the water in which their
hands had been washed; their very presence was beneficial.”

The same writer, vii. 2, quotes the account of the Ophio-
geneis of Parion, given by Crates of Pergamus, as “a race of
men who relieved the wound of a serpent by a touch, and by
laying on the hand drew the poison out of the body.” (Con-
tactu levare solitos et manu impositd venena extrahere corpori. )
Varro spoke ef.a-few of them as still remaining whose saliva
cured the bites of serpents. Strabo found the race not ex-
tinct, he conjectures that they may have been descended from
the Psylli of Africa, who are also mentioned by Pausanias ix.
28, in this connexion, as well as by Pliny and lian.


“In the bodies of the Psylli of Africa, says Pliny vii. 2, is a
natural virus fatal to serpents, the very smell of it sending them to
sleep. A similar race was that of the Marsi in Italy, said to be
sprung from Circe the enchantress.”

These accounts and references to the Psylli are farther
illustrated by Alian. He states, “ that members of the race
cured those who were bitten by the cerastes, by giving them
to drink water that they had held in their mouths, or in which
their hands had been rinsed. The cure was immediate and
complete.” Hist. An. 1. Lib. xvii. 28. He gives a more de-
tailed account of their mode of proceeding,—


“If the Psyllus found the anguish of the wound still tolerable he
relieved it by his saliva, and prevented worse consequences. If he
found the sufferer in extreme torment he gave him water to drink
that he had held in his mouth, and in cases where the virus had
gained still greater power, he lay down naked by the naked patient,
and delivered him from his danger, by communicating to him, by
gentle friction, the sympathetic vigour of his own body.” (rod
XPWTIS of TOU sOiou meoravatpiLas thy icxwy Tn cuupui.)

He quotes some verses of Nicander, of Colophon, to the
same effect,—

VOL. III. Y


308 Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


“ The a cure men of venomous bites, not by the assistance
of roots, but by the contact of their own bodies.”


Avdgacw nuvvav tumpaciv axSouevois,
Ou pifais egdovres, ewy Samo cvyxpoa yuiwy.


Mention occurs of other families or tribes of extraordinary
power that we must call mesmeric, though in these cases
exerted, as the power probably may be, maliciously. Pliny
vil. 2, speaks of “ a race of Pharnaces, in Aithiopia, whose
perspiration affects even covered bodies;” of fascinating
families in Africa, ‘‘ whose presence was fatal to cattle, trees,
infants ;” similar among the Triballi and Illyrians, “ who
even killed those that they looked at long, especially when
with angry eyes.* Women of the same kind, called Bithyz,
in Scythia, the race of Thibii, in Pontus, and many others.
They could not be drowned even when encumbered with
clothes.” A curious parallel to the modern plan of testing
witches by swimming them.

These forms of fascination belong to the belief in the in-


* It is said of Alexander Severus that the fire of his eyes was excessive
and oppressive if regarded too long; and to this circumstance is added a
notice, as if of a phenomenon in some way related to it, that his prophetic
mental presentiments were very frequent. ‘* Nimius ardor oculorum et
diutius intuentibus gravis, et divinatio mentis frequentissima.”— Alius Lamp.
in Alx. Sev.

Augustus was also remarkable for the power of his eyes, which were
clear and bright, and (like Dr. Parr) he was willing to have it thought that
they were indued with a certain divine power, and was pleased when any
appeared to avoid his glance, as if dazzled by the sun. ‘“ Oculos habuit
claros et nitidos quibus etiam existimari volebat inesse quiddam divini
vigoris: gaudebatque siquis sibi acrids contuenti, quasi ad fulgorem solis,
vultum submitteret.”—Sueton’ August. 79.

It may be noted here that Suetonius in the next paragraph, speaking of
another idiosyncrasy of the emperor, calls the index finger, the healthful or
salutary. ‘“‘ Dextra quoque manus digitum salutarem,” &c., &c.

So the fourth or ring-finger is digitus medicus.

Compare Montaigne’s chapter on the Force of Imagination. He quotes
Ovid de Rem. Am. 615,

** Dum spectant oculi lasos leduntur et ipsi,
Multaque corporibus transitione nocent.”

** Eyes are injured by regarding diseased eyes, and many disorders pass
from one body to another.”

* On veit dernierement chez moy un chat questant un oiseau au hault
d’un arbre, et s’estants fichez la veue ferme l’un contre l’auttre quelque
espace de temps, l’oyseau s’estre laissé cheoir comme mort entre les pattes
du chat. Ceulx qui aiment la volerie ont ouy faire le conte du faulconnier,
qui, arrestant obstineement sa veue contre un milan en l’air, gageoit de la
seule force de sa veue, le ramener contrebas, et le faisoit a ce qu’on dict. :
car les histories que jémprunte je les renvoye sur la conscience,” &c. &c.

His apology in this instance is perhaps less wanted than in another
where he omits it; tortoises and ostriches, he says, hatch their eggs by
simply looking at them, “ signe qu’ils y ont quelque vertue ejaculatrice.
This belief is not unallied to that of half the birds-nesting population of the
country, that very shy birds desert their nests if their eggs are looked at,—
certainly if they are touched.


Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics. 309
fluence of the evil-eye, so widely diffused in ancient as well as
modern times. Plutarch has a chapter on the subject in his
Symphosiacs which is worth reading. The guests laugh at
the whole matter as absurdity and delusion, but Metrius
Florus, the host, declares “ that facts strangely bear out com-
mon opinion, though the circumstance that the cause is
latent, very unfairly discredits the fact, inasmuch as the
causes are equally unknown of numberless other facts that
no one thinks to call in question,” and so he proceeds to
argue the possibility of fascination in really very creditable
style, considering the condition of contemporary physiology.

Curiously concurrent with these instances are the anec-
dotes of the mixed moral and bodily influence of Socrates.
The interlocutor in one dialogue of Plato (I cannot at the
moment recover the reference), presenting the pitiable spec-
tacle of a philosopher dumb-foundered, complains that in the
presence of Socrates he is numbed as by a torpedo, and that the
influence that Socrates exerted in that way was enough to lay
him open to a charge of fascination or witchcraft.

In the Theages is an amusing relation by Aristides (re-
ported by Socrates) of the unfortunate effects on his intellect
of temporary withdrawal from the society of the philosopher.
After relating an accident of much the same kind to a friend,
he proceeds.


** Aristides. But I too am myself in a most ridiculous position,
O Socrates.

“Socrates. How so?

“* Aristides. Why, before my expedition I was capable of dis-
coursing with whomsoever, and never appeared inferior to any in
conversation, so that I sought eagerly the society of the most bril-
liant. Now, on the contrary, I avoid any one whom I perceive to
be a person of education,—my shame is such at my own deficiency.

** Socrates. Did the faculty quit you suddenly, or by degrees?

“* Aristides. By degrees.

“Socrates. And when you possessed it, did you come by it in
learning anything from me, or in any other way?

** Aristides. I will tell you, Socrates, what is strange enough,
but true. I never learnt any thing at all directly from you, as you
yourself well know; but I improved whenever I was with you,
though only in the same house, and not in the same room ; and
when in the same room I fancied still more if I looked at you as you
were speaking than if I looked another way; but I made by far the
greatest progress when I sat near to you and touched you; now,
however, I am entirely divested of the faculty.”


The mesmeric traits in this passage are still more identi-
fied by being closely associated with references to the cele-
y¥2


310 Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


brated prevoyance of Socrates, among other instances to his .
presentiment of the destruction of the Sicilian armament.

In the treatise of Plutarch on the genius of Socrates is a
story of a certain Timarchus who consulted the oracle of
Trophonius on the subject of the genius of Socrates; it illus-
trates the familiarity of the ancients with clairvoyance, and
attempts, amusingly enough, an explanation of its phenomena
at least as successful as many more modern.


** Souls are seen by the visionary, like stars hovering over a
chasm, some sinking into it, some rising upwards. These are the
geniuses of man. Souls becoming united to bodies tend to become
irrational by the conjunction. But all are not mingled in the same
manner; some are entirely sunk in the body, and corrupted by the
disorders and passions of life, others partially emerge and leave the
purest part without, touching on the top of the head as floating on
the surface; and thus the soul, as far as it is not irrationally sub-
jected to the passions of the body, remains suspended over his head,
as though above one, immerged in an abyss. That therefore which
is sunk in the body is called the soul (vx). And that which
is exempt from decay is popularly called mind (vous), and supposed
to be within onesself, as reflected spectra within the mirror. But
like those, it is understood by the intelligent to be in fact external,
and is called by them the genius (damov.) ......- The souls,
well disciplined and submissive from the origin and rise of their
proper genius, constitute the divining class (to wavtimov.) Such
was the soul of Hermodorus of Clazomenz, of which it is related
that it quitted his body entirely for days and nights, wandered far
and wide and then returned again, after having been a present wit-
ness of things said and done at a great distance.

** But this is incorrect, for the soul of Hermodorus did not go out
of his body, but yielding and relaxing the rein to the genius, gave it
scope and range, so that it reported within much that it saw and
heard without.”


This Hermodorus is evidently, from coincidence of terms,
the same as the Hermotimus of whose clairvoyance mention
is found in Pliny, vii. 52, Lucian, Encom. Musce, and Tertull.
de Animi. Compare also Aithalides in Apollonius.

The same was told of Aristeas of Proconnesus and Epi-
menides.

The oracle of Trophonius was in full operation in the time
of Pausanias, who himself consulted it, and has left us some
details of his observation and experience that appear to indi-
cate that persons consulting it were thrown, by whatever
means, into a state of mesmeric somnambulism.

** The inquirer was restricted for several days previous to pecu-
liar diet and sundry purifications, and omens were taken from the
entrails of the numerous victims he had to sacrifice, and however


Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics. dll
favourable these might be, if the last and most important was un-
favourable, the god was held to reject the application. Among many
other ceremonies he was led to the two fountains of Oblivion and
Memory, from the first of which he drank that he might forget all
his previous ideas, and from the latter that he might retain recollec-
tion of what he should see in his consultation. Descending by a
ladder into the cave he lay down on the ground, placed his feet in a
small orifice, and following them with his knees, immediately found
his whole body carried inwards, as if by the vortex of a mighty rush-
ing river; his return, and feet foremost, was by the same orifice.
He came forth in a state of great disturbance (xatoxov tw deat)
and unconscious of himself and those round him, and in this state was
immediately placed on the chair of Memory by the priests who then
obtained from him, by inquiries, all that he had seen or heard. He
was then delivered to his friends, and after a time both came to
his usual senses and found himself cheerful. (veregov wevros ta Te
adra oudev Th PLOVNTEL WELOV m WeOTEPOY Mau yerws emaverciv o. Paus. ix.)


By whatever mechanical or other contrivances assisted, the
chief effect in these instances was probably due to a gaseous
exhalation of the same kind as that to which we are told by
such numerous authorities the prophetic excitement of the
Delphic priestess was due. Of the mesmeric character of this
condition in the best age of the oracle, when it was the great
religious centre of the Dorians, the acknowledged predomi-
nant tribe in Greece, and when it was superior to corruption,
there can be little doubt. And what difficulties are not obli-
terated at once from our conception of Greek civilization by
the recognition of the possibility that its declarations were in
numerous cases examples of genuine prevoyance. What an
amende honorable is not due from all ranks of modern philo-
sophers to the wisdom of the ancients, to Socrates, Xenophon
and Plato, for having sneered at, ridiculed or pitied, their un-
accountable superstition or simple deference for Delphi.

It is unnecessary to collate all the mesmeric phenomena
of Delphi that have been repeatedly cited by others; I will
only mention the story told by Pausanias (ix. p. 576) “ of the
barbarian sent by Mardonius to consult the oracle (Mardo-
nius, according to Herodotus, employed Greek soothsayers at
Platza), and to his inquiry in his own language received an
answer, not in Greek, but also in barbaric tongue.”

These instances suggest the question whether experiments
may not be advantageously directed to test the efficacy of the
gases in inducing mesmeric coma or somnambulism, or in-
fluencing it when produced. (The effects of nitrous oxide,
or laughing gas, are very analogous to mesmerism.) The
presumption in favour of their influence in this way is strongly
supported by some statements of Strabo, xiv.


312 Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


** Between Tralles and Nysa is a village of the Nyseeans, in which
is a Plontonion, with grove and fane of Plontdn and Kore, and a
Charonian cave of very wonderful nature. For they say that the
sick who resort to these gods for cure go thither and live in the
village, near the cave, with those of the priests who are skilled, who
sleep on their account (the vicarious incubatio familiar to us in Egypt
and Greece), and prescribe modes of treatment from their dreams.
Frequently also they take them into the cave and place them there
to remain in quietness and without food for several days as if in a
state of hybernation.”


The nature of the cave is apparent from what follows,—

** Every year at a festival a bull was taken to the cave, and being
sent in after a few steps fell dead.” ingov mposerbwv mimtes xan
EXTVOUS YIVETAI.


There was another Plontonion of the same kind at Hiero-
polis in Phrygia, into which the emasculated priests of Rhea
ventured unhurt, though when Strabo sent in a sparrow it
fell dead. Dion Cassius, Pliny, Apuleius, and Ammianus
Marcellinus avouch the same fact.

The mesmeric phenomena of vast increase of muscular
power and of insensibility to external injury appear mani-
fested under apparently similar circumstances. Pausanias
(x. p. 672) mentions “a sacred cave at Hyle in Thessaly,
issuing from which the priests performed extraordinary leaps,
tore up trees by the roots, and passed with the burden along
the narrowest ridges, and threw themselves from high prect-
pices without suffering injury.”

Compare with this the insensibility of the convulsionaires
to blows (Bertand, 386), that demolished a wall, of which
notice will be found in a work or rather book of Popular De-
lusions, the professed crudity of which might be pardoned for
the sake of its amusingness, were not crudity on the part of
those who take upon themselves to apply and circulate the
epithets dupe and imposter, disgraceful and a crime.

The French Commissioners appointed in 1660 to examine
the possedeés of L’Auxonne, declared that many of them
threw themselves unbruised against pavements and walls
with a force that should have produced wounds or even
fractures.

Mesmeric traces abound indeed in Asia Minor. Tacitus
Ann. ii. 54, mentions particulars of the oracle of Colophon
that strongly recall the thought-reading of somnambulists and
the power of mesmerised water.

* Priests out of certain families, usually from Miletus, having
heard merely the number and names of those consulting, retired
into a grove, drank water of a secret fountain (hausta fontis arcani


Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics. 313


aqua), and ignorant in most cases of letters and verse, gave metrical
answers on the subject each of the applicants had in his mind.”
Compare Eusebius Preep. Evang. v. 16.


So at Delphi, there was a fountain to which was ascribed
the power of rendering the priestesses prophetic. Paus. x.

Lycia and Caria, to the antiquities of which so much
attention has been recently attached by the discoveries and
acquisitions of Mr. Fellows, particularly abounded in modes
of divination by water, variously applied. In many instances
the presumption is clear that mesmerism was concerned,
though imperfect accounts leave the mode of its application
obscure. In one instance those who sought an oracle looked
into the sacred well, and were said to see there the event they
were curious about. (The proverb, that truth was in a well,
may have had no more likely origin.) In other cases a mirror
was let down into the water by a fine thread, just so far that
the water rose to its rim, and therein was seen the fatal or
favourable termination of the illness—the class of questions
on which alone this oracle, which Pausanias calls infallible
(aevdes) was consulted.

Numerous experiments seem to shew that the mesmeric
influence is capable of reflection from polished surfaces, and
some acquaintance with this fact, or others resulting from the
same general law, may probably have led to the general em-
ployment of mirrors in all the various forms of divination and
magic, from the engraved mirrors of the Etruscans, so well
known to antiquarians, to the mirrors of the middle ages,
such as that in which Lord Surrey was said to have beheld a
vision of the fair Geraldine, and to the globule of ink in the
palm of the Egyptain boy at the present day.

In connection with specular magic I find the following
ancient instances of which the mesmeric character is most
decided and obvious.

Didius Julianus, “ the fortunate purchaser” of the Roman
empire, when it was put up to auction by the pretorian
guards, on his brief reign hastening to an end with every
step of Severus and his Pannonian legions in full march upon


Rome, in his apprehension and distress, resorted to the arts
of magic.


‘*He employed the method of the mirror or speculum,” says
Spartian, ‘‘in which boys are said to look, having their eyes bound
and incantations performed on their heads. In this instance the
boy is said to have seen both the arrival of Severus and the depar-
ture of Julianus.”

**Quze ad speculum dicunt fieri in quo pueri preeligatis oculis,
incantato vertice, respicere dicuntur tuneque puer vidisse dici-
tur et adventum Severi et Juliani decessionem.”


314 Allusions to Mesmerism in the Classics.


Spartian has evidently a mind to mark his own scepti-
cism, in the careful repetition of dicunt, dicuntur, dicitur.

Milman observes in a note to Gibbon, vol. i., cap. 5, that
this seems to have been a practice somewhat similar to that
of which our recent Egyptian travellers relate such extraordi-
nary circumstances. This is true, but a German annotator
would have thought it as necessary to refer at the same time
to the correspondence of the anecdote with the procedure of
mesmerism and the phenomena of clairvoyance. Invited,
much less directly, the illustrious Boekh, in notes to Pindar,
Pyth. iii., mentions the magnetic cure as a fact well known
in antiquity, “ Magneticam curam probé veteribus notam,”
and F. G. Walcker, notes to Philostratus, p. 659, refers, with-
out qualification or apology, to traces in the biography of
Sophocles, that he cultivated and manifested mesmerism ;
“Tnsomniorum magneticorum facultas Sophocli insedisse, ipse
eis utique studuisse videtur.”

Septimius Severus, immeasurably the superior of his rival
Julianus in all other respects, was at least his equal in the
occult arts, for which his native country, Africa, was notori-
ous or renowned. Their prevalence and character is illus-
trated in the Apology of the African Appuleius *, a defence
like that of Othello, against the charge of getting a wife by
magic.


“The charge,” he says, “ was got up according to the popular
notion of the process of magic: a boy was said to have been in-
chanted in private, with verse, altar, and lamp,—then when he was
enchanted, in the presence of a few accomplices, he fell down, and
afterwards was roused, unconscious of himself. This was al! that
was alleged; but to make the tale complete there should have been
added, that the same boy predicted many things by foreknowledge,
for that we are told is the reward of the whole.

“* And this prodigy about boys,” he proceeds, “is confirmed not
only by vulgar opinion, but by the authority of learned men. I re-
collect to have read in the works of the philosopher Varro, a man of
the exactest learning and erudition, numerous instances of the kind,
and among others, that the people of Tralles had recourse to inquiry
by magie as to the event of the Mithridatic war; and a boy, regard-
ing in water the image of Mercury, sang, in a hundred and sixty
verses, the events that were about to take place. Also, that when
Fabius had lost 500 denarii he went to consult Nigidius, and that
boys, excited by verse, indicated the place in which a purse was
buried with part of them, and how the rest were distributed ; one of
them was in the possession of M. Cato, the philosopher, which it
appeared he had from one of his attendants.

** These and other such anecdotes I read indeed in many authors,
but I am suspended in my opinion whether I should admit or deny


* A littie earlier than S, Severus.


Allusions to Mesmeriam in the Classics. 315


their possibility ; though 1 admit to Plato that between the gods and
men, some intermediate spiritual powers are interposed in nature
and space, who govern all divinations and magical wonders; and
again, I consider this with myself, that it is possible that the human
mind, especially when young and unsophisticated, whether by the
diverting influence of verses, or by the soothing of perfumes, may
be thrown into a deep sleep, and brought into a state of oblivion of
the present, and the memory of the body being gradually withdrawn,
be reduced and return to its own nature,—the immortal, that is, and
divine ; and thus, as in a certain sleepy dose (veluti quodam sopore),
presage the future course of things.”


“Igitur ad preescriptum opinionis et famee confinxere, puerum
quempiam carmine cantatum, remotis arbitris, secreto loco, arula et
lacerna; et paucis consciis testibus, ubi incantatus sit, corruisse:
postea nescientem sui, excitatum. Nec ultra isti quidem progredi
mendacio ausi. Sed fabula ut impleretur, addendum etiam illud
fuit, puerum eundem multa preesagio preedixisse: quippe hoc emo-
lumentum canticis accipimus, Preesagium et Divinationem. Nec
modo vulgi opinione, verum etiam doctorum virorum auctoritate,
hoe miraculum de pueris confirmatur. Memini, me apud Varronem
ese 6a virum accuratissime doctum “—- eruditum cum alia
iujusmodi, tum hoc etiam legere: Trallibus de eventu Mithridatici
belli magica percontatione consulentibus, puerum in aqua simulac-
rum Mercurii contemplantem, quee futura erant centum sexaginta
versibus cecinisse. Itemque Fabium, cum quingentos denarios per-
didisset, ad Nigidium consultum venisse: ab eo pueros carmine in-
stinctos indicasse, ubi locorum defossa esset crumena cum parte
eorum: ceteri ut forent distributi: unum etiam denarium ex eo
numero habere M. Catonem philosophum: quem se a pedissequo in
stipe Apollinis accepisse Cato confessus est.

“‘Heee et alia apud plerosque de Magicis pueris lego equidem :
sed dubius sententize sum, dicamne fieri posse, an negem. Quam-
quam Platoni credam inter Deos atque homines, natura et loco
medias quasdam divorum potestates intersitas, easque divinationes
cunctas et Magorum miracula gubernare: quin et illud mecum re-
puto, posse animum humanum, preesertim puerilem et simplicem,
seu carminum avocamento, sive odorum delenimento, soporari, et ad
oblivionem preesentium externari: et paulisper remota corporis me-
moria, redigi ac redire ad naturam suam, que est immortalis et
divina: atque ita, veluti quodam sopore, futura rerum preesagire.”


He afterwards adverts to a charge against him of employ-
ing magic in relation to some epileptic patients that had been
brought to him by a physician for his advice, and that he had
promised to cure. He concludes that his accusers must be
prepared to affirm that it was a characteristic of the practi-
tioners of magic that they cured diseases, or give up their
charge as false and calumnious.


“Tgitur quum ad inspiciendum mulier eegra, curationis gratia ad


316 Cure of Ulcers of the Leg with Local Mesmerism,


me perducta sit, atque hoc, et medici confessione qui adduxit, ad
meam ratiocinationem recte factum esse, conveniat: aut constituant,
magi et malefici hominis esse, morbis mederi: aut si hoc non dicere
audent, fateantur se in puero et muliere caducis vanas et prorsus
caducas calumnias intendisse.”

That we have here a description of mesmeric phenomena,
and proof to very extensive familiarity with them can hardly
be doubted, whatever may be thought of the methods by
which they were produced, and the attempted explanations of
them. The magical apparatus of mirror, verses, odours, &c.,
were probably in great part, in different circumstances, that
only served to cover the real inducing causes from ——


IV. Cure of Ulcers of the Leg with Local Mesmerism.
By Dr. Ex.iorson.


Mr. Epwarps, aged 73, resident at No. 52, Conduit Street,
and 241, Maida Vale, the father of the lady whose sleep and
cure were effected with mesmerism after ten grains of muriate
of morphine every six hours had failed to make her sleep or
do her good (Zoist No. II., p. 191), applied to me last March,
on account of an ulcer of the size of half-a-crown, above the
outer ankle and three smaller ones in his right leg, which was
inflamed all around and nearly to the knee.

This state was ascribed to taking cold in his damp
garden and grounds, and had come on slowly—the inflam-
mation first and then the ulcers, at the end of last autumn,
and had now existed five months ; fluctuating, but getting
worse in spite of very proper treatment—leeches, warm and
cold applications, purgatives, mercurials, low diet and rest.
On account of the inflammation I also ordered leeches, which
first and last were applied a dozen times; the application of
cold water, which soothed very much more than warm fo-
mentations ; gave him an abundance of cathartics; gently
mercurialized him ; allowed no flesh food, not even broth,—he
was already an abstainer from wine, malt liquor and spirits ;
and ordered the leg to be kept up. Various applications were
made to the ulcers, and nitrate of silver among the rest.

After he had been under my care six weeks, ———
more than he had done under Mr. Havilard of Maida Hill,
with whose approbation I saw him, I was absolutely at a loss,
and in my annoyance proposed a trial of local mesmerism,
hardly venturing to hope it would answer better than my pre-


by Dr. Elliotson. 317


vious measures. The daughter promised me to make longi-
tudinal passes over the sores and inflammation for half an
hour night and morning : and she fulfilled her promise.

In two days, the three small ulcers began to close and the
large ulcer looked better—the edges somewhat drawn towards
each other; so that she said, “ this will do,’”’ convinced that
she had now the proper remedy. The chronic inflammation
rapidly disappeared; the pain, burning and itching, which
had tormented him for half a year, subsided ; the large ulcer
began to heal; and in a month from the day when mesmerism
was begun, there was neither ulcer nor inflammation, and his
leg has continued as sound as the other to this day, Sept. 20th :
all medicines and applications having been omitted, that the
mesmerism might be fairly judged of.

She experienced no sensation in her hand from mesmeris-
ing her father.

I cannot refrain from mentioning that Mr. Edwards was
a tried friend of Mr. Wakley, who long ago was made
fully acquainted with the cure of the elder daughter and in-
troduced him to me about eighteen years ago. Mr. Wakley
was never in my house but twice in his life, on neither occa-
sion sitting down, nor remaining five minutes. The first time
was to request my professional services for Mr. Edwards, who
then laboured under paralysis: the second time was after an
interval of nine years, to request F would go down to the
House of Commons and give evidence on the poor law. I
never tasted food or drink under the same roof with him in
my life. I seize the present opportunity of mentioning this,
because lately The Medical Times most untruly called me a
chum of Mr. Wakley’s, and Mr. Edwards assured me that
Mr. Wakley had told him I was at all his parties, though I
never either visited him or met him in society, or ever heard
of his being in society. He thought proper to report my
clinical lectures for his own interest, and thereby increased
the sale of his Lancet considerably. Not having yet got on
in my profession like my contemporaries who were physicians,
and finding my lectures ill reported, I feared I should suffer,
and therefore offered gratuitously to correct the proofs of
them myself; and I did for a few years. This occasioned
me to call sometimes at the printer’s, and sometimes at Mr.
Wakley’s house, where his subeditor was to be found ; and
thus I had a speaking acquaintance with him: but my taste


did not and could not allow of any farther acquaintance with
the man.


( 318 )


V. Cure of a Contracted Finger, with local Mesmerism.
By Dr. Ex.iotson.


Miss Jane Critcaey, of 22, Great Pulteney Street, Golden
Square, the younger sister of the lady whose cure of hiccup
with mesmerism and wonderful mesmeric phenomena are re-
corded in Vol. II., p. 42, and who then resided in Beak
Street, Regent Street, had a little round lump (a solid gan-
glion) on the tendon (leader) of the middle finger, exactly at
the spot where the finger and palm join. Seniting it or
bending the finger occasioned a pricking pain and made her
feel sick. As it increased to the size of a large pea, Mr.
Johnston, the family medical attendant, whose liberality I
acknowledged in my account of the case of hiccup and who
has ever since been consistent and liberal, cut it out. The
wound healed, but the finger then contracted, and bent down
towards the palm, so that it could neither be extended nor
bent upon the palm, but remained midway,—each joint being
half bent: a second lump began to form at the seat of the first,
and a third at the next joint. The whole hand grew weak, so
that she dropped whatever she attempted to hold. Lotions were
applied ; but, as they did no good, she came to me on the
26th of last February. I advised it to be first soaked in warm
water for half an hour, and then mesmerised by passes without
contact, inside the finger and along the palm, for half an
hour, night and morning. The hand had always been ccld
after the operation; but a fortnight after she consulted me,
it acquired its natural warmth ; in a month the lump, with of
course the tenderness, was much lessened, and the finger so
much less contracted, that, though the water was used twice
a day, the mesmerism was had recourse to but every other
night: and at the end of another month the lump and tender-
ness were gone, the finger was straight, and the hand had
acquired its original strength.

When taken out of the water the hand always felt weak,—
but as the mesmerisation, which was immediately begun, pro-
ceeded it invariably grew warmer and warmer till it acquired
a burning heat at the end of the half hour, such a heat that
she “could hardly bear it ;”’ and at the same time it grew
heavier and heavier to her feelings, so that she was in the
habit of laughing and telling her sister, who was the mes-
meriser, and on whose lap the hand rested during the process,
that it would stick to her lap. When the process was finished,
the sense of weight went off and the hand felt strong. The
acquired strength did not go off before the next mesmerisa-
tion; and each mesmerisation augmented the strength.


The Power of the Will over others. 319


The sister felt nothing herself the first few times that she
mesmerised the hand. But she then began to experience a
burning of her whole hand, and a tingling of her fingers,
with swelling of the veins, which lasted some little time after
each operation.


VI. Instances of the Power of the mere Will over others.
By Mr. H. 8S. Tuomson.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—I have repeatedly said that will as I would, I have never been able
to produce any effect by mere will: and could never see any reason to think
that when I used manipulations or other visible means, their efficiency was
at all different whether I at the same time excited my will to the utmost or
thought of other matters so as not to be aware that I willed atall. But I
fancy I have not a strong will. Neither my organs of Firmness nor of Self-
esteem are greatly developed ; nor those called by some, whether accurately
or not, the organs of Concentrativeness, But I never thought of denying
the influence of the will because I had not witnessed its power. In July,
1843, (Zoist, No. III., p. 240,) at a meeting of the Phrenological Associa-
tion, I said, ‘‘ 1 myself have never produced any mesmeric effect by the
will. But so many persons have related experiments to me which appear
satisfactory that I must admit its influence.” Mr. H. S. Thomson, to whom
the cause of mesmerism lies under such deep obligation, and who has prac-
tised greatly with his will, has kindly complied with my request for informa-
tion, and put the following account at my disposal.

I remain, &c.
J. ELLiotson,


Fairfield, near York,
August, 1845,

My dear Elliotson,—I fear you will think that I have
been a long time in sending you a sketch of those cases of
volition you were interested in. I merely relate to you a few
facts, as I have met with them, and shall only observe that I
have found several patients in the course of my mesmeric
experiments, whom I could affect as strongly by will as by
passes ; and I have met with instances where I have relieved
pain by the mere exercise of the will and without the know-
ledge of the patient; and have observed that those patients
who are the most sensitive, (i.e. who can be most readily
attracted to, and repelled from, the mesmeriser, by passes,)
are those over whom the exercise of the will seems to have
generally the most powerful effect. I have had one or two
patients who had been long under mesmeric treatment, and
whom I could invariably put to sleep by concentrating my
thoughts upon them, even when they had no intimation what-
ever of my intention. I think I mentioned to you the first
case that I met with, and which accidentally convinced me


320 The Power of the Will over others,


of the influence which sometimes the thoughts of the mes-
meriser have upon his patient, (an influence which I imagine
is not altogether confined to mesmerism, or the mesmerised,)
but is more generally felt than suspected. It is about two
years ago, that one day I had been endeavouring to mes-
merise a lady for a neuralgic pain; but finding I had not
produced the usual beneficial effect, but on the contrary,
some unexpected nervous twitchings, and an increase of pain,
I left off the operation, and sat down on the opposite side
of the room to that on which my patient was, and uncon-
sciously fixed my eyes on a picture on that side of the room
on which my patient was sitting. I observed in a short time
that she turned her head slowly round, and apparently fixed
her eyes on the same object. I was struck with this, and
without moving my head turned my eyes towards a table, at
some distance from the picture, on which some books were
lying. I found that her attention was shortly directed to the
same object. I wondered whether the patient would be in-
duced to go to the table, and books, if I kept my thoughts
tivetted upon them; I did so, and in a few minutes she got
up, walked to the table, and turned the books over as if in
search of one, but did not select one. I then suspected that
my thoughts, to some extent, were participated in, and with-
out looking at my patient, I willed her to go to a table in the
centre of the room, and take a book from it; she did so, and
returned and sat down with it. Iclosed my eyes, and willed
her to speak to me, (not a word had been previously spoken
by either of us for ten minutes ;) I had been reclining on a
sofa with a book in my hand, as if engaged in reading. She
almost immediately put her book down, and seemed desirous
of entering into conversation with me. I made no obser-
vation to her at the time about what she had done, but
observed afterwards similar results, from my will, on this
patient. The experiments were not always successful, as a
trifle, such as an observation made by any other person, or
anything which attracted the attention, seemed to counteract
them, and also at times I found that I had not the same
influence. I was much struck with these phenomena, and
determined to watch my other patients more closely, and
also to try some experiments on others whom I had not
mesmerised.

One of the most curious and interesting cases that 1 have
met with in a mesmeric state, is that of a gentleman, a friend
and patient of mine, and whom I have been fortunate enough
greatly to relieve, if not entirely to cure, of a most distress-
ing complaint. He has seldom been in a very deep mesmeric


by Mr. H. 8. Thampson. 821


sleep, and when he awakes, is almost always conscious of
everything that has been said and done. I had observed that
he was particularly sensitive; and that by passes made at a
considerable distance, I could attract or repel him, or move
his legs and arms, in any direction I pleased,—this I can
succeed in doing when he is awake; he has the power of
resistance, but says that it is very disagreeable to him to exert
it. I had mesmerised him one evening when he was just
recovering from a severe attack of his complaint ; and when
he was asleep, his wife, who was in the room, observed,
that she had been sceptical, and had not believed that any
benefit could be derived from mesmerism ; and especially that
parts of the science, or art, which some contend for, ap-
peared to her so perfectly absurd and incredible,—such as
clairvoyance, prevision, and the power of volition,—that
surely I myself did not believe in these, however great my
faith in it as a sanative power. I said, “ Suspend your judg’
ment for a short time, and observe your husband.” I had
seen that he was more than usually sensitive; his hands
twitching, and following mine every pass that I made. I
made a sign that I would make him frown (he was smiling
very complacently at the time),—he did so. I continued,
until his wife seemed alarmed at the angry and distressed
feeling which appeared to agitate him. I willed him to laugh,
in a few moments he was seized with a fit of laughter, rub-
bing his hands, and appearing as if some circumstance had
greatly amused him; on asking him what he was laughing
at, he answered, “‘ Nothing particular ; I only feel in a laugh-
ing humor.” I then made him lift in succession his arms
and his legs, get up from his seat, and attempt to sing a
song; and when I was going away, I asked him mentally if
he would come out and take a ride with me; he arose from
his chair, buttoned up his coat, and said, “Come along
then, Iam ready.” I shall not readily a the expression
of wonder and astonishment depicted on his wife’s counte-
nance, but I have never heard her utter a doubt as to the
power of the will since. The gentleman has since this been
mesmerised by other persons, and has been told the experi-
ments that I had tried on him, and I think these cireum-
stances have in some measure been detrimental to the clearness
of the later experiments which I have tried upon him. Yet
even now, I hak petmnntls I can produce phenomena in him
sufficient to convince all but those who will not believe. I
have several times relieved him of spasms, and taken pain
away, by merely directing my whole attention to the part
affected, and without making passes over it, or pointing at


324 The Power of the Will over others.


the attempt, and very soon the girl left the party in the other
room, and came and looked out of the window. Mr. Atkinson
told me to will her back again ; I did so—she returned in about
a minute. We repeated the experiment, and again succeeded,
and made her sit down in a chair by the window. We left
her sitting, and went into the other room. Mr. Atkinson
then requested me to will her to come to me, stand a short
time near me, walk round me, and go back again, and sit in
the chair by the window. I did so, and the experiment was
perfectly successful in every particular.

Dr. Ashburner, who had observed we were trying some
experiments on his patient, was informed by Mr. Atkinson
exactly of what had occurred. Dr. Ashburner asked me if,
after “‘ Alexis’s” séance was over, I would try whether I could
put his pa to sleep by will only, and when in another
room. I consented to make the experiment. Dr. Ashburner
informed several of the parties present of my intention, and
when the exhibition of ‘“‘ Alexis” was closed, the party retired
into the back drawing-room, where the girl was still sitting.
I remained in the front-room ; in seven minutes the girl was
in a mesmeric sleep. I then excited several faculties by will
only, and concluded by making her give me a note or packet,
which I had observed she had been somewhat anxious to
conceal.

All these experiments were tried on patients who were in
a mesmeric state, or who were highly sensitive from having
been mesmerised ; but I have tried experiments on others who
had never been mesmerised, and who were not aware at all,
at the time, of my intention, and the results have often been
very curious and interesting; though I have frequently at
other times been unable to discover that I produced the
slightest effect.

I will describe a few of the experiments I tried a short
time since ona lady. In a conversation with a party,—be-
lievers, and interested in mesmerism,—I had been relating
some of my own experiments and those of others on volition,
and also expressed an opinion that we were perpetually influ-
encing others with whom we associate by our thoughts and
feelings, without the slightest intention or knowledge on our
parts that we are so doing. They seemed rather incredulous
on these points, but at the same time expressed a wish to see
an experiment tried. The party consisted of three gentlemen,
myself, and a lady: the lady a daughter of one of the gentle-
men present. The lady leaving the room shortly afterwards,
it was agreed that I should try whether I could suggest any-
thing to her by will, and that as soon as she returned and


Cures of Affections of the Eyes, &c., with Mesmerism. 325


was seated, I was to will her to get up from her seat, to go
twice to a table in the centre of the room, and the last time
take a bunch of keys from the table and sit down with them.
All this she did. Another day I tried several experiments on
this lady, and succeeded completely. She brought me two
books, walked in particular directions, and at last guessed
that I had a twig of a plant in my hand, and described it in
the manner I wished,—as a stick with some leaves on it.
This I willed at the request and suggestion of another person.
I have generally found that it was necessary, in trying these
experiments, to keep your attention fixed on the subject you
wished to suggest to another, without wavering ; and that the
person should be totally unconscious of your intention.

I could give you many other instances of cases of volition,
with some very extraordinary effects produced by it at consi-
derable distances, but have thought it better to confine my
relation to those cases only which seem beyond the pale of
mere coincidence, and in which it would appear that imagi-
nation in all probability could have contributed nothing what-
ever to the success of the experiments.

ours ever, most truly,
Henry S. Toompson.


VII. Cases of Amaurosis, Ophthalmia, severe Rheumatism,
Catarrh, and Pain of Head and Giddiness from a fall,
cured with Mesmerism. By Mr. H. S. Taompson.
Communicated by Dr. Exuiorson.


Fairfield, near York,
Sept. 4th, 1845.

My pear Ex.iotson,—I send you a few cases that have
been relieved by mesmerism. If you think them worth
noticing, you may send them for insertion in The Zoist.

Ever truly yours,
Henry S. Toompson.


I have had several cases of diseased eyes, within the last
six months, some of which have derived much benefit from
mesmerism.

Ann Hutch, a girl of about fourteen years of age, applied
to me for a certificate to the York Eye Institution. The sight
of one eye had been defective for some time, and she suffered
much from pain in her head. Suddenly the sight of the other
eye became so deranged, that she could not distinguish any
object distinctly, and could but just find her way about with-

z2


326 Cures of Affections of the Eyes, &c., with Mesmerism,


out assistance. After trying the remedies recommended for
a short time, and finding her small amount of sight still con-
tinue to decrease, I determined to try mesmerism. The
disease was amaurosis ; the vision of the right eye was quite
obliterated, and with the other she could but faintly distin-

uish the outline of objects. The first time I tried mesmer-
ism, she could see to read small print with the best eye, and
could distinguish between light and darkness with the other.
This effect lasted but a few hours. I have continued to mes-
merise this patient every day when at home. The improve-
ment has been slow, but steady. One eye is perfectly re-
stored; the other nearly so—with it she can distinguish any
large object, and different colours, and can see to read very
large print. She is now not subject to relapse when the
mesmerism is not continued, and all pain and uncomfortable
sensation in the head is removed. She was very severely
burnt about the sides several years ago, and complained of
continued pain of the injured parts; this has been also en-
tirely removed.

Anna Hodgson, aged twenty, came to me July 22nd ;—
her eyes were diseased from a very early age, after the mea-
sles, and the sight was gradually growing worse. She had not
been able to see to read for six years. The pupils of the eyes
seemed to have very little power of contracting or dilating.
The humors of the eyes were discoloured, and there was great
opacity of the cornea, particularly of the right eye. I have
mesmerised her constantly, from the time she first came to
me. Her sight is much improved, she can see to read and
work readily. The eyes look bright, and the cornea of both
nearly clear. The chief defect now in her eyes would appear
to arise from the state of the iris, which causes it to dilate
and contract irregularly. This, I should fear, is a defect
which cannot be remedied, and one that I could not observe
at first, from the insensibility of the eyes ; her sight, however,
is wonderfully improved.

Within the last three months, I have had three cases of
inflammation of the eyes; one, a very severe case, where the
sight was much affected. They were all relieved by once
mesmerising. In two of the cases, on the following day, you
could not see a trace of inflammation left ; and in the other,
though the eyes were slightly congested, yet all sense of pain,
weakness, and uncomfortableness were gone.

On Monday, the Ist of September, 1845, a poor woman
was sent to me by my father, in order that t might try
whether mesmerism would be serviceable to her. This was a
case of severe rheumatism, and her pain seemed very great.


by Mr. H.S. Thompson. 327


She had been afflicted about a twelvemonth, and had been
obliged to leave her situation in consequence. She had been
under different medical treatment, which appeared to have
little or no effect upon her, the pain being removed from one
place only to attack another with redoubled violence. She
told me she did not know what it was to have a good
night, and the agony at times was scarcely endurable. The
pain, when I saw her, was most violent in the shoulder
and elbow of the left arm. I made a few passes over the
arm and shoulder—the arm became perfectly rigid, and
the pain was removed. I began to mesmerise her; she
soon closed her eyes, and broke out into a profuse per-
spiration ; she awoke perfectly relieved, not even any stiff-
ness remaining in her arms and shoulders. When I saw her
the following day, she had had no return of pain, and had
had an excellent night. I hear she still continues well.

August ]0th. A young lady had a sudden attack of cold,
atiended with pain in the chest, and loss of voice. All these
symptoms were entirely removed by once mesmerising, and
she has continued perfectly well since.

August 12th. Relieved a gentleman, (a friend of mine),
of a similar attack as speedily.

On Friday, the 29th, | was out riding with a large party,
amongst whom was a young lady whose horse ran away and
threw- her with considerable violence against some railings.
She was much stunned and bruised. She was so giddy and
faint that she was obliged to be conveyed home in a carriage.
On reaching home, she complained of violent pain in the head,
and giddiness, and was so stiff from the bruises and con-
tusions that she walked with difficulty into the house. I
offered my services—she went into a mesmeric sleep very
quickly, and 1 continued mesmerising her until she said that
all pain had ceased. She awoke apparently no worse for her
accident. A few hours afterwards, the pain in the head re-
turned. I repeated the mesmerism, she again awoke quite
well, and has had no return of headache since; nor has she
suffered from the stiffness or soreness of the bruises and con-
tusions, some of which were severe. My wife received a note
from the young lady three days after the accident, expressing
her thanks, and saying, “ pray tell Mr. Thompson that I may
say with the Irishman, ‘1 am no worse for my fall, but quite
the contrary.’ ”


( 328 )


VIII. Cure of severe Affection of the Nervous System, and
extreme Debility, with Mesmerism. By Mr. W. Case.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Fareham, Hants, 7th Sept., 1845.
Sir,—lI shall be obliged by your inserting the inclosed
statement of a case in which the most simple mesmeric phe-
nomena have been followed by the most marked and happy
results. I believe it more than doubtful if any other mode of
treatment would have been followed by success; and certain
am I that no other mode with which I am acquainted could
have been followed by the speedy and marked beneficial re-
sults which attended the steady employment of mesmerism.
But for the kind advice and encouragement afforded by Dr.
Elliotson, I doubt whether the steady and persevering em-
ployment of mesmerism could ever have been obtained, and
sure I am that the patient is most grateful to the Doctor for
his efforts on her behalf,—a feeling too which is sincerely

shared by
Your obedient servant,
Ww. Case.


Mrs. L., the wife of a naval officer, residing at Fareham,
aged 25 years, naturally of a highly nervous and excitable
temperament, had been suffering much mental anxiety for a
considerable period.

After more than usual excitement she was, on the 18th of
April, 1845, attacked with very severe pain in the head, espe-
cially the forehead ; and this was accompanied with fever, a
rapid pulse, white tongue, intolerance of light and noise, loss
of appetite, considerable thirst, hot skin, sleeplessness, and
derangement of the secretions generally. Mrs. L. was at this
time a nurse, but the function soon ceased. She was placed
on low diet, febrifuge medicine administered, and attention
paid to the state of the secretions, her room darkened, and
every care taken to prevent noise, while cold evaporating
lotion was constantly applied to the head, some of the hair
having been removed.

Under a scrupulous adherence to this plan the fever gra-
dually subsided, the pain in the head became less, and at the
end of a week she was thought to be convalescent, but was
reduced to a state of extreme weakness, having been far from
strong previously to this attack. After the lapse of a few
days her appetite was good, and her strength somewhat
greater, which induced her, imprudently, to set her ever active


Cure of severe Affection of the Nervous System, &c. 329


brain to work ; the result of which was, on the 8th of May, a
return of the severe pain in the head, and febrile symptoms.
On the 9th this pain was much worse, in fact agonizing, with
the former intolerance of light and noise increased, and loss
of appetite. The application of cold to the head, &c., gave
very temporary relief throughout the day, and only under the
influence of an anodyne at night was any sleep obtained.
About 12 o’clock on this night she suddenly awoke com-
plaining of having had a horrid dream, of the belief in the
reality of which she was unable to divest herself. From this
time, until about 4 o’clock a.m. on the 10th, there was con-
stant delirium without fever, and at length she sank into a
sleep.
Duins this delirium I had mesmerised her a considerable
time, and almost hoped that a somewhat soothing effect was
produced. After she had slept about half an hour, she was
suddenly seized with a violent general convulsion, which left
her in a state of insensibility. On her recovering from this
state, she still complained of headache, in the forehead more
especially, extending down the right side of the face, and
fastening on the second molar tooth in the upper jaw on that
side.

She was now reduced to a state of great danger, from the
extreme debility on the one hand, and the very great excit
ability of the brain and the rest of the nervous system on the
other.

In the course of this day she was seen twice by Dr.
Elliotson, and herself asked the Doctor if he would mes-
merise her—-to which request he most cheerfully acceded.
He advised the continued application of cold to the head,
attention to the digestive organs, and mesmerism to be con-
tinued for half an hour twice daily. This course was steadily
pursued with, during the first week, a soothing effect and relief
to the pain: in the second week these effects were much in-
creased, even before mesmeric sleep was induced. From the very
commencement of mesmerism she slept better, and after its per-
severing use for ten days she used to fall asleep after my visits,
awake to eat, and sleep again. She had now a good healthy
appetite, and in fact her whole existence was passed between
eating and sleeping, repairing the strength of the frame by
the ready digestion of all the food taken (which consisted
of plain nutriment only), and affording to her previously over-
tasked and ever excitable brain the repose required to restore
its healthy functions.

During this time the bowels took on a perfectly healthy
action, and only once or twice did a little grey powder appear


830 Cure of severe Affection of the Nervous System, &c.


indicated by the state of the secretions; and this, with two or
three teaspoonfuls of castor oil, was the whole of the medicine
taken during the course of treatment after the commencement of
mesmerism.

On the 12th May the pain in the head was much relieved,
that in the face and tooth better; and on this day J began to
experience a pain in the right side of my face, more particularly
in the same molar tooth as that in which Mrs. L. complained of
pain. This pain, for several days, increased while I was en-
gaged in mesmerising her, and during this period the pain
was gradually leaving her. The pain I felt was so severe that
it appeared to me that it would be pleasure to sit down to
have the tooth extracted. The severe pain continued with
me for some days after she had lost all pain, but by degrees
it went off.

On the 28th May, after 20 minutes mesmerism, she passed
into mesmeric sleep-waking, evincing attraction to the mes-
meriser, and repulsion of all others, replying to my —
as to whether she was asleep, comfortable, kc. From this
time I put her to sleep each day in a shorter period, her appe-
tite continuing good, and her strength increasing. On being
put to sleep in the morning, she slept from half an hour to
two hours; and at night, from that time until six, seven, or
eight the next morning.

On the 3rd of June, from some cause, she was attacked by
pain in the right shoulder blade, extending down the right
side of the spine. When mesmerising, | at first placed my
open hand on the seat of pain, when she immediately experi-
enced “a glow” in the part, and relief to the pain. The re-
lief not continuing, I altered my plan, and, previously to
making passes before the face for the purpose of putting her
to sleep, I made passes over the seat of pain for five or ten
minutes, which always gave relief. Very soon after beginning
this plan, pain seized my right shoulder, in the same spot as my
patient felt it. It was not constant (neither had my patient’s
pain been so), but always came on as soon as | began to
mesmerise. It lasted some days after she had lost all pain,
and then gradually disappeared.

In her mesmeric sleep she has been most intolerant of
sounds, hearing painfully any slight sound, and even a whisper
causing an immediate contraction of the brow.

After she went into the mesmeric sleep, and became intole-
rant of contact with any but her mesmeriser, she very curi-
ously every night on her mother coming into her room where
she slept, turned towards her, in whatever direction she might
be lying, with outstretched arms, which she put around her


Cures of Neuralgia and Epilepsy with Mesmerism. 331


neck, and kissed her. If her mother did not at once go to
her, she appeared much distressed, but she would suffer the
approach of no one else. Of all this she was on awaking
quite ignorant.

I mesmerised my patient with continued progress until the


18th June. At that time, as I was leaving home for a few
days, her husband undertook the duty, and has done so until
now (7th July); and I am happy to say that she now has
better health than she has had for some few years. She yet
wants some strength, though it daily increases: but in all
other respects her health is perfect.

P.S.—I should state that on communicating to Dr. Elliot-
son the fact of the transference of the pain from the patient’s
face to my own (her mesmeriser), he ae the having made
“very slow passes with contact from the seat of pain along
the jaw outwards, downwards, and inwards to the point of the
chin, at least twice a day:”’ but from my constant occupa-
tion, this was never done. He states, “ You would presently
lose it (the pain) in all probability. The good Samaritan who
mesmerises you is not likely to take it himself, but will merely
scatter it to the winds.”


IX. Cases of Neuralgia and of Epilepsy cured with Mesmerism.
By Dr. Buxton.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—Should you consider any of the following cases
worthy of record, I shall feel obliged by their insertion in your
valuable periodical.

I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Joun Buxton, M.D., M.R.C.S., &c.


Brownlow-street, Bedford-row,
23rd August, 1845.


Odontalgia.

Mrs. H., wt. 21, residing in Upper Seymour Street, Eus-
ton Square.

10th Nov. 1844. Has been suffering for four or five days
from very severe tooth-ache, attended with much swelling of
the right side of the face, arising from having taken cold in a
carious tooth (the right superior canine) when coming up to
town. From the intensity of the pain, her nights have been
quite sleepless. 1 mesmerised her at half-past three in the


332 Cures of Neuralgia and Epilepsy with Mesmerism,


afternoon, by passes for a quarter of an hour, and she dozed
another quarter of an hour, but awoke from the severity of
the pain, which, however, was quite subdued by blowing on
the cheek. I then directed her to apply a linseed meal poul-
tice to the cheek.

llth, 34 p.m. Has passed a comfortable night, but the
pain returned about an hour ago. On examining the inside
of the mouth I found an abscess pointing just above the root of
the carious tooth, and by pricking it, let out a quantity of pus.
Then I mesmerised her for twenty minutes, and notwithstand-
ing her utmost efforts to keep awake, she again dropped off
to sleep for about ten minutes. As the pain still continued
when she awoke, I blew on her cheek for about ten minutes,
and again quite removed the pain, which did not return. She
continued applying the poultice for a day or two, till the
swelling had subsided.


Nervous pain in the forehead and chest.


Dinah Hearn, of No 3, Foster’s-buildings, Whitecross- :
street, a stout healthy-looking child, five years of age, was
brought to me by her mother on the 4th January, this year.
She had always enjoyed excellent health till she had the
measles twelve months previously, but had since been subject
to pain over the right eye, and at the superior portion of the
right side of the chest, recurring several times a-day. She
also moaned and tossed about a good deal in her sleep, and
woke each morning crying with the headache, and appearing
unrefreshed.

I could not detect any other symptoms of disorder in the
child ; the bowels were regular, the appetite good, and pulse
natural. She had had jalap and other aperients occasionally,
but with only very temporary benefit. I mesmerised her by
passes at 10 a.m., but without producing any perceptible
effect. She had her headache and pain in the chest when I
began, and still complained of them when I desisted, but
upon my blowing for one or two minutes upon the painful
parts she was quite relieved.

On the 6th she had been much freer than usual from the
pain in her head and chest, and had slept much better, without
——. or moaning, nor did she wake crying, as had lately
been her invariable habit. Mesmerised her again without
any apparent effect, as also on the 7th and 8th. On the 9th
and 10th she yawned once or twice. Being perfectly well,
she gave up attending, and has continued till now (14th June)
quite free from her complaints. -


by Dr. Buxton. 333


Epilepsy.

William Tonks, zt.14, short, of Nag’s Head-yard, Marl-
borough-mews, Oxford-street.

llth Nov., 1844. About the beginning of last June he
fell from a waggon on his head, and a fortnight after had an
epileptic fit, which lasted five minutes, and was followed by
half an hour’s sleep, or stupor. The next morning he had
another, and a third about the beginning of October.

Since his accident he has been subject to headache, chiefly
over the eyes; has not been able to read for more than five
minutes without seeing the letters double and dazzling, and
the eyes have been constantly winking. I mesmerised him
by the passes at 6 p.m., for about a quarter of an hour, and
he became drowsy and stupid, and I then roused him by
blowing on the eyes and forehead. By this means the head-
ache, from which he was then suffering, was removed.

The mesmerism was repeated for about 25 minutes on the
12th, 15th, 21st, and 28th. He had two slight fits on the
24th, and one on the 25th. I also mesmerised him on the
9th, 13th, 18th, and 27th December, and on the 3rd January
of this year, but could not render him insensible. As he did
not return, and I was anxious to know how he was, I went
to see him on the 3rd February, and found him quite cured
of all his ailments. He continued well on the 13th of June.

I consider this boy to have been cured by mesmerism, be-
cause I was always able, after mesmerising him, to relieve
him of headache, or other pain, by blowing on the part, or
applying my hand; and because up to the time that J first
saw him, his headache and winking of the eyes had been gra-
dually increasing, and he had become dull and listless, but
since this treatment was pursued, he improved.

I need scarcely add that no other medical means what-
ever were employed in any of these cases. A regular diet and
mode of life were enjoined.


Epilepsy.

Edward , et. 3, a florid, healthy-looking child, had
been subject to fits for about two months previous to my first
mesmerising him on the 8th May, 1844.

From what the child said both previously and subse-
quently to his temporary loss of speech, it — that one
evening, shortly before the fits were noticed, he was very
much frightened by a dog springing upon him in the dark, and
that this was the exciting cause of his disease; at least 1 have
been unable to ascertain any other. He had had tinea capitis
for two or. three months when the fits came on, but it was


334 Cures of Neuralgia and Epilepsy with Mesmerism,


subsiding under the use of ung. cetacei externally, and the
usual accompanying treatment. When about a year old, he
had a severe attack of pneumonia, but for the last year had
been in excellent health.

The fits were at first exceedingly slight, occurring perhaps
once in the middle of the day, while at play, when he would
suddenly become quite quiet, stare for half a minute, and then
resume his amusement. Gradually they augmented in seve-
rity and number, and in about rt weeks began to take
place only at night. He now became a good deal convulsed
in them, would have seven or eight in one night, and was
rather listless in the day time. I was requested to see him,
and although there was no other symptom of disordered
health except the fits, ordered him some powders of calomel
and scammony twice a week, thinking that if the fits de-
pended on any obstruction in the digestive organs, they
might remove the cause, or otherwise act beneficially by de-
termining the blood from the head to the abdominal viscera.
At the end of a week or ten days, finding my little patient
becoming worse, I applied a blister to the nape of the neck,
and very strictly regulated his diet, desiring that he should
have no meat, pastry, nor any article of food difficult of diges-
tion, and take rather less nourishment than usual. I gave
him at the same time minute doses of belladonna, but not-
withstanding, the disease continued to increase, and looking
upon the case as otherwise quite hopeless, requested his mother
to take Dr. Elliotson’s opinion. We saw him on the 7th of
May, and he said that mesmerism would cure the child, and
that he thought every practicable plan had been tried. To
shew me how to mesmerise him, he put him into an easy
chair, and placing one hand on the top of his head, made the
usual passes with the other for about ten minutes. The little
ange yawned once or twice, and Dr. E. recommended that
1e should be mesmerised in this manner half an hour daily.
On the 8th, therefore, I followed these directions at noon.
Drowsiness and yawning ensued, and at the end of the time
I roused him by blowing on the eyes, face, and forehead, and
by transverse passes. The fits came on the succeeding night
much as usual with him at this time. Twenty minutes or
half an hour after falling asleep, he generally had one, which
might last from three to ten minutes, and the attacks recurred
about every half hour in the night till his ordinary time for
getting up.
9th er. Mesmerised for half an hour by the passes at
noon, and he went into a deep sleep for an hour and a half.
On my then endeavouring to wake him by blowing on the eyes,


by Dr. Buxton. 335


forehead, and vertex, and making transverse passes, a severe
fitcame on. He had three more fits before 5 o’clock, sleep-
ing between them. After the last we kept him awake, and
he took nourishment, and then went out for a little exercise.

The next night and till noon the following day he had fits
every half hour, more or less severe. During the attacks,
and in the intervals, 1 had repeatedly endeavoured to mes-
merise him, but without any apparent effect. In the after-
noon I again sent him to sleep, but the fits quickly reap-
a and continued at more Lintent intervals through the
night.

Fn the llth, 12th, and 13th, he was much the same, but
on the 14th when mesmerised, he went into a deep sleep for
35 minutes, and woke of himself. On the next night he
slept quite quietly for 12 hours, and was less restless on the
following day.

At this time, and for the week previous, he had lost all
command over the legs and arms, being unable to walk, feed
himself, or speak; had much difficulty in holding his head
erect, but his appetite was generally good.

15th, 34 p.m. Put to sleep in seven minutes, and slept
quietly, but not deeply, till about a quarter to five, when he
awoke, but seemed very drowsy. I therefore mesmerised him
again a little, and at a quarter-past five he had a pretty strong
fit, though not of long duration. Soon afterwards he awoke,
very cross. The following night was similar to the preceding,
the 14th. He had fits during the mesmerism on the 16th to
the 24th, and on an average 16 or 18 each night.

As he had had no attack on the night of the 14th, after
having been free from them in the mesmeric state, | thought
it would now be well to wake him from this condition ea
he should have a fit; therefore on the 25th, having allowed
him to sleep ten minutes, I awoke him as usual. On the
subsequent night, the fits were much fewer in number, and
not so strong. On the 26th he was not mesmerised, and
cage a night similar to the last. On the 27th I mesmerised

im, and woke him in twelve minutes, and on the next night
he had only one short and mild attack at eight in the
morning.

28th. He can walk and use his hands a little, and support
his head properly. Was in the mesmeric state a quarter of
an hour to-day; and he slept the next night as is usual with
him when in health, viz., restlessly, and tossing about much.
— ene the following morning he was somewhat con-
vulsed.


From this time he was mesmerised every other day for


336 Cures of Neuralgia and Epilepsy with Mesmerism.


about a month. He soon became able to walk alone again,
and feed himself, and in the fourth week began to try to
articulate ; at the end of the time had nearly recovered his
former health and power of speech, and afterwards continued
well.

19th Nov. Dr. Elliotson had cautioned his mother to allow
the mesmerism to be performed occasionally after he had be-
come perfectly well to all appearance ; but as she had to leave
town, this was neglected, and when she returned, it seemed
unnecessary to recur to it. For the last month, however, she
has observed the little boy to be very restless day and night,
he often changes colour, and now and then shivers, even while
at play ; she therefore requested me to mesmerise him, but it
required 25 minutes to induce sleep. Fearing a return of the
attacks, I awoke him in five minutes. Once or twice after-
wards I tried for half an hour at a time, but could not
succeed.

6th Dec. He has not appeared well for two or three days,
and in the middle of last night was very restless. Just then
a dog barked loudly near the window, and his mother saw
him in a slight fit. I mesmerised him at three in the after-
noon, and he went to sleep in five minutes for half an hour,
when he awoke of himself.

7th. Mesmerised by his mother, who was suffering from
pain in the chest and dyspnoea; but he was fretful the whole
evening afterwards, and complained much of pain in the chest.
The sleep also was very light, so that he would awake and
answer if called or pe Bee to.

May, 1845. About a month ago he had three or four slight
fits in the middle of the day, but only amounting to fixing
the eyes. His mother thought they were owing to a change
of residence. He is growing fast, and looks pale, but is other-
wise quite well.

The mesmeric sleep in this case differed in only one parti-
cular from the natural sleep, as far as I could ascertain, viz.,
in its depth. When fairly in the mesmeric state, it required
five or ten minutes blowing hard on his face, transverse
passes, &c., to wake him, but a slight noise is quite sufficient
to rouse him from the natural sleep. I could not induce
any other mesmeric phenomena, as stiffening, clairvoyance,
or answering, though I repeatedly tried.

I think that further remarks are unnecessary, as such will
readily present themselves to any who will take the trouble
of reading these cases with common attention. I noticed no
other phenomena than those recorded, nor have I intentionally
omitted any important facts.


X. Cure of severe Affection of the Stomach with Mesmerism.
By Mr. Baupocx.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


7, Terrace, Chatham Yard,

7th August, 1845.
I nave to record another effectual cure through the instru-
mentality of mesmerism. On Friday, the 29th of May, 1845,
I was requested by Mrs. Hughes, the wife of Captain Hughes,
of the 80th Regiment, to mesmerise one of their domestics,
named Ann Falton. She was 26 years of age; the wife ofa
non-commissioned officer of the Royal Artillery, and had had
no family. She was formerly stout and in robust health, but
for many months had been falling away, until she had be-
come almost a skeleton. She had had severe and constant
pains in the pit of her stomach, and most acute pain in the
lower part of the region of her heart. For some weeks pre-
vious to my seeing her (at her master’s quarters in Chatham
Barracks), she could not retain any food on her stomach,
throwing it up soon after she had eaten it, and with such
severe pain that she was almost constantly moaning. Her
eyes were sunk in her head, and she looked a doomed
woman.

On the 29th May, I made passes over her for nearly an
hour, and she went into the half-sleep. I devoted an hour to
her on the 30th, and she passed into the deep sleep. I also
mesmerised her an hour per day on the 3lst of May, and Ist,
2nd and 3rd of June, by which time her pains had nearly left
her, and her appetite was improving. On the 3rd, I found
that she responded very promptly to my touch over several
of the cerebral organs. On the 4th, 5th and 6th of June, 1
mesmerised her an hour each day, and she was wonderfully
improved in health and spirits.

On Monday, the 9th of June, I found her very full of
pain, having been absent in London two days. I had much
difficulty in getting her into the mesmeric sleep, and for some
time after her eyes were closed she groaned and was in much
= but after she had been in the mesmeric sleep for an

our, she was awakened quite free from pain.

Tuesday, 10th June. When mesmerised, she responded
beautifully to my touch over several of the cerebral organs.
When Veneration and Ideality were excited in combination,
she said she saw a most beautiful place, full of angels; that
they were all making obeisance to a figure of light seated on
a transparent brilliant throne: and the tears ran down her


338 Severe Affection of the Stomach cured with Mesmerism.


cheeks most copiously ; and her countenance assumed almost
a seraphic appearance, being lighted up with devotional joy.
When I excited Tune in conjunction with the two previously
named, she said, “Do you not hear the music of harps,
trumpets and lyres, and such beautiful singing?’ And then
she chanted a most holy chant. But when I took my finger
away from Tune, she said, “They have done, they do not
sing or play nice.” But upon my replacing my finger on
Tune again, she said, “ Listen, there is the singing and music
again.” I asked her why she shed tears, and she said, that
among the angels she saw three of her sisters, (long since
dead), that they smiled upon her, but that she could not
touch them or speak to them, as she was not = enough
yet to go to the place where they were. When Philoprogeni-
tiveness was excited, she said she loved children, that nothing
should tempt her to beat them ; that she would coax them to
make them good. I excited Combativeness in combination,
and then she said, “I would beat them well. I would just
thrash them ;’’ and when Destructiveness was added, she said
she would smother them. But when Philoprogenitiveness
was again excited by itself, she said, “ Never beat children,
spoil them if you do.” When Wit was excited, she
aughed joyously, and said, “They are telling such funny
stories ;’’ and when I added Tune, she said, “‘ Can you hear
their funny songs ?”’ I said no, and she sung most humour-
ously, “ Billy Barlow,” and a parody on the “ King of the
Cannibal Island.”’ When Imitation was excited, she echoed
every word that fell from me. Gibberish, and imitation of
cattle and of birds, she did to perfection. As fast as I
changed, she followed me with exactness. When Colour was
excited, she said she was in a beautiful garden, full of lovely
flowers ; there were white lilies, white roses, white statues, la-
dies dressed in white, and most beautiful flowers of all colours,
I said, “ If you had a nosegay of them, would you give part
of them to me and part to your mistress?” “ No,” said she,
“TI would not part with one of them, I will keep them in my
own room.” But upon my touching over Benevolence also,
she said, “I will give all of them away.” But on my re-
moving my finger from Benevolence, she said, “I will keep
them all to myself.” When Self-esteem was excited, she
said, “Iam a very grand lady, a marchioness.” She said
that she had a large establishment of servants—was most
ridiculously affected in her manners, and said she had given
directions to her butler not to admit her mistress or myself.
When the organ of Order was excited she arranged her hair.
In fact her head resembled a piano: you had but to touch


Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism. 339


over any organ, and the response was as prompt as if you had
touched a note of the piano. I mesmerised her daily until
Monday, the 16th June, and again on the 19th, 22nd, 26th,
and 30th June, on the 3rd July, 7th, 8th, 9th, and the | 1th
July. And it is with sincere pleasure that I record the fact,
that she is now quite free from pain, has a good appetite,
and that her face presents the appearance of sound health.
She and her husband expressed much gratitude for the cure
wrought in her with mesmerism alone.
er case has excited much interest here, as her sickly ap-
— and her previous ill health was known to very many.
er cure, and the great improvement in her appearance, have
made many at Chatham converts to mesmerism. Several
persons saw her mesmerised, and upon different occasions
witnessed the excitementof the cerebral organs—among whom
I would enumerate Sir Thomas Wiltshire, Colonel-Command-
ant here; Captain and Mrs. Hughes, 80th regiment ; Captain
Burslem, 13th ; Captain Smiley, 99th ; Major and Mrs. Camp-
bell; Mr. Powell, of New Bond-street, &c., &c., all of whom
will corroborate the foregoing statement. I should add, that
Ann Falton has an excellent private character, and neither
she nor her husband had any previous knowledge of mesmer-
ism or phrenology. She stil continues in robust health.
I am yours, truly,
Tuomas Bapock.


XI. Case of a Contracted Foot with severe Pain, cured with
Mesmerism. By Dr. Exxiorson.


“ Practitioners who adopt the th d follies of Hah Priessnitz, and ANIMAL MAG-
NEtisM, do so to obtain a living, not having the talent or patience to obtain the public cunfidence
in the legitimate manner ; consequently they cannot be considered a loss to medical science,” &c.
On the Remedial Influence of Oxygen, &c. By J. Evans Riadore, M.D., F.L.S., Member of
the Royal College of Surgeons. London, 1845. page 8.

“ Pretenders there are to refined originality, and disseminators with electric speed and bril-
liancy, of spurious medical philosophy ; such, for instance, as the modern practitioners of hydro-
pathy, homeopathy, and MEsMERIsSM ; that inculcate practice by commission in the former and
omission in the latter, who may be said to be—


* Our nation’s terror, and her bloody scourge.’”—Ibid., p. 7.


_ “Thus we may hope, &c., to recover those strayed patients who have unwittingly confided
in the injurious modern systems, of which it may be said, that they were conceived in selfish-
ness, and have been brought forth in murder.” —Ibid., p. 13.


TuEsE quotations have not been made from a person of the
least note, or whose name can be familiar to my readers; but
still they shew the feeling of the profession, as the writer is
struggling hard for notoriety and support in the heart of the
fashionable part of London, and writing books on taking sub-
jects, as he thinks, in a taking manner. With his remarks
VOL. III. AA


840 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


on homeopathy and hydropathy, I have no business; but
his vituperation of them and mesmerism as “ bloody scourges,”’
is rather simple. The omissions of mesmerists are the omis-
sions of debilitating, tormenting, and disgusting measures,
which have proved ineffectual, as the astounding cures re-
corded in The Zoist demonstrate. How far I had “ neither
talent nor patience to get on in a legitimate manner, and so
endeavoured to obtain a living” by mesmerism, Mr. J. Evans
Riadore knows full well. The talk of impiety was stale, even
in Mr. Hocker the murderer.

“Enormous labours, the expenditure of incalculable ener-
gies,” he says, at p. 8, “ have elevated these sciences (medi-
cine and surgery) to that high degree of development which
they have obtained, and to the exalted ground they now
occupy.” Why, if this were true, we should not have mul-
titudes dying weekly throughout the kingdom under the most
popular physicians and surgeons and general practitioners
and in the best hospitals; nor meet with multitudes who
have sought at great expense in vain a cure for their suffer-
ings, “straying” and “unwittingly confiding” to a succession
of the three orders, who long treated them “ in the legitimate
manner.”


Miss Eleanor Collins, of Newark, was brought to me by
her father and aunt on the 20th of last March, with her /eft
foot strongly contracted—the point drawn downwards and in-
wards, the heel upwards, so that the instep was convex ani
tense, and any attempt which I made to force the foot a kair’s-
breadth forwards and upwards, or sidewise, was not merely
fruitless, but gave severe pain. She of course could not put
it to the ground, and was under the necessity of being car-
ried or hopping about with a stick. She suffered also severe
pain in the foot and up the outside of the extremity—certain
portions of the spinal chord concerned with sensation being
thus affected, as well as of those concerned with motion.
Her general health was not good: she was weak, and her
appetite was impaired, and she slept ill. She had rather dark
hair, eyes, and complexion ; was short, but well, even strongly,
formed ; and was fully developed; her head was of excellent
size and proportions, and her countenance expressive of great
penetration, goodness, and decision of character. Her ge-
neral appearance reminded me of the elder Okey, who with
her sister was cured with mesmerism and is alive and well;
but whose treatment is a foul blot upon Mr. Wakley and the
multitude of medical men who ignorantly and cruelly took
him for their leader. .


by Dr. Elliotson. 341


Mr. Collins furnished me with the following history :—

“‘ My daughter, when about twelve years of age, was at
school at Grantham, and in coming home on a visit was
seized, without any assignable cause, on the road with
hiccough. This encreased to such a degree that she was un-
able to return to school. Dr. Chawner, an eminent physician
at Newark, attended her. She was bled and blistered, and
took the medicines proper in her case. At times the hiccough
was so severe as to prevent her sitting on a chair without
being held; her hair was thrown in disorder about her face,
and her sufferings were, at times, exceedingly distressing
both to herself and her friends.

“ By the care and attention of her physician the paroxysms
were diminished in number and intensity, but she still re-
mained liable to a recurrence of them, and had them, more
or less frequently, till she was about fourteen years old. At
this period she experienced a difficulty in walking, and ver
shortly afterwards lost all power in using her lower limbs. She
was, indeed, in a pitiable condition,—unable to bear the
slightest noise, and incapable of attending in the least to her
studies. This part of her affliction lasted for about a year,
during which her eye-sight so far failed her as to render her
incapable of reading music at the distance it is placed at the
instrument, and she could read only large print ; and for se-
veral weeks she was /otally blind. Wer hearing also was af-
fected, and at one time we seriously apprehended that the
power of swallowing would be destroyed.

“In the month of June, 1840, 1 took her, with much diffi-
culty and no little anxiety, to Burlington Quay; and, having
myself previously constructed an easy carriage, I drew her
for some hours every day upon that beautiful pier. Her
health was much improved by a residence of more than three
months on the coast, and she returned home able to walk,
but the hiccough occasionally returned.

“A few months after her return from Burlington Quay,
she complained one morning of her neck being stiff’ on the left
side, which at first was supposed to proceed from cold, and
she was treated for it till the next day, when it was discovered
by Dr. Chawner to proceed from the same cause as the hic-
cough ; and, although the doctor was unremitting in his at-
tention to her, the spasm continued to encrease till the cheek
was brought into actual contact with the shoulder, and the
muscles were so rigid that it was utterly impossible to insert
even a card between the parts. The contraction drew her so
much aside that her spine began to be curved. Everything, I
believe, that the materia medica could supply in her case was
employed, and she was galvanized for some time without
AA


342 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


effect. We almost began to despair of relief as her neck had
been drawn aside for six months.

“In December, 1841, I took her to London, with a writ-
ten statement of her case, to consult Sir Benjamin Brodie,
who fully approved of everything that had been done for her.
He gave no hope of her speedy recovery, but said that she
might get better in time.

“ A newspaper, sent by an unknown friend, contained a
report of a lecture on mesmerism by Mr. Braid, surgeon, of
Manchester, in which was an account of a female having
been cured of a violent contraction of the right hand by mes-
merism. In the paper there was also a letter from Mr.
Herbert Mayo, of London, in favour of this new agent. I
immediately determined to take my daughter, then sixteen
se of age, to Manchester; and I placed her under Mr.

raid’s care. That gentleman first saw her in the evening of
the 24th March, 1842, Dr. Chawner and myself only being
present.

“Mr. Braid, having very quietly asked her a few common-
"we questions, desired her to look steadily upon a silver

ancet-case which he held about twelve inches above her
head, but so that both eyes could gaze upon the object. In
a few minutes her eyes closed in sleep. He extended her
limbs and made them rigid. After her remaining thus for
about two minutes, he gently placed her head upright, appa-
rently with as much ease as a mother would change the posi-
tion of the head of her infant, and awoke her suddenly.
Her head, to our utter astonishment and delight, remaining
straight. Immediately on awaking she appeared much ex-
cited, and began to weep. No doubt this proceeded from
surprise and joy at finding her head so suddenly restored to
its proper position. She was led into an adjoining parlour to
the friend’s at whose house we were residing, and after re-
maining for an hour or two on the sofa, all the time appear-
ing very feeble, she was taken to bed.

“In the morning she came down to breakfast, perfectly
straight, and was very cheerful. After breakfast Mr. Braid
called, and again mesmerised, or, as he terms it, hypnotized
her, and shortly afterwards I perceived that her head had a
slight nervous motion similar to a person affected with a shaking
palsy. Whilst in the mesmeric state he asked her a few
questions, to which she replied in a low tone of voice.

“ On the following morning he hypnotized her again, and
the nervous motion of the head soon after much encreased.

“We remained in Manchester the next day (Sunday),
and on Monday we returned to Newark.

“ We had not been at home quite a week when her mother


by Dr. Elliotson. 343


came to tell me that her head had been again drawn aside
during the night, but that Dr. Chawner had hypnotized her,
and with much ease had placed her head straight, and also
that the nervous motion had entirely ceased. The latter has
not since returned.

“In June of the same year I took her to Burlington
Quay, with a view of benefitting her general health. Being
myself obliged to leave after having been there for two or
three weeks, I learned, with deep regret, that her head was
again drawn aside. Notwithstanding this information, it was
deemed prudent to allow her to remain by the sea-side for a
fortnight longer, which completed the period for which she
originally went. Dr. Chawner waited for her arrival at
Newark, hypnotized her as soon as she reached home, put
her head straight in a few minutes, and in an hour afterwards
she walked into the town.

“It has been said that change of air was the cause of her
recovery ; but in this case she had been well for three months,
and after a residence on the coast for a month, the spasm of
the muscles on the left side of the neck, the side invariably
affected, again occurred.

“On several occasions, probably six or eight, her head
was drawn aside, and put straight, with perfect ease, by her
mother, after Mr. Braid’s method.

“In 1843 she went to reside with her brother at Lincoln,
and enjoyed for some time very good health. In October,
1844, when coming down the “ Steep Hill” in that city, she
caught her left foot against a stone, and shortly afterwards
a second time struck it against a projecting object.

“On reaching her brother’s house she complained of the
pain in her foot, which was fomented as for a sprain. This
afforded no relief. On the contrary it was, in a few days, so
painful, but without swelling, that she could not use it, and
in December she returned to Newark.

“T soon felt convinced that the contraction of the foot
was owing to the same cause as the previous spasm in her
neck, and if she had struck her foot against a stone this was
the effect of the spasm.

“The morning before she left Lincoln her mother hypno-
tized her with the hope that it might be as beneficial as it had
previously been ; she succeeded in producing sleep, but with-
out the desired effect. When she was awakened by her
mother, she had violent pain in her head and eyes, and felt
very restless and weak, nor did those uncomfortable sensations
leave her for more than an hour. She had not been similarly


344 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


affected before. Dr. Chawner wished her to be hypnotized
again by her mother, but, for the first time, sleep could not
be induced. In December Dr. C. attempted two or three
times to hypnotize her, but did not succeed, though each
trial lasted about half an hour; and each caused pain of the
head and eyes. When in January her neck again became
stiff, and, as was always the case when her head was drawn
down, she suffered extreme pain along the whole of her left
side and arm, the doctor once more hypnotized her, an
with ease put her head straight, but could not in the least
move her foot. After she had remained asleep for two or
three hours, he awoke her, and desired that hypnotism should
not be tried again for some time, as it had made her so much
weaker, and had brought on great pain in her head and
eyes. It was accordingly discontinued till the beginning of
March, when a lady, Mrs. Ware, endeavoured three times
one day to mesmerise her, for half an hour each time, and
once the next morning, without success; but her mother
produced sleep by Mr. Braid’s method (the only one we were
then acquainted with). The following morning they each tried
again without any effect whatever, excepting the weakness
aud head-ache she had before experienced ; but Dr. Chawner
succeeded in putting her to sleep, though without any bene-
ficial result upon the ancle. This I think was the last time
she was hypnotized.

“Some time after her return from Manchester I received
a letter from the Lady Mary Bentinck, stating she had heard
that my daughter had had a relapse, and in the kindest
manner, for which I can never feel sufficiently grateful, of-
fered to give mea letter of introduction to Dr. Elliotson. As
my daughter’s health was then much improved, I could only
thank her ladyship for her condescension and kindness ; but
in March last, her foot having then been violently contracted
for six months, I applied to her ladyship, who, without any
delay, most handsomely furnished me with a letter, and
Dr. Elliotson saw my daughter for the first time on Thursday
the 20th March. She was then, as she had been for half a
year, unable to place her foot to the ground, and I had to
carry her from one part of the house to another.

“‘ She was very much out of health in many respects, and
had been for some months. Her appetite was very indifferent,
and she seldom closed her eyes for sleep before four or five
o’clock in the morning, as the pain in her ancle increased to
a high degree about seven in the evening and did not dimi-
nish till five in the morning; though from the first day


by Dr. Elliotson. 345


she was seized with the affection she constantly had pain in
the foot, it was the most severe during the above-mentioned
hours.”


She was placed in an easy chair, and I made very slow
passes with one hand from opposite her forehead to opposite
her chest, occasionally pointing my fingers without movement
before her eyes instead, looking at her intently, and she look-
ing as much as possible at me, for five and thirty minutes :
but no effect of any sort was produced. I then held one of
those very short broad bottles, in which smelling salts are
frequently sold, above her, which she looked upwards at,
precisely as she had always done when treated in Mr. Braid’s
way, for fifteen minutes: still no effect came. The patient
and her friends said that all was done precisely as Mr. Braid
did, but, to make myself sure that the method was exactly
followed, I next requested the father to hold the bottle over
her for some minutes : all was in vain.

2lst. From my daily experience of mesmerism for the
nine last years, I felt a strong presumption that it would cure
the present case, and bring forth beautiful phenomena. The
absence of all effect from my passes and pointing upon a
patient subject to a succession of such symptoms, I ascribed
to her agitation at being with me for the first time ; and had
no doubt that the composure of a little acquaintance would
enable her susceptibility to prove itself. As may be supposed,
I resolved upon the old-established modes of mesmerising,
and not upon the coarse method practised by Mr. Braid.

When I had made slow downward passes before her face
for a short time, she looked drowsy, her eyelids drooped, her
head grew unsteady, and in ¢welve minutes from the first she
went into a deep mesmeric sleep-waking. Some go into it
very slowly, so that for days and weeks, nay, months, the
sleep seems only common sleep. But she went into it com-
pletely at once. She was cataleptic,—every part remaining in
the position in which I successively placed it; and presently
her arms, head, and trunk, became rigid, remaining in a
fixed position, or, if forced from it, returning to it again.*
The rigidity of those portions afterwards characterized her
mesmeric state as long as I treated her; but the catalepsy
never recurred except once about a week afterwards, and then
lasted a few minutes only. The rigidity shewed itself as
soon as I moved an arm, her head or aon ff from its position,
and kept it still for two or three seconds. When a part was


* See my remarks upon the improper use of the term catalepsy by per-
sons ignorant of medicine, Vol. II., p. 67.


346 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


thus rigid,’she had no direct power over it—could not alter
its position by merely willing this: but indirectly she could
alter its position,—if she felt an emotion, to obey which the
movement of a rigid part was required, she could move it.
For instance, when her arm and hand were rigid, if I touched
her hand, she instantly moved both and then closed her fin-
gers to seize and grasp my hand ; if I touched her head, she
instantly moved her head away, and raised her arm to push
my hand from her head ; and if any one else touched her an
where, she moved away the part touched and repelled with
her hands. For she manifested attachment in the mesmeric
state to me her mesmeriser, and repulsion of others: and her
attachment to her mesmeriser was not so great as her aver-
sion to have the organs of her brain touched over. As soon
as ever her emotion was past, the parts were rigid again,
though necessarily in a new position.* Breathing upon them
at once produced relaxation.

Her eyes were too firmly closed for her to open them, and
closed again instantly if I found them open; and this was the
case to the very last day. She could not sit —_ in
the chair; but her activity increased daily, till she sat up
well, and at length walked about. In the same way she
spoke when addressed, but in a whisper and briefly : from day
to day, however, her voice became louder and she spoke more
freely ; till at last she would chatter away like the liveliest
girl awake. She was not in a dream, as some sleep-wakers
are,+ she knew where she was, who I was, and the time ;
though on subsequent occasions she occasionally fell into a
dream for a longer or shorter time, and on exciting certain
cerebral feelings strongly by mesmerising the appropriate
organ we could throw her into a dreamy delusion.


I readily awoke her by rubbing my thumbs on her eye-
brows outwards and blowing in her face.


On the third day (22nd) it was also twelve minutes before she
went off.


On the fourth and fifth days only siz.
For nine days she went off in three.
She then, from some accidental circumstance, had a great increase
of pain, not only of the foot but of all the left side, even up to her
head; and I was seven minutes upon the 3rd of April, and, as the


pain had still increased, I was nine upon the 4th, in producing the
mesmeric state.


* See my remarks, Vol. II., p. 61.
+ See the case of Miss Rosina Barber, who was always, and whenever I
mesmerise her is still, in a dream, Vol. I1., p. 219.


by Dr. Elliotson. 347


The day following (April 5), however, as the pain had subsided,
she went off in three minutes as before, and also on the 6th and 7th.

But on the 8th in four minutes; and on the 9th in not fewer than
eight minutes, being ill and in pain—nam in menstruis erat.

On the 10th in four minutes; on the 11th in five, and she awoke
for the first time spontaneously, at the end of two hours, from pain
in the foot and leg. Not merely was the cause of general illness
still in operation, but the pain had become aggravated, in all
probability, on account of it, as is so commonly the case with
all diseases in females; so that on the 11th, she again was not
off in fewer than eight minutes; and for several days the time
was about four ; and then it was three again. Soon two; then one.
Then three or four passes were sufficient; at length one, if slow,
or even an earnest look for an instant without a pass, sent her
at once into perfect sleep-waking. There was always, as usual
with patients, a little more time required if she was at all poorly,
or in pain, or unhappy. These circumstances not waieneath
cause great delay or even impossibility to produce full or even
any sleep.

For the first few days I awoke her at the end of half an
hour, this being the utmost time I could spare for her. But,
happily, after some days she brought herself to be con-
tented asleep without my presence, and I therefore allowed
her to remain in the mesmeric state with other mesmeric
patients, who always allowed me to leave them in their sleep-
waking, in a room beyond my library while I received my
general patients. Thus she was in the mesmeric state, like
her companions, daily from ten till one or two o’clock, when
I went out on my round. At length, whenever it was conve-
nient for her aunt, who always accompanied her, to remain,
she continued in my house asleep till four or five o’clock, by
which time the sleep had usually expended itself. She has
continued asleep till I returned to dinner at seven ; and some-
times when I called in for a few minutes about four or five I
have awakened her.

If her extremity pained her, or she was poorly, or an-
noyed, she awoke the sooner; andI have known her sleep to
beso short that her aunt has knocked at my door two or three
times during a morning for me to send her to sleep again.
Sometimes I have not been aware of any cause for the short-
ness of her sleep. A sudden fright would wake her, as for
ies when another patient one day near her fell down in
a fit.

When I had mesmerised her ¢wo days, the foot was rather
less pained, and, though still equally bent down, was less
twisted to one side.


In twelve days from the first (April 1), she could just stir it


348 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


voluntarily in bed, and the pain was much less; and, though in a
few days more there was an accidental increase of it, her general
health was better; her improved looks struck every body; and the
pain rapidly decreased.

On the 6th she had lost all pain, while the foot was at rest, and
could stir it a little more.

On the 7th of April she had a return of her old severe pain, and
I found it extended from the back of the head just behind the left
ear, from two points before and behind the mastoid process, in two
lines down the left side of the neck;—that arising before the mastoid
running to the shoulder, that arising beyond the mastoid running
to the scapula, left arm, body, and left side of the left leg and foot
to near the toes.


The explanation of this aggravation will be found at
p- 347: and she habitually suffered thus just before the oc-
currence. When painful or other disorders of females are
aggravated by this circumstance, it is in some just before, in
some during, and in some just after it, and in some at two or
all these three stages. The pain was the same she had felt in
her foot, and she poled | it to the sensation from a hot
string ; her foot was now drawn more again out of its pro-

er place, and her head was rather bent to the left side.

his pain I understood was felt in the neck when her
head was formerly twisted. I entirely removed it for the time
by slow, firm, downward passes of my fingers with contact
over her clothes,—over her stockings only as regarded the foot
and lower half of her leg, and sleeves as regarded her arm, but
over all her clothes as regarded the body and three-fourths of
her left lower extremity ; so that she woke perfectly free from
it. This pain continued to return from time to time from a
variety of accidental circumstances; and I always removed
it by the local downward passes.

I removed it or head-ache much more quickly by making
these passes in her mesmeric than in her ordinary state ; though
if she had either when awakened I could always remove it
by them.


On April the 11th, I tried her foot for the first time since the
first day, and found it quite flexible in her mesmeric state and
after waking. Still she could not put it to the ground on account
of the pain which the attempt occasioned in the heel bone, behind
the small bone of the leg, in the tendon of Achilles, and on the
outside of the back of the foot; but the local passes invariably
removed this.

“ On the 19th she had another accession of pain in the whole
side.


To whatever part I made the passes, so far only did I


by Dr. Elliotson. 349


remove the pain. IfI made them from the neck to the hip,

the pain ceased above the hip, but continued all below it : if

I made them to the knee, they ceased above the knee, but

continued below it: if I made them behind the ankle, she still

had = the leg and on the back of the foot; and if I
t


wrolonged them on the back of the foot, the pain remained
in the hollow under the ankle.

This is a circumstance familiar to mesmerisers, but, like
the production and removal of rigidity exactly at the parts
where mesmeric measures are employed, a stumbling-block
and foolishness to medical men who choose to despise mes-
merism. The less substance intervened between her and m
fingers the sooner was the relief. In rubbing her foot, there-
fore, I at length prevailed upon her to allow her shoe to be
taken off with great benefit, and I relieved the lower part of
her leg and her foot sooner than those parts which were co-
vered with the numerous articles of female dress. In pro-
ducing rigidity, in relaxing rigid parts, in removing the
ordinary degree of sensibility of a part no less than in re-
moving pain, the less substance that intervenes between the
patient and the mesmeriser’s hand the greater is the influence.
It is the same if the three last effects are attempted by slowly
breathing upon a part.

Though my power in removing her pain was so great, and
I thus every day quickly remove various pains, and in one
young lady soon remove pains absolutely terrific, to which
the least cold renders her subject at a certain period, and for
which there was no help till I rendered her susceptible of
mesmerism, I never have experienced any sensation in my
hands or elsewhere upon benefitting her. Some persons do,
always they say or occasionally ; and some hearing this fancy
they do. But this is unnecessary, and those who experience
a sensation are not in the least more able to relieve pain than
others. The thing merely shews a peculiar susceptibility of
morbid influence in the mesmeriser in addition to the common
power of lessening sensation: and it is quite analogous to the
occasional occurrence in the mesmeriser of the very pain or
other affection of the patient and at the same part, such as
was so remarkably instanced in Mr, Case, whose interesting
cure of a patient will be sent for your present number. Mr,
H. S. Thompson, of Fairfield House, near York, has relieved
large numbers of persons of severe pain by local mesmerisa-
tion, and yet never felt any sort of sensation: and very
many successful mesmerisers tell me the same. In Vol. II.,
p- 239, I related the striking cure of severe inflammation of
the eyes on two occasions by passes made before them ; and


350 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


the operator made a communication to The Zvist in the next
number, p. 379, that I had omitted to mention the striking
circumstance that he felt pain and heat of his hand in propor-
tion as the patient felt less pain and heat. This, like every
fact, is worthy of record, but was forgotten by me in the
all-important fact of the cure. However, this year the same
patient had an equally violent inflammation of the eye, and
the disease was removed as quickly as, or even more quickly
than, last year by another operator, who felt nothing in his
own hands from the process. An unfortunate circumstance
reproduced the inflammation, and by its continuance hin-
dered or maintained the disease in such violence that mes-
merism failed to subdue it, and indeed soon could not be
employed.

Long passes with contact removed her pain much better
than breathing, pointing the fingers, or laying the hand —
the parts. It was the same with her headache, to which when
I first saw her she was very subject. Passes with the fingers
in contact, drawn from the middle of the forehead to each
temple and down each side to the chin, never failed soon to
remove it.

Sometimes I was too occupied to attend to her in her mes-
meric state and make local passes when she was in pain; but
the mesmeric state of itself almost always caused the mitiga-
tion or removal of the pain after the state was over. I con-
tinually notice this circumstance in cases of pain—that though
no local measures are employed, and the suffering is not
diminished in the mesmeric state, nay, either is increased or
the ability to restrain expression of it lessened, amendment,
perhaps even cessation, of suffering gradually ensues after
the state is over: no doubt from the general improvement
of the system, so commonly felt for a longer or shorter time
on coming out of the mesmeric state.


She was free from pain after leaving me, and so far improved
that on her return home from me she walked round the table well,
resting her hand upon it, and did the same in the evening, though
with a little pain. But the exertion was too much; brought on the
= again in the night, and this lasted the next day, so as to wake

er up frequently from her mesmeric state.


Patients little think beforehand of the mischief they do
themselves by too early trials of their intellectual, muscular
and digesting capabilities in their joy at finding themselves
improving.

26th.—Her foot is now quite flexible in all directions: but still
too sensitive for walking without pain.


by Dr. Elliotson. 851


27th.—She had always been carried into the house, and through
my sitting to the further room, for the first three weeks, while Dr.
Engledue and myself were sitting at breakfast; and then from her
increased strength had enabled her to hop through it; but to-da
we were delighted to see her enter, and walk, though slowly, throug
the room with the help of only a stick, and resting really very much
upon her left foot.

29th.—No pain; tenderness less, so that she walks better; but
tried herself again so much after ee me in walking about her
sitting room, that she had a good deal of pain again upon the 30th.

It soon subsided for good, and she was able in a week to walk
about the room without her stick; and on the 16th of May walked
slowly without it from Cramer’s music shop, at the Regent Street
corner of Conduit Street, to my house, and was soon quite well. But
I requested her father to allow her to stay in London till Midsummer-
that by mesmerising her daily till that time I might consolidate
her cure.


I will now give the continuation of her father’s letter,
which was interrupted at p. 345.


“On the 21st June I went to London, and was indeed most highly
delighted to see her quite well in every respect. She informed me,
as did her aunt who had been with her during the time she had been
in town, that she had not taken a particle of medicine, neither had
anything whatever been applied to her foot. Mesmerism, applied
gratuitously, and with undeviating and unremitting kindness and
gentleness, by Dr. Elliotson, had been the only means employed to
effect her remarkable cure, and make a family happy.

“On the 25th June we returned home by railway to Nottingham,
and agreeably to the advice I received from Dr. Engledue, who was
on a visit at Dr. Elliotson’s during all her stay in London, I mes-
merised her a few minutes before the train started. I had only to
make one pass to send her to sleep, and she remained in that state,
performing the journey in the most placid and quiet manner, occa-
sionally speaking to me and answering any questions I put to her,
till she awoke spontaneously in the town of Newark. Although I had
to remove her, at Nottingham, for some distance in an omnibus
over rough stones to the coach in which we afterwards travelled for
twenty miles, she did not awake, and then it was spontaneously, till
we actually got into the town.

‘During her mesmeric sleep she heard only my voice except when
I took hold of her hand, and then she could hear her aunt who sat
opposite to her in the carriage, when she spoke to her, and any
other sound; but the moment I took my hand away, and was silent,
she ceased to hear any noise whatever, not even the shrill and
piercing whistle of the locomotive engines.

“On reaching her home she was not in the least degree fatigued;
but, although it was evening when we arrived, walked out to see
some of her friends.


352 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


“She is now, Iam happy to say, quite well, and walks with
perfect ease.
“James Couns.
** Newark, July 26th, 1845.”


I have just heard from my patient herself, that she is in better
health than she had been for years, and can walk with her foot four
or five miles. She adds that both she and her sister have been very
successful in removing pains of the head and face, sore throat, and
two cases of erysipelas by local mesmerism alone.

Her aunt writes me word (September 17th) that her nerves are
now so much stronger that she drove to Nottingham in a gig,—a
thing she had not dared to do before since she was thrown out of a
phaeton eight years ago.


She is mesmerised occasionally by her father at my re-
quest, in order to confirm her renewed health, and writes
to Dr. Engledue, at Southsea, that


‘* She is informed she still enjoys her mesmeric sleep, and diverts
herself in it by practising her music, walking in the garden, and
most by talking of what transpired in the little room at Dr. Elliot-
son’s, which latter afforded her as much pleasure in her ordinary
state, although her knowledge of it is very limited.”


This was of course written in her ordinary state, in which
she knows nothing of her sleeping state: but occasionally in
my little room with the other patients and her aunt she woke
spontaneously, and remained awake a short time before Dr.

ngledue or myself went to her and sent her to sleep again.

Per multos annos, medicamenta ad alvum ducendam
—- nocte sumpserat : nec tamen szepius quam bis in heb-

omade reddita est alvus. Nunc autem semel vel etiam bis
quotidie sponte descendit. Menstrua bis in mense provene-
rant atque ea, et uteri et faciei dolor acerbissimus semper
comitatus est et preecessit: quinque menses dolor nunc abest,
nec justo frequentiora sunt.
his case was one of those which medical men call cases
of spinal irritation, and, like the person who has furnished
me with a motto, write about and treat in ignorance of its
age remedy. Not that the spine or back bone is affected,
ut the nervous chord within it, known by the improper name
of spinal marrow, though it is as different from marrow as
from paste.* The treatment customary is most unsatisfac-
tory and generally most distressing: cupping and leeching
till the strength is much reduced; burning moxas and caus-
tics, blisters, setons, issues, croton oil, and ointments and
plasters of tartar emetic, &c.; with a deluge of drugs ; accu-


* Gall, Anatomie et Physiologie, &c., 4to., vol. i., p. 49.


by Dr. Elliotson. 353
sations of fancy or even imposition, and exhortations or com-
mands to the sufferer to cure the disease herself by violent
efforts, notwithstanding the agony and exhaustion they may
occasion. Mesmerism cures most of such cases in the easy
manner it did the present: and yet medical men scorn to
employ it, and the medical journals, to their utter disgrace,
scorn to quote the cures from The Zoist to enlighten the ig-
norant members of the medical profession. What is worse,
when a splendid cure has been effected by mesmerism, those
who had fruitlessly attended the patient vociferate that the spine
never was affected, though they had always called the case
spinal irritation and employed the most tormenting measures
as if the spine was affected, and that the patient would have got
well without mesmerism, and might have cured herself by
exertion, and had in fact little the matter with her. Why
therefore did they take so many fees for prescriptions, or pour
the whole contents of shops so many times into the poor suf-
ferer’s stomach, and put her to pain? The Zoist contains
remarkable mesmeric cures of this family of disorders.*

Had Miss Collins been mesmerised when twelve years of
age and occasionally afterwards, not only would the hiccup
have been cured as readily as Miss Critchley was cured in
1838 (Vol. II., p. 42), but all her various subsequent suffer-
ings for seven years prevented, without bleeding, blistering,
galvanizing, and “everything that the materia medica could
supply,” and all the various future attacks prevented. If
Sir Benjamin Brodie had not scorned mesmerism, he would
not in 1841, through wilful ignorance, have allowed the poor
child to return to Newark, attempting nothing for her relief,
and saying she would not recover soon, but possibly would in
time; when he might have cured her most easily and at once,
without an instrument or prescription, by that mesmerism
which he still pretends to despise and still refuses to see, al-
though I had then been exhibiting it for three years to many
hundreds at my own house, within a few yards of his, and
have there exhibited it to many hundreds in the subsequent
four years.

Had she been treated with mesmeric science, the nume-
rous relapses after her head had been first set straight would
never have occurred, nor would her foot have ever been con-
tracted, or those derangements of the health mentioned at

. 341, 344, 352, tormented her till the present spring. The
iccup, the blindness, the pain and twisting of the head and

* Vol. I., p. 300, 466; Vol. II., p. 82: (a most disgraceful anonymous


letter from a medical man of Chelmsford upon Miss Raymond’s case ap-
peared in the Chelmsford paper), p. 124.


354 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism.


the foot, were not local affections, to be treated with the
mechanical views of a surgeon who cuts out a wen and has
done with the case, till by chance another wen comes which
also he cuts out: but arose from a general condition of the
system, shewing itself here and there at different times, as
shoots rise out of the earth at various spots if roots lie under
the surface. Established mesmerism should have been prac-
tised and been continued regularly for some time after her ap-
parent cure ; and employed occasionally for a year or two.
Any little falling off in the appetite or strength is thus at once
remedied ; and it is an inestimable advantage to have the
mesmeric susceptibility kept up, not only for the purpose of
thus obviating indisposition, but for the advantage of having
operations, even tooth-drawing, performed without pain, of
enjoying sleep in fevers, inflammations, or other accidental
diseases, and indeed of finding a ready remedy for many
diseases. Through this perseverance with mesmerism, not
one of my own similar cases has suffered arelapse. Hannah
Hunter (Vol. I., p.300) and Maria Pearsey (p. 427) remained


ever afterwards perfectly free from their complaints, and died
at length of consumption. Master Salmon (p. 314), Mrs.
Brett (p. 329), Elizabeth Kell (p. 334), Miss Cohen (p. 335),
Miss Melhuish (p. 429), Mary Grimes (p. 453), Miss Spong
(p. 457), Miss ae now Mrs. Hall (Vol. IL., p. 42),


Miss Barber (p. 194), Miss Abbott, now Mrs. Brooks (Vol.
III., p. 39), have had no sort of relapse to this day. Except
what are in this number, I have recorded no kind of cases
mesmerised by myself besides four cases of St. Vitus’s dance ;
(Vol. I., p. 195, Vol. III., p. 281), and not one of these has
suffered a relapse since I published them: nor recorded any
case mesmerised under my direction, except two of St. Vitus’s
dance and three of insanity, and in none of these have I
heard of a relapse.

The mode of mesmerising, too, before I saw her, not
only failed, but caused, as it so frequently does, much incon-
venience. We saw at p. 343-4, that it produced pain in the
head and eyes, restlessness, and debility. Many persons
who have tried it, have found it produce even convulsions:
and it often makes the eyes smart, and is distressing. The ac-
count given by Miss Collins in her mesmeric sleep induced
by her father, is—

‘I never wished to be hypnotized except when my head was
bent, but I always liked to be mesmerised.”

“‘ After having been hypnotized for ten or twelve times, I found
it very unpleasant. Previously I cared but little about it. I did
not, however, at any time very well like it. I was never half so


by Dr. Elliotson. 355


happy when hypnotized, as when mesmerised; and I was latterly
always like a lump of lead, and very uncomfortable.”

“The difference of feeling is extraordinary. When mesmerised,
I feel cheerful and lively, both in mind and body. When Dr. Elliot-
son first mesmerised me, I remarked to myself the very great dif-
ference there was in the feeling, but did not name it.”

‘** Hypnotism is not so pleasant as mesmerism; still it is mes-
merism, modified, however, in effect.’

** I always like Dr. Elliotson’s plan; for if I have head-ache, it
invariably removes it, and never produces it, nor any other uncom-
fortable feeling, however long the time may be before I go to sleep.
When hypnotized I disliked to talk; was not always in a good
temper—very cross; but when mesmerised by Dr. Elliotson’s
method, felt cheerful and happy, and much better when awake, and
particularly if I had been talked to during sleep.”

When awake, she wrote to me on the 8th of September :

“The manner in which you mesmerised is at all times most
delightful, and I feel much refreshed when I awake.”*


It will be observed that the local affection was cured by
only general mesmerisation. At the beginning I tried long
passes with contact upon the leg and foot, and slow breathing
upon them, while she was in the mesmeric state. But no
advantage resulted on any day that I did either, and I there-
fore trusted entirely to general mesmerisation ; using these
local means only when she chanced to have severe pain and
I had time, and then the advantage was the speedy removal
of the pain; but this without local means usually occurred
after she awoke. Ann Pearsey’s right leg was contracted
firmly almost to her body, and Mr. White of the Westminster
Hospital had wished to cut it off. No local mesmerism was
angled passes before her face completely cured her.t I
have a case of real cancer of the breast which has been bene-
fitted almost beyond belief by mesmerism. Yet this has been
general only; the patient being sent to sleep-waking daily
by me with one pass, or a fixed look for a few seconds.


PHENOMENA.


I shall now detail the phenomena of the case.

Sleep-waking was at once induced, when, on the second
attempt, I succeeded in influencing her; and it was at first,
and on most occasions afterwards, of the perfectly rational
kind. For, as far as she was awake she recognized every
one, she knew the time and place, and conversed so as to
_ .* See my observations, Vol I., p. 308.—The hypnotic was remembered
in the mesmeric, but neither in the waking, state. Hypnotism is evidently
coarse mesmerism.

+ Vol. I., p. 427.
VOL. III.


356 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


appear to strangers a person awake with her eyes shut; and,
as far as she was asleep, she was unable to open her eyes
ever so little, and contented to remain quiet in her chair for
hours together, though young and sprightly and the time
the morning, and went into an absolute doze occasionally
if not spoken to. The difference of her mental state was
merely the usual feeling of perfect ease, which causes sleep-
wakers to behave almost as composedly to all persons,
whatever their age or rank, as if they were equals. The
generality of this striking effect is one proof of the reality
of the mesmeric state.* The conduct which results from
this happy feeling of equality depends upon the cerebral cha-
racter and the education of the patient, and the absence or
presence of a greater or less dash of cerebral alienation in the
sleep-waking. This patient was well organized, and had
been prvers brought up, and there was no dash of insanity;
her conversation and behaviour therefore, though divested of
the reserve which is usual in society, was only the same to-
wards me and my friends as pave her own family and in-
timate friends: and, being always good with them in her
waking state, was equally proper in her sleep-waking. Those
whose familiar conversation is marked by levity or rudeness,
may, in the mesmeric state, rattle and be rude; and then, or if
there is a degree of imbecility in it, or of delirium, as happened
in the Okeys, the conduct may surprise and beget a suspicion
of imposition.+ But after a time she occasionally fell into a
dreamy state: perfectly rational on her premises; but mis-
taking persons, places, and time, and misconceiving some
other circumstances, but perfectly rational on these false
grounds: precisely as Rosina invariably was,} and as Miss
Abbot § was for the first month of her passing into the
sleep-waking state. Her dreamy mistakes could always be
rectified by touching over the organ of the sense of persons:
and though the dreamy state frequently came on without
evident cause, we could induce it, as I shall hereafter mention.


Attachment to the Mesmeriser. On the first day of my
affecting her (the second mesmerisation) she manifested this
by squeezing my hand when it touched her’s. She was also
uneasy if I removed from her, and if others touched her. For
a few days I could not leave her. This is always a misfor-
tune. For I am convinced that the longer patients remain
in the mesmeric state, the greater usually is the benefit.

* Vol. IIT., p. 65.
t See Vol. I., p. 323, 409, 414.


t Vol. IL., p. 219-221.
§ Vol. III., p. 64.


by Dr. Elliotson. 357


They are the more refreshed and composed, and the sooner
is their health restored. The state is one of comfort and
happiness ; and, if to interrupt common sleep is a violence,
much more so is the interruption of this. However long it
may continue, it should generally be permitted to expend
itself, as it is sure to do sooner or later. There are excep-
tions, as when the patient in the mesmeric state declares
the time he should be permitted to sleep: or when a long
duration evidently begins to excite or overpower him ; and this
may not begin to happen before the cure is ying eer just as
medicines sometimes do in proportion as the healthy state
returns and they are less and less required.* But those in-
stances are comparatively rare; and, as a general rule, I would
never wake a patient.+ As she was generally in a perfectly
rational sleep-waking, the longer it Aa esae | the better she
was, even though chattering all the time with Dr. Engledue,
myself, or two other patients who were there and every morn-
ing put into the same state in the same room. She, like so
many others, assured me that she was not only not the less
refreshed, but the more refreshed, for this incessant, cheerful,
and often merry conversation.{ And yet when alone with
her aunt she would sit for hours in contented silence. This
proves the usual composure and happiness of the state as
much as the declarations of patients. I every day see
patients in the midst of full activity, and early in the morn-
ing and after a perfect night’s rest, sent into sleep-waking,
and at once reclining in perfect silence and contentment
for hours, though still so little asleep as to hear and answer
you, and chat as readily as when awake, whenever you think
proper to address them. As in other sleep-wakers, the pro-
portion of sleep occasionally preponderated over the propor-
tion of waking, and she then did not hear at once when
spoken to, breathed heavily, and roused herself to activity
as we do if aroused in ordinary sleep.

Fearing, therefore, that I should not cure her soon if
she slept no longer than I could remain with her, I en-
deavoured to overcome this inordinate attachment to her
mesmeriser, by representing to her, within the first two or
three days, the disadvantage of her not allowing me to leave
her in the mesmeric state, and by assuring her that she could
overcome it. She having excellent sense and feeling, as well


* I have mentioned two cases in which, though the mesmeric state re-
freshed, its frequency excited unpleasant symptoms at last as the cure ad-
vanced, and I found it advisable to have the patients mesmerised less and
less frequently. Vol. I., p. 328, 426.

+ Vol. I., p. 310.

¢ See Vol. IIL, p. 61.


BB2


358 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


as strong resolution, presently overcame it, and allowed me
to leave both the room and the house for any length of time,
though she was always delighted at my return. I should recom-
mend all mesmerisers to look to this point at once in every
case: for, if the attachment is not governed early, it may be-
come irresistible, and then the patient may have far less chance
of an early cure or a cure at all; or the mesmeriser, if he
consents to persevere with the case, may be compelled to most
serious sacrifices of time. In some patients it may be irresisti-
ble from the first ; but am persuaded that where there is good
sense, principle, and resolution, it may often be governed,
especially if taken in hand early. I have observed in the
two wonderful cases of general rigidity, with perfect closure
of the eyes and deafness, in which the patients incline anxi-
ously to the mesmeriser and recede from others, distinguishing
them by some occult sense, that if 1 go out of the room and
shut the door, or remain in the room and throw something
over them so as to intercept any influence, they become con-
tented and remain unmoved in their chair.* I mentioned the
strongest example of mesmeric attachment with which I am
acquainted ; and in that young lady, the sincerity of the re-
gard remains the same, but the intensity has so lessened
that she will allow me to move a yard or two from her for a
short time, to speak of others and even to others, and some
of her dearest relatives to touch her :+ yet, and notwithstand-
ing her most earnest desire to be able to allow of my absence
in her mesmeric state, that she may obtain a cure, of which
there seems no chance while she cannot support my absence
in her sleep-waking,—and I cannot devote more than half an
hour daily to her,—she cannot permit me to leave her asleep.
In another instance there was no mesmeric attachment to the
mesmeriser for many months;{ and then it became irresistible,
till a serious indisposition, in which she feared she should die,
took place, when she was able to govern it greatly, and allow
the contact of her relatives.

In the mesmeric state, induced by her father, Miss C.
informed him that, when hypnotized, she “‘ felt no regard for
an individual merely because he was the hypnotizer: and
cared not who went near her:”’ and on his particularly in-
quiring whether she cared about any other person approaching
her when mesmerised, replied very cnghatielby. “ Indeed
I do care.”


* Vol. II., p. 54, 77. These facts I had not ascertained when I wrote
the account of the two cases.

+ Vol. III., p. 53.

¢ Vol. II., p. 201.


by Dr. Elliotson. 359


As usual, when there is attraction to the mesmeriser and
repulsion of others, the sensation given by my hand or breath
was agreeable, and by the hand or breath of others dis-
agreeable.*


My hand was “ very smooth and nice,” though really my palm
is by hereditary organization rough; and, however cold it might in
reality be, it was ‘‘ warm” or “‘ not cold.” Her aunt, to whom she
is deservedly much attached, she could not bear to touch her, and
found “‘ rough and cold.” One patient with a cancer was, though
in mesmeric sleep, ever “rough.” Dr. Engledue, whom she likes
very much, and whom she could hear when she heard no one else
but myself, and who could at length mesmerise her as readily as I
myself, was “rough.” A youth, in both his ordinary and sleep-
waking state, and his mother, were ‘‘cold and rough.” In short
she said they felt all “very nasty.” The touch of one female
patient in sleep-waking was “very nice.” This patient has the pe-
culiarity of dropping senseless and powerless if in her mesmeric
state she mesmerises another, or remains a short time in contact
with a mesmerised person or mesmerised gold, and of remaining
long in this condition, coming to with great distress, and remaining
very weak and melancholy, and without appetite, for many hours or
a couple of days. By her holding Miss C.’s hand this happened,
and then the feeling which she gave was no longer “ very nice,” but
*‘ very unpleasant.”


Generally sleep-waking patients like the touch of all
others in the same state, and some passionately ;+ others dis-
like it, but less than if the party was in his ordinary state.


My breath upon her hand was agreeable, but that of her aunt
and Dr. Engledue was rough and cold.


If an individual is disliked, the unpleasant sensation is
much greater §


She had no occult power of distinguishing the touch or breath of
myself from those of others; nor of persons in the mesmeric state


from those of persons who were in their ordinary state, as certain
patients have.||


The sensation was probably the result of mesmeric dis-
like of all others in contact but myself. I have no doubt
that the reason of the touch of the patient with the cancer
being disagreeable, was her knowledge of the disease; and
of that of the youth, her sense of propriety and her com-
mand over herself, which were both very strong, and pre-
vented her from ever once exhibiting those childish marks of


* Vol. I., p.177; Vol. II, p. 52.
+ Vol. 5... wm 227. ¢ p. 216.
§ Vol. IIL, p. 54. || Vol. IL., p. 213, 216.


360 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


affection which are sometimes seen in mesmeric patients.
Still the intensity of mesmeric affection differs, like that of all
mesmeric phenomena, in different persons.*


She at first could hear no one but myself. But very soon heard
Dr. Engledue. Her aunt she to the last never heard, unless that
lady said, “ Ellen, you'll wear your hands out,” and this she inva-
riably heard, however gently it was whispered: and one day a young
gentleman, whom she had never heard, said this, when she instantly
started, as if taken by surprise, and answered him sharply. At
home she hears only her father, who mesmerises her, unless some
one says these words, and then she always hears it, however low the
whisper, and is displeased. It vexed her, and referred to her habit
of rubbing her hands together to prevent them from growing rigid.

I mentioned at p. 62, the fact of a young lady hearing no one
in her coma, which was not mesmeric, but her physician. A sleep-
waking patient, not mesmeric, is mentioned by Lorry, who could
be made to hear or see or be aware of the presence of only one

rson, and him she evidently saw and conversed with on the sub-
ject of her dream. Dr. Pritchard speaks of a boy who in such pa-
roxysms was insensible to all external impressions, unless, when
he was playing on his flute, other boys began to accompany him,
and then he evidently attended to them.t

But she heard all who spoke in the mesmeric state, if she knew
they were in that state; but none that she knew were not, or fan-
cied were not; and she heard them, when not in the mesmeric state,
if she fancied they were.

Her eyes were closed: two other female patients were always in the
mesmeric state with her, and they all chatted freely. But she found
them asleep when she arrived, or she was aware of my sending them
to sleep if they arrived after her. If I woke them, she heard me
breathing, or making transverse passes before them. But I have
deceived her; and then she could hear them in their ordinary state
and could not hear them in their sleep-waking state.


And yet there was no imposture here, as those unaccus-
tomed to the wonderful phenomena of the states which are
induced by the artificial process of mesmerism, and which
often occur spontaneously and puzzle medical men, would at
once pretend. She experienced what is so common in mes-
meric patients, an attraction, which varies in different per-
sons, towards those in the mesmeric state. She had no occult
power of knowing when persons were in that state, and was
guided by her hearing, &c., and might therefore be imposed
upon. Just as among those patients who have the propensity
to imitate movements and attitudes, some have an occult power
of knowing what you are doing, others not: and the latter


* Vol. III., p. 52. ;
+ See my Human Physiology, p. 647.


by Dr. Elliotson. 361


therefore either look, anxiously and without disguise, if they
have their eyes more or less open,* or, if their eyes are by
chance firmly closed in the state, do not imitate, for they
know of nothing to imitate.

Mary Ann, the female patient whose touch she likes, and
whom, like others, she hears only when she fancies her to be
in the mesmeric state, one day prevailed upon her to hear,know-
ing M.A. to be in the waking state: and yet I have known her
try very hard and fail,—and I am certain she did not hear, or
rather heard and knew it not. She did not hear Dr. Engledue
till he had day after day sat with her and begged her to hear
him. She liked him greatly, as every one must who values
high intellect and moral excellence ; and above all, she knew
him to be my intimate friend, and a physician, and a mesmer-
ist, so that through many reasons, I conceive, she was able to
bring herself to hear him consciously, though she could not
consciously hear even her father or aunt. The words, “ you’ll
wear your hands out,” could not have been really heard more
than others; and yet she invariably heard them consciously,
whoever uttered them: and I have no doubt because they an-
noyed her greatly, and she had accidentally, when she first
heard them, given way to manifesting signs of displeasure, so
that they afterwards always arrested her attention and were
heard consciously.+ The young lady whose attachment to me
has been more intense and exclusive than that of any other,
could not for three years be made to give the slightest sign of
hearing any one but myself, ora noise made by any one if she
fancied it not made by myself; not her sister or father, whom
she doated upon, not even when saying things calculated
to vex her beyond endurance ;{ an experiment I have made
with many patients. Miss C. was once exerting herself to
the utmost in vain to hear Mary Ann, yet suddenly heard
some accidental noise. On another day she heard Mary Ann
and a gentleman speak together, but was unable to tell what
they said, and gave as a reason that she had not attended.
Here she heard, simply because less abstracted than usual.
She stated lately in the sleep-waking to her father, that “she
is always conscious in that state, but does not know what is
passing.” The truth is, that sleep-wakers are more or less
abstracted, and abstracted in regard to some things and not to
others : that they, through unconscious and involuntary incli-
nations may not be consciously percipient of many things,
which however their brains really perceive, and which they in


* Vol. L., p. 190, 317.
+ Vol. I., p. 441; Vol. II., p.2i1, p. 70; Vol. III., p. 62.
¢ Vol. IIL, p. 53.


362 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


the mesmeric state, and sometimes in the ordinary only, may
never afterwards know they have perceived ; and their brains
may have various internal feelings, and will many things,
quite unconsciously ; and afterwards they may act upon and
be influenced by the knowledge thus unconsciously re-
ceived, without ever suspecting that they had received it.
I must request the reader to peruse the pages referred to
in the last note but one. Dr. Geeintes never hears in his
sleep the rattling of his alarum in his bed-room, but is
always awakened by his night-bell, even by the motion of
the wire before the bell actually rings. Mr. Case tells me
that he does not hear his children who sleep around him
cry in the night, but instantly hears his night-bell. One
lady in her sleep-waking who hears me only, does not hear
her own watch tick but always hears mine. Another lady,
from her refusing to think of any living being in the mes-
meric state but myself, always declared most solemnly there
was no one in the room but herself and me; though she knew
her sister was always present when she was mesmerised, and
was in the room when I sent her off: and she was greatly
hurt at my maintaining that her sister was there. She
would tell me of things she was most anxious her sister
should not know, and yet I kept assuring her that her
sister was present. The bagpipes are her detestation ; but
they Ronn? be played screechingly in the street under her
window, and she never noticed them.

No point in cerebral physiology is more curious than our
unconscious reception of sensations or unconscious preven-
tion of consciousness of them, and the influence of uncon-
scious knowledge and feelings over our actions. Materialism
only can explain this. The brain acts in all these wonderful
ways: one part doing what another is ignorant of.

I shall now proceed to give some remarkable instances of
unconscious reasons for acting; and of unconscious volun-
tary influences on ourselves.

It is well known that impressions may be made upon
patients in their sleep-waking, which lead to acts in their
ordinary state, though in acting they are perfectly ignorant
of the reason.

My first experiments of this kind were upon a lady of rank,
July 25, 1842. In her sleep-waking, she foretold all the
course of her complaints without ever being wrong, and pre-
scribed with invariable success for herself. She once prescribed
two grains and a half of extract of Belladonna at bed-time;
and promised me she would take it. After waking her I did
not inform her of what had passed; but she took the quan-


by Dr. Elliotson. 363


tity of Belladonna, and with benefit. On sending her to
sleep the next night, she informed me she could not help
taking it, and that whatever promise she made me in her
sleep, she should keep it when awake. I then begged her
on waking the third time,—for she always awoke sponta-
neously in about ten minutes and I therefore was in the
habit of sending her off three times,—to lift the candlestick
and put it down again. On awaking the third time she ex-
tended her hand to the heavy silver candlestick which was
at some distance from her, as she lay on the sofa, and drew
it towards her—her weakness was such that lifting it was
impossible, and what she did was an effort and for no appa-
rent ae cere

She herself mesmerised the poor around the family seat ;
and had in her ordinary state asked me if I thought there
was any danger in mesmerising those who had typhus fever.
I told her yes, and entreated that she would not, and she
romised me that she would not. A year afterwards, in
er sleep-waking, she all at once asked why I had not
allowed her to mesmerise in fever. On giving her my reasons,
she assured me that she should never catch a fever, and that
I might allow her with safety. I asked her if she felt cer-
tain, she replied yes; and I then told her she had my con-
sent, for I had never known her wrong in any point regarding
her own health. After waking her I never alluded to what
had passed. But three months afterwards I received a letter
from her, expressing her deep regret at having broken her
promise to me that she would never mesmerise patients in
fever,—she could not conceive why she had done so,—she
had never broken it before, but on this occasion her promise
to me had not prevented her from mesmerising a case of fever,
she could not account for it, and felt it right to inform me.

I still did not tell her of my having absolved her from
her promise and given her permission. But in a letter toa
former pupil in India containing some mesmeric news, I re-
lated this, and he without my permission published the letter
ina Calcutta paper. A retired Indian gentleman, residing
in this country, was in the habit of receiving the Calcutta
papers, and on reading this shewed it to his medical attend-
ant, who also attended the lady’s family. From her being
mentioned as the daughter of the Duke of he at once
discovered who it must be, and carried her the paper. Thus
for the first time she knew how she came to break her pro-
mise, the only one I am certain she has broken in her life.
She mesmerised the case of fever about two months after
Thad absolved her from her promise.


364 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


I made an experiment of this nature at nearly the same


time (August 1842) with the young lady whose case I referred
to at p. 53.


August 5. In her sleep-waking I begged her to take up two
books from the table when she awoke. She thought it impossible,
as in her ordinary state she had never remembered anything of her
mesmeric. However, as I told her it would be a kindness to me and
her mesmeric attachment to me was strong, she promised, on the
proviso, however, that she remembered her promise. After I had
awakened her, and she had involuntarily followed me about the
room some time, as was habitual with her, for the intense attrac-
tion to me in the mesmeric state always continued for many minutes
after the sleep-waking was over, she went to the table and, laughing
and looking vexed, took up a book, and after a little while, with
vexation strongly depicted in her countenance, she took up the other.
I made no remark and bid her good bye.

Aug. 6. The next day, her sister, who was always present at
my visits, informed me that after I was gone she told her that
she had felt very strangely on waking: that she as usual felt drawn
towards me, and wished to be close to me when I retired from her,
but at the same time felt drawn to the table, and at last rivetted to
it, and compelled to take up two books—that the feeling of compul-
sion was very unpleasant, and her struggle very great. Her sister
explained the whole to her, and she said she should in future know
whenever I had told her in sleep-waking to do anything after waking.
On my sending her off, she declared she would never promise again,
it was so ridiculous and unpleasant, and that she should now alwsys
know on waking if I had made her promise. At length through her
mesmeric attachment I prevailed on her, saying I would not laugh
at her, to promise to take a book off the table on waking and place
it upon the piano. On waking she would at first, as usual, be close
to me, and then said that she knew I had made her promise to do
something; and she took up a book, but instantly put it down
again, saying she would not. I was close to her, and told her this
was nonsense, but to do as she chose. She then said she would if
I went with her. I assented, and she immediately took up the
book and walked to the piano, and upon it laid the book, I moving
with her.

The next day, when in sleep-waking, she told me that she had felt
as if pulled by a cord to the piano, and could not have resisted even
had I begged her not to go towards it and endeavoured by force to
keep her away.

Aug. 8. On account of my conversing a good deal with her
parents and sisters, she grew cold and cross, and refused to promise
to do anything on waking. But such was her attachment, that at
length she spontaneously apologized and was very kind, and promised
to snuff one of the wax candles, but feared we should — at her.
On waking, she snuffed one of the candles, but also took a thief
out of it in order, as she afterwards confessed, to prevent her
father from noticing that she snuffed it. I may remark that she


by Dr. Elliotson. 365


declared before waking that the cold she had suffered from the pre-
sence of so many of her family and my conversing with them, was
worse than the east wind—‘‘a most disagreeable feeling.”

Aug. 13. Finding that she disliked coffee without sugar, and
that her brother took no sugar in it, I now made her promise to
pour out a little milk and coffee the next morning at breakfast and
drink it without sugar: and then pour out a cup of coffee and milk
for her brother and put in sugar. At breakfast she was observed to
take a cup of coffee and milk without sugar: and then to pour out
her brother’s and put in sugar, and to offer it to her sister, who
prefers tea and, having been present when the promise was made,
declined it, and she then asked her brother to take it notwithstand-
ing the sugar. In the evening, when asleep, she related all this
with great glee, remarking that she had felt no discomfort as I was
not then attracting her, and as she had no idea she was acting in
consequence of a promise.

26. She promised to put her spoon and another into her cup
the next morning, and then take them out again, before she poured
out the tea. This she was observed to do. In order to prevent it,
her sister proposed to make the tea; but she would make it her-
self, as she informed me in the evening in her sleep-waking. She
informed me she had no good reason,—merely thought she would,
and at that moment entertained no intention respecting the spoons:
and after she had put in and taken out the spoons, she wondered
why she had been so foolish.

I made no more such experiments upon her till a few weeks ago.


The winter before last I heard that Teste* had mentioned
the possibility, by the same method, of making a person in-
visible to the sleep-waker on waking.


February 9, 1844. I requested a young lady whom I long mes-
merised with the never tiring devotion of a parent, and in whom I
produced a variety of phenomena, to promise to be unable on waking
to see her maid, who always sat in the room at work during my
visits, till I left the room, and then at once to discern her. On waking
she did not see the maid, but said she saw the chair in which the
maid sat; presently, however, she saw the maid—was agitated, had
an hysteric fit, and passed into the ea state. I now en-
quired how she came to see her maid, as I had not left the room,
and told her she must not when I woke her again. I then awoke
her again; she could not see the maid, was astonished at the maid’s
absence, and at first supposed she was in an adjoining room; but
presently rang the bell twice, though the woman was standing before
her. I moved just out of the room, leaving the door open, and she
saw the maid instantly, and was astonished and laughed.

Feb. 21. She promised to say to the party on going to dinner,


. * Striking experiments of the present kind will be found in his tenth
chapter.


366 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &e., with Mesmerism,


** Oh how pleasant ’tis to meet,
That we may all sit down and eat. This is in Chaucer.”


She was heard by the party to say it, and was in a great pet all the
while she said it.

Feb. 22. She promised not to see a lady, who had come into
the room after the sleep began and was sitting opposite, on waking,
till I coughed. I woke her: and she took not the slightest notice
of the lady, but as soon as I coughed, saw her with surprise.

23. She promised to see her maid sitting in the room with her
bonnet on as soon as she woke, and not after I coughed. I woke
her; she was astonished at the sight of her maid sitting with her
bonnet on, and looked displeased; but, as soon as I coughed, saw her
sitting as usual with her cap on. She could not comprehend this,
and at last told me knowingly she was not quite sure that the maid
had not still her bonnet with her behind the chair.


I did not prosecute the subject, but when Dr. Engledue
came to see me last spring, I mentioned it to him, and pro-
posed to make some trials. Accordingly,


March 5. I asked Miss Collins in her sleep to promise not to
see her aunt and another lady, on waking, till I coughed. She did
not think this possible; however, she promised to do her best. I
awoke her. She did not see them, and seemed agitated at not seeing
them. I therefore coughed. Still she did not see them. I coughed
again; and it was a little while before she discovered them. She
was astonished at finding herself in my library; for I had sent her
to sleep in a further room, and in her sleep had led her into the
library and the other ladies had followed.

She promised to whistle on the 7th in entering my library.

March 6. In the sleep she remembered promising not to see
her aunt and the lady, but not that she was to see them on coughing:
she also forgot that she promised to whistle on the 7th, but remem-
bered she promised something. I therefore reminded her.


It should always be borne in mind that the ordinary fa-
culties, no less than the extraordinary, are subject to fluctu-
ations of strength both in the mesmeric and in the natural
state. Sceptics expect all the phenomena to be perfectly at
command at all times. Patients who usually hear only their
mesmerisers, will sometimes hear other noises for a moment.
Thus Miss C. one day not only heard my sleep-waking pa-
tient M. A. speak to a gentleman, but heard him reply; though
she could give me no account of what he said, not having
understood it. I presume that her abstraction at the moment
was not perfect, but still existed. She has told me that she
sometimes hears her aunt, but does not choose to hear her.
In truth, the abstraction is sometimes perfect, involuntary
and unconscious: sometimes imperfect, and more or less


by Dr. Elliotson. 367


controllable. She says she hears the words, “ you'll wear
your hands out,” because they vex her so much: and she
suddenly one day heard a patient whom she rather dislikes
blow his nose. The loud horrid scream of my cockatoo
made no impression upon her.

Yet she heard any person and any noise if I touched her:
but no one if merely he touched me,—no relation (rapport)
could be established thus between others and her.


April 7. She entered my library and walked through as Dr.
Engledue and myself were at breakfast, without whistling. As soon
as she was sent off, she mentioned this to me, and said she had
not whistled because my butler was in the room; but that when
awake she knew nothing about the desire, or the reason of her not
indulging it.

This little fact is one of a nature that I have often ob-
served. Those are greatly mistaken who imagine a mesmer-
iser can make his patient do anything.

The circumstance of a desire occurring unconsciously in
the brain, and being repressed by an unconscious reason, is
a striking fact, but in harmony with the facts previously
mentioned.


She promised not to see her aunt on waking till I coughed. She
did not. I even led her up to her aunt, and pushed her against her
aunt, nay her aunt kissed her; still she was quite unconscious of
her aunt’s presence. 1 coughed, and she immediately perceived her
aunt.

May 1. She promised to whistle on waking, if no stranger was
present; and she fulfilled her promise: and as I did not, out of
regard for her feelings, appear to notice it, she whistled again, and
yet seemed ashamed.

The day before she left London, she promised Dr. Engledue in
her sleep to write to him on the day four weeks after her return
home, and her father made a note of her promise at the time. She
arrived at home June 26th, she wrote July 24th, and Dr. Engledue
received the letter July 25th. Mr. Baldock had given her some stock
seed, and Dr. Engledue prevailed on her in her sleep to promise him
to sow it and place a stick at each end of the row, with the words
Mesmero-Baldockian Stocks. In her letter to Dr. Engledue she
says, ‘‘ the morning after my arrival I safely deposited my Mesmero-
Baldockian stock seed in the ground, not neglecting to put their
name largely written on sticks, at each end in the row.” Hearing
of all this from Dr. Engledue, I wrote and asked her why she did
so. Her reply was,—‘‘ September 7: The day I received the seeds
from Mr. Baldock, I took them with me to your house enclosed in
his letter, which I had not had time to read. I remember that
when you awoke me, I told my aunt I thought of giving the seeds
the before-mentioned name, which on my return to my lodgings I


368 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


found written on the envelope of Mr. B.’s letter by Dr. Engledue.
I was much amused by the circumstance altogether, and when I
sowed the seed I thought I would write their name largely at each
end of the row, that I might not forget it; and as it was written
by Dr. Engledue I thought I should like him to know that I did not
intend their appellation to be lost.

**T felt as though I should be neglecting a great duty were I to
lose another post, though I had had plenty of time before, even
more than on that day; and was surprised and ashamed to think I
should have so long delayed writing to thank him for his kindness
to me while under your care.”

It was long before the reason of her writing was communicated
to her in the waking state by her aunt.

She promised Mr. Thompson also in her sleep to write to him,
and she did; but not having seen him often in her waking state, it
was with many apologies, clearly not well knowing, Mr. T. tells me,
why she wrote, and he had given her his address in her sleep only.
The reason she gives me in a letter is, that ‘‘he appeared to take
great interest in her case, and as she was not quite better when he left
town, she thought she would write and tell him that she was per-
fectly restored, and by mesmerism alone.”


One day in August, a friend of strong intellect and well
versed in mesmerism called upon me, and we conversed upon
this subject. He said that he had made still more curious
experiments. That he had made one patient promise on wak-
ing to fancy herself in a small jar which was in the room. On
waking she exclaimed, “ What a disagreeable smell!” and
fancied herself confined in the jar. It contained salted flowers
—was a stale pot pourri. She did not know what was in it,
had only just arrived, and had never been in the house before,
nor had Mr. C. After she had left the room, Mr. C. took
some of the flowers in his hand, and on her return put them
covertly near her, when she said, “There’s that nasty taste
again.” If he directed her to feel a pain on waking as soon
as any object around him was touched, she did feel the pain,
though prevented from seeing the object touched; if for in-
stance his hair was touched by another person behind her
back or behind a curtain. She could be made to feel pain as
in any object around, as the tongs, and also to fancy herself
to be some one else. She was to fancy herself to be a certain
lady who was doing some lace work. On waking she went
up to the lady, roe the work from her, and the lady assured
her she would not be able to do it, for every body found it
difficult to learn from its being done diagonally : but she did
it perfectly well though she had never learnt the way, and
without effort and talking all the time. She could always be
recovered from this fancy by addressing her as herself, even


by Dr. Elliotson. 369


inadvertently—without intending it: and when this was done,
she was unable to execute the work without instruction, did it
wrong, attempting it, as the lady said all uninstructed persons
naturally do, by placing it at right angles instead of diago-
— She remembers this state after it is past. She was
made to fancy herself a certain wayward child; and, being
afterwards asked how she had felt in that fancy, replied she
had been the worse for their attention and restraint, and best
when they left her alone: and this actually had been found
by the parents to be the best method with the child. She
was desired to fancy herself on waking to be a certain gen-
tleman whom she had never seen before. In endeavouring
to break a friend at college of the habit of touching his
cheek he had acquired the habit, and was also accustomed
to put his elbow on the table. She did both these things
though she was ignorant of his ways. On leaving the room
he said he was convinced from having observed her do them,
for they were two habits of his. The experiment was re-

ated the next day with all the same effects; and, when
asked if she did these two things, replied, she once had the
habit. She has been made to fancy herself in her own ear
with her legs outside: and to fancy her hand had very nume-
rous fingers. These effects were produced on signals being
made, by persons who did not know the purpose, and when
Mr. C. could not observe them. I had caused patients not to
be aware of a sensation of sight, and to fancy they saw un-
real things, but had not tried the other senses. I therefore
made experiments with this view upon three patients,—1. the
young lady with the exclusive mesmeric attachment,—2. the
patient who has the cancer,—and 3. Mary Ann. The promise
was made in the mesmeric sleep, and the effect was to ensue
on waking or after a certain time, and perhaps at a signal, or
was to cease at a signal.

1. I begged her to feel as if the back of her right hand,
between the bone of the thumb and fore-finger, were pinched,
upon my pinching the fluted silk of a fire screen. There was
no effect. I said nothing. The next day I mentioned the
failure in her sleep, and begged her to try again. After
waking, when I pinched the screen, she suddenly exclaimed,
“ Oh! what’s that? why my hand felt as if some one pinched
it: and she began pressing and rubbing the spot of the
right hand agreed upon.

The next day I made her suddenly fancy at the same sig-
nal that a bee had stung the point of her nose.

The next day I tried to make a lady present invisible to
her, but failed.


370 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


The following trials were made each on a successive day,
and the delusion was to occur on waking.

To make her smell aromatic vinegar. Failed.

Repeated this experiment. After being awake a short
time she began sniffing. 1 asked what was the matter. “She
had such a nice smell.” “ Of what?’ “I think it’s aromatic
vinegar.”

__ To taste aloes ; and on my coughing, to taste barley-sugar
instead. Failed.

Repeated these. Both succeeded.

Repeated the attempt to make a person (her sister now)
invisible, and visible again on my coughing. Failed.

Repeated this. Failed.

Ditto ditto. Failed.—I then sent her to sleep and
awoke her several times on this day, to make the experiment
in various ways. She was most anxious to try for me, and
promised to do her utmost.—Not to see her sister, and then
to see her with her bonnet on. Failed.—I then tried one of
these things only at a time; each in different sleeps ; but in
vain.—To find an inanimate thing—a screen—invisible, and
then on my coughing to see it and a hat upon it. Failed.
—I tried each of these in separate sleeps. Not to see the
screen. Failed.—To fancy a Pat upon the screen. Failed.
—To fancy her mother sitting in a chair. Failed.—Therefore
I made no farther attempts on vision; but proceeded to the
other senses.

To hear the piano playing “ Oh Pescator;” and, on my
coughing, “ God save the Queen.” On waking she soon be-
gan to listen, and said, “‘ Oh, what is that music running in
my ears?” “ What instrument?” ‘It must be an organ.”
‘Is it like an organ?” “No, it’s more like a piano; but
there’s nobody at the piano, so it must be an organ in the
street.” “What tune?” “I think it’s ‘Oh Pescator.’” I
coughed ; but with no effect, for she was admiring my New-
foundland dog, and to my question replied she still heard the
music. I coughed again—she told me it had ceased. The
failure of many of these experiments was very satisfactory.


’


2. The following experiments were made with the patient
who has the cancer te « delusion to occur on waking.

Aug. 19. To taste raspberries. Observing her moving her
lips, I asked what she was doing. “Nothing, sir.” “ You
are moving your lips.” “I thought I tasted something nice.”
“What?” “It’s like raspberries.” The next day I did not
see her; but two days afterwards she informed me in her
sleep that she tasted them till she got home, and thought I


by Dr. Elliotson. 371


had given her some in her sleep, and still thought so in her
waking state.

20. To hear an organ playing “God save the Queen.”
On waking she looked attentively. “ What are you thinking
of?” “I thought [ heard music.” “What?” “ Aninstru-
ment.” She thought it came from above, not through the
wall exactly. Next door is a chapel. ‘“ What tune?”
“God save the Queen.”” The next day she said in her sleep
that she continued to hear it till she had passed through my
library into the hall.

21. To feel a strong heat on the back of her left hand.
On waking she began rubbing the back of her left hand.
“ Why are you doing that?” “ It feels so hot—it’s so painful
—quite burning.”” The next day she said the sensation had
lasted till she got home—a distance of a mile and a half, and
that the hand then still felt rather hot.

22. Not to see M. A. till I coughed, and then to see her,
but with my hat on, and me with M. A.’s bonnet on. She
woke spontaneously, and it succeeded perfectly. But I will
detail all this presently, in my account of the other patient.

23. The next day I merely told her I should beg her to
do the same to-day, but she wished not; and a German
came in whose rude behaviour annoyed her, and we were all
vexed, so that the experiment was not farther alluded to.
She awoke spontaneously, and saw M. A. as in a mist
till I coughed, and then she saw her plainly; but this was
all. The other patient was in a state of prostration and in-
sensibility from accidentally touching my gold ring, and on
being restored no result took place, though I intended the
same experiment with her.

26. I repeated it with perfect success.

27. To fancy herself glass and in danger of breaking.
On waking her, she looked strange and anxious, and did not
get up from her easy chairas usual. ‘ What is the matter ?”’
“T feel weak.” “How weak?” “Not strong, but light:
funny altogether. I feel so cold.” ‘How?’ “That I shall
break, if I am touched; if you push me, that I shall break
to pieces ; if you touch my arm, that it will break.” ‘“ What,
like pie-crust ?”’ “No; like glass.” She had risen very
carefully, looking around. I asked her to sit down again.
She was afraid. I pushed her gently into the chair, and she
was frightened. After a time she got up again: for she knew
it was time for her to leave. But she continued standing
still. I begged her to go home. “ I’mafraid.” “ Why?”
“I’m afraid I shall be broken.” “ Look at yourself, and see
if you are glass.”’ “ My hands don’t look like glass.” “ Are

VOL, III, cc


372 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


they transparent?” “WNo.’’ At last she left me, slowly and
full of fear. The next day in her sleep she said that at first
she had not known what to think of herself, and at last con-
cluded she must be glass: yet all the time knew she could
not be glass, and it must all be imagination, and thought as
well as Mary Ann, who fancied a leg of mutton hanging
from her nose, I must have done something to her: that
on leaving the room she asked Mary Ann to keep her up lest
she should be hurt, and got out of every body’s way as she
walked home: that the fancy left her suddenly while turn-
ing from Park Lane into Green Street, when the fresh air
from the park blew upon her.

28. To think she should goto the devil. ‘I fear it will be
difficult, because I do not believe there is such a being as the
devil: every one’s bad inclinations are his devil.” “ Never
mind; nor more do I.” On waking she was silent, and
remained in her chair. I smiled; and she very faintly re-
turned it. “ What is the matter?” She faintly replied,
“ Nothing,” and looked very sad. After a pause, “I am
miserable.”’ “ Why ?—tell me.” “ No.” After much entreaty,
she took me aside, for she had risen and Mary Ann was in
the room, and whispered, “I fear I shall go to the devil.”
I laughed and said, “ Why you don’t believe there is a devil.”
“T think I shall go to him.” I coughed, and instantly her
face brightened up, and she smiled. “ What is it?” She
laughed joyfully, and said, “ I am happy now, but have been
unwell.” “ Indeed !”” and wondered what could have coine
to her. She only laughed on, as did M. A., who had hated
me till she heard that same cough. The next day she apolo-
gized in her sleep for her conduct on the day before in en-
deavouring to leave the room quickly, (I had not noticed
this; but M. A. had.) “I was so miserable, and did not like
your laughing at me.’”’ “ When did the feeling go off?”
“It went off suddenly before I left the room.” I had
coughed, but she said she did not hear it. I had made no
arrangement about coughing, but did cough intentionally ;
and it probably had the effect of dissipating the fancy,—from
having been employed before as a signal. Yet it is remark-
able that she was not conscious that she heard me cough.

29. To fancy herself glass while still in the mesmeric state,
as soon as I coughed, and the fancy to cease when I coughed
a second time. Succeeded as perfectly as before. I made her
to fancy herself glass at once in the mesmeric state, without
any signal; and in a short time the fancy at once to cease.

In the mesmeric state, I said, “ Roast chicken is a very
good thing :’”’ and she was to remember this when awake.


by Dr. Elliotson. 373


Now during the two years and a half that I have regularly
mesmerised her I never knew her remember on waking a
single point of her sleep-waking. When I coughed she was
to forget it again entirely. This succeeded perfectly, and
she even forgot that she had just mentioned it,—a circum-
stance that I had not thought of.

30. To fancy herself dead till I coughed.—I once attended
a Jewess in a very insane family, who fancied herself dead,
though spending her time with the rest of the family.—I
awoke her. She did not rise from her chair as usual. “ What
is the matter?” She looked very sad and serious, but made
no reply. After I had repeated the question often, she said
very solemnly, looking up earnestly at me, “I’m dead.”
I made a great effort, but could not restrain myself, and
laughed most heartily; and the other patient, whom I had
awakened the first, also laughed heartily. She, however, did
not laugh: but looked as serious as before; said she was sure
she was dead, and begged me to rouse her. “I cannot rouse
a dead person.” “ Rouse me if you please.”” “ You could
not hear and see if you were dead.” “I don’t know--do
rouse me,”’ she sorrowfully and earnestly repeated. She
thought she had been dead some vy did not know of
what: declared she could not move or feel, and continued in
the chair with sorrow in her face. I coughed. She instantly
looked happy, laughed at her having had such a fancy, and
was supremely happy.

31. To fancy herself the Queen of Sheba. On waking
she was grave, and kept looking at me: rose and continued
looking very gravely. With much difficulty I got from her
that she was the Queen of Sheba. There was no smile,
but evidently a doubt and a conviction at the same moment.
I coughed without prearrangement, and she instantly looked
herself, and was cheerful, and spoke of her past fancy as
very strange.

Sept. 7. To wake with her right hand ina tremor. This
occurred and continued to perfection, greatly astonishing her.
I stiffened the arm by long —_ with contact, as I am al-
ways able to do in her waking as readily as in her sleep-
waking state, but the tremor was unabated. I relaxed the
arm by transverse passes at a short distance; the tremor
remained. I coughed without prearrangement, and it in-
stantly ceased.

8. To fancy herself no larger than a seed and that she
should be pecked up. When she awoke she was going away
immediately, and wished me good morning. “How are
you?” “Quite well, sir.” “Is nothing the matter?” She

cc2


374 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


looked serious. ‘Are you grown taller?” “No, sir; I
think shorter.” ‘“ How much shorter,—one third?” “ Yes.”
“Less?” “Yes.” “ How small?” After a pause, she said
seriously, “ Not larger than that spot on the dog’s back.”
My Newfoundland dog has a black spot rather larger than a
crown on one side. “As large as an apple?” “Yes.” “A
small apple?” “Yes.” “ Not smaller?” “No.” “Are
you afraid of being injured in going home?” “No, I shall
be safe in the streets for being small.” She now became
very much confused, and said, “ It must be fancy.” I coughed,
with no prearrangement; she smiled, looked no longer con-
fused, but happy, and left the house.

The next day in her sleep she spontaneously informed
me that she had fancied herself very far smaller than an
apple, and feared she should be pecked up as she went home:
but was ashamed to tell me so, lest I should take her for
a fool; and was so confused when I questioned her about her
size that she was anxious to leave the house.


3. The experiments on M. A. were made in the same
room, and nearly each, it will be seen, on the same days as an
analogous experiment on Miss B.

19. To smell aromatic vinegar. Succeeded. The next day
she told me that the fancy ceased on her leaving the room, but
she long afterwards thought of it, and could not help believ-
ing, and does still in her waking state, (and she did I found
also the day following), that I had held a bottle of it to her
nose in her sleep.

20. To hear a piano playing “Rule Britannia.” Suc-
ceeded. The music seemed to come from the chapel; against
the wall of which she always sat. The sound of the organ
came to the other patient as from that side but above, and
the other always sat in a chair removed from the wall by a
wardrobe, before which her chair was placed sidewise. The
next day she told me that the music lasted in her ears till
she was out of the room; but she could not forget the tune
till she got beyond the next room.

21. To feel the back of her hand cold. The moment
she awoke she put it to her face and rubbed it, saying it was
very cold, quite benumbed: and it felt cold to her cheek.
The next day she told me it felt cold for three-quarters of an
hour, and she went to the fire at home to warm it, and her
mother asked her what she would do in the winter if she felt
cold now.

Each of these patients begged me not to tell them what
I wished till near waking time, as when I had once told them


by Dr. Elliotson. 375


they could think of nothing else and worried themselves.
I may state that the young lady mentioned immediately
before them has her attention and memory rather impaired
by her disease, and this explains her forgetting to remember
on waking several of the promises made in her sleep-waking.

22. Not to see the other patient on waking, and on my
coughing to see her but with my hat on, and me with the
other’s bonnet on. The experiment was made on both simul-
taneously, and one cough was to answer for both. From
some cause, when I awoke her, she awoke up imperfectly—
in a peculiar state, in which she often knows me, but is very
cross, stupid, and wayward. I breathed upon her to mes-
merise her more deeply, and then rubbed her eye-brows to
awake her, when she at once fully awoke, quite herself, and
now answered me with her accustomed propriety. She said
she saw me clearly, but saw the other mistily; knew it
must be the other, but saw clearly only as high as her
knees, and up to them indeed somewhat mistily ; but more
and more mistily higher and higher up, so that she could
not recognize the face. Precisely the same misty appearance
of M. A. happened to the other. M. A. fancied her head
could not be quite right to see the other and yet see her in
this strange way. The other thought the fault was in her
eyes and rubbed them, and said she often felt stupid on first
waking: she discerned M. A.’s eyes. On my coughing, each
saw the other well. Neither uttered anything about my hat
being on the head of the other, or the bonnet of the other
on my head.

23. See my account of this day already.

26. The other had told me in her sleep, when she was far
less reserved, that she thought she had seen the other with
my hat on, and me with the other’s bonnet on; and that
she had felt the other’s head to know whether the other really
had my bonnet on, and mentioned it afterwards to her, but
had not liked to tell me, “ it would look so silly.”

The experiment repeated with success; and the same
peculiar results as on the 22nd. Each looked towards the
other, and went close and looked peeringly. In sleep the next
day, M. A. said that on the 22nd, as well as on the 27th,
she knew by her reason that it must be the other, and saw
the other with my hat on and me with the other’s bonnet
on, but had not liked to tell me when awake.

27. To fancy a leg of mutton hanging from her nose,—a
fancy which, like that of being glass, has really occurred in
hypochondriacs. On waking she put the: back of her hand
to her nose, rubbed it, and looked at her hand every now


876 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


and then while rubbing it. “ What is the matter?” “I
feel a weight at my nose, sir, as if something heavy was
hanging from it.” She tried all ways to get rid of it, and
in my absence for a short time begged the other to endeavour
to pull it off. “ What is it like?” “Flesh.” “ What flesh?”
After a pause, “A leg of mutton?” In the first moments,
she felt only the weight, and the idea of meat came next, and
last of all of a leg of mutton, as she told me in her sleep the
next day. She was terribly puzzled, and continued rubbing
and looking astonished. It hung by the knuckle—was not
dressed. She was certain it was a mere fancy, and still
there was a leg of mutton. So she went home quite at a
loss, rubbing her nose.

28. She told me in her sleep that this fancy of the leg of
mutton went off suddenly after she had been at home an hour.
She forgot it for a few minutes, and, on thinking of it again,
it was gone. She felt for it and believed its reality no longer.
While she felt and saw it and believed it, she knew it could
be only imaginary. It was not so heavy as a real leg of mut-
ton would have been. She had thought about it ever since
in her waking state.

To hate me on waking till I coughed. On waking her I
placed my fingers upon Attachment and breathed upon the
disposition to Violence, as I could affect her cerebral organs,
as well as stiffen her arms, in the ordinary state. But she still
hated me, and behaved very ill. The other, who was awake,
was surprised, and told her she was not awake; supposing
she must be in that half-waking wayward state. “ Indeed |
am awake.” I employed the process which always brings her
out of the half state, but in vain. It was not that state: and
agreed with it simply in the existence of waywardness. I
coughed. She smiled and was in her usual happy and amia-
ble condition ; apologized, and when she saw I was not dis-
pleased, laughed at herself. I must mention that all those
patients recollected the events of the periods of fancy. The
cross half-waking state is never remembered by her.

29. In her sleep, she again spontaneously apologized for
behaving so ill to me, telling me that I knew the reason, and
she would not have done so otherwise.

In her sleep, she consented to fancy the leg of mutton
again in the mesmeric state, and to lose it on my coughing.
This succeeded ; but she did not fancy it so large or so heavy
as she did when awake ; and as her eyes are always closed in
the mesmeric state, she could not sce it. One cough was often
to dissipate the fancies of each patient, and it did. But a
pretty circumstance occurred. M. A. said I ought not to


by Dr. Elliotson. 377


make one cough do for both: I ought to cough separately for
her. This tallied with the fact of her having a strong attach-
ment to the mesmeriser, whoever he may be, in her sleep-
waking, and of her being at her ease. In her waking state
she never said anything of the sort, and I am sure never
thought of it.

I then arranged for the same effect, and in a short time
its cessation, while she was still in sleep-waking, without sig-
nals, and with success.

To wake with the feeling of madness and wander about
the room rubbing her hands as if mad. On waking, she
looked thoughtful and strange, and began whispering; soon
she also rubbed her hands, and slapped them repeatedly to-
gether gently, and walked about the room half lost. When
I advised her to be still,—‘“ I shall do as I choose.” She felt
she should go mad ; would go to Bedlam. She saw and heard
everything. I endeavoured to excite her cerebral organs—
Wit, Veneration, Attachment, Pride—but altogether in vain.
I coughed and all instantly ceased. But she complained of
headache, was not refreshed as she always was before by her
mesmerism, and seemed sad. I made passes from the centre
to each side of her forehead—breathed on it—sent her to
sleep and woke her again, and she was much better: but she
still had a little headache and was rather uncomfortable.

30. Shg came to my house looking pale, and unhappy
and weak. I said nothing, but sent her to sleep by one pass
as usual, I asked her if she was not well. The other pa-
tient who had spoken to her before she came into my room,
said she was not. Her head had been uncomfortable, and
she was tremulous. I then learnt from her that she had been
frightened at having felt mad—was now even in her sleep-
waking sure she had really been mad—that it was not all
fancy, and still feared she should lose her senses. Both her
left extremities became bent and rigid, and she had an hyste-
rical fit ; still she could speak, but suffered from pain in the
head and was miserable. I had not expected this effect, but
felt certain I could remove it as readily as I had produced it.
I made her promise on waking to lose all her fears, and be
satisfied for ever that it was nothing but fancy and not worth
thinking of, and be perfectly happy. I woke her immedi-
ately, and she awoke perfectly free from all apprehension,
and as happy and well as before anything had happened, and
laughed heartily at the matter, and has never been concerned
about it since. I then sent her to sleep again.—To wake
deaf; and when I coughed to lose the use of her right arm,
and on my coughing again to recover its use. It succeeded.


378 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


But when she was deaf, and I clapped my hands close to her
ears, she said she heard it slightly. On my coughing, no
effect followed till I coughed a second time, and then she at
once heard; but did not lose the use of her right arm for a few
seconds. On my coughing again, she recovered the use of
it.—Mesmerism ought to be fully tried among the insane.
Many called lunatics are no doubt in a state analogous to the
mesmeric, and susceptible of management with it: and among
others, a number may be susceptible as among the healthy,
and, if the mesmeric state is induced, it possibly may prove of
great power. At any rate it is not merely a disgrace, but a
crime in medical men who have lunatic establishments, that —
they do not fully try it. Ignorance, obstinacy, and laziness are
sad reasons when the insane swarm throughout the land.*
31. To fancy herself Queen Victoria. She awoke looking
important, and got up saying nothing. On my addressing
her, she was reserved and important, and after a little remon-
strance with her about this behaviour, said she was Queen
Victoria. The other patient who was awake, asked her how
her children were, and she laughed; but again behaved
gravely, though not with too much importance: and said she
had been married three or four years. I coughed and she
was herself, and we all laughed heartily together. I had not
arranged, nor did I after this, that her fancy should cease on
my coughing, but she, like the other patient, tgok it fora
signal. The next day in her sleep she said that when the
question was asked her about her children, she recollected
that she had none and remembered who she was for a mo-
ment, but that the truth passed away almost instantaneously.
Sept. 8. To fancy herself on waking in the drawer of the
table in the room where we were. She thought it impossible,
and laughed: but on my assuring her it was possible, con-
sented. On waking she went and stood still against the
table, saying nothing; and did not put her bonnet on as
usual. “ What is the matter?” “I feel so stiff; I cannot
move my limbs.” “What do you mean?” “T feel shut up
in some narrow place—in a box or drawer.” Which?”
“Tn a drawer.” “ What drawer?” “ This in this table.” I
asked her to go with me into the next room: she declared she
could not. I took her by the hand, and pulled her into the
library ; she declaring she could not go there because she was
in the drawer. When she was in the next room I asked how
this was possible if she was in the drawer. “The drawer
seemed to come with me: I am still in it.” All this passed


* See the Cures of Insanity in Vol. I.


by Dr. Elliotson. 379


very seriously. I coughed, and the delusion at once ceased,
and she moved freely and laughed.

The next day in her sleep she told me that she had firmly
believed she was in the drawer, while I shewed her the drawer
and took her into the next room, and yet knew she was not
in it.

Being in Hampshire lately I called on the lady whose case
is related by Mr. Case, and I mesmerised her. Finding her
ears so sensitive in the sleep-waking state that the very
slightest cause distressed her, and was a drawback on her
happiness, I begged her to be deaf after I coughed. She
thought it impossible, but promised to try. I coughed, and
spoke to her and she answered. I thought the experiment
had failed. But presently I found that though not deaf, her
ears were no longer sensitive, and the noises which before
aroused her produced no more impression than upon me.
Here was a fact shewing the important use to which the power
of impressions in the mesmeric state may be applied: and I
do consider the subject one deserving of the deepest attention.

It will be observed that in my cases there were none of
the marvellous circumstances which my friend related to me.
I have never yet witnessed in any case of my own, commu-
nity of feeling or of ideas, vision with the eyes closed, and
but once that kind of clairvoyance which has been called
ultra-vision, though I cannot doubt their occurrence. The
phenomena now related are all established facts in the history
of insanity and nervous diseases. As with all the phenomena
of mesmerism, the only question is whether they can be pro-
duced artificially. On every account I can assert that the
whole in these three cases where fancy was so powerful was
real, and the proof was equal to that of any such facts in
the insane. The two last of these three patients are in hum-
ble life ; the last but one in the middle class: but from daily
observation of them for two or three years, I can assert that
they are as incapable of deceit and even affectation as the
first lady whose rank is high and who is an ornament to hu-
man nature. More excellent and truth-loving persons in
their ordinary and their mesmeric state do not exist.*


(To be concluded in our next.)


* I presume my readers have been aware that in all these cases there
was invariably complete ignorance in the waking state of all the occurrences
of the sleep-waking.

My experiments were extended beyond the original intention expressed
at p. 369.


( 380 )


XII. Surgical Operations without Pain in the Mesmeric state.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—Since your last number appeared, several more cases of Surgical
Operations without pain have occurred; and I send you accounts of them.
The American cases were made known to me by Dr. Doane, of New York.
The case from Alton was refused admission into the Lancet, which declares
it does not mean to publish anything further on mesmerism.*

Yours, &c.
Joun Ex.iotson,
Conduit Street, London,
Sep. 17, 1845.


I. Removal of a Breast.


“The following authentic and minute description of an
operation in mesmerism appears in the last number of the
Southern Medical and Surgical Journal, written by Dr. L. A.
Ducas, Professor of Physiology in the Medical College of
Georgia, who performed the operation in the presence of
several eminent physicians. This operation, it will be seen,
was a complete removal of the mamma of the patient.

“On the 3rd of January, 1845, Mrs. Clark, (wife of Mr.
Jesse Clark, of Columbia Co., Georgia,) came to the city,
for the purpose of getting me to remove a schirrous tumor of
her right mamma, which had been gradually increasing for
the last three years, and which had now attained the size of
a turkey’s egg. The tumor had never caused any pain of
consequence, was not adherent to the skin, nor did it impli-
cate any of the axillary glands. Mrs. Clark is about forty-
seven years of age, has never borne a child, and her health
by no means robust, was pretty good, and had not been im-
paired by the evolution of the tumor. The operation having
been determined upon for the following day, Mrs. Clark re-
marked to me that she had been advised by Mr. Kenrick to
be mesmerised ; but as she knew nothing about it, she would
ask my advice, and would abide by it. To which I replied that
there were several well-authenticated cases on record, in which
surgical operations had been performed, under mesmeric in-
fluence, without the consciousness of the patient; that I
would be happy to test the subject in her case; and that I
would endeavour to mesmerise her, instead of operating as
had been proposed, on the day following.

“On the 4th January, at 11 o’clock, a.m., I called on
Mr. Clark, and was informed that on the preceding evening
she had been put to sleep by Mr. B. F. Kenrick (at whose
house she resided). I then mesmerised her myself, and in-


* Notice to Correspondents, May 10, 1845.


Surgical Operations without pain. 381


duced sleep in about fifteen minutes. Finding my patient
susceptible to the mesmeric influence, and reflecting that it
would not be convenient for the same person to maintain this
influence and to perform a surgical operation at the same time,
I requested Mr. Kenrick to mesmerise Mrs. Clark morning
and evening, at stated hours, until insensibility could be
induced.

“This was regularly done, with gradually increasing effect,
when, on the evening of the 6th January, sleep was induced
in five minutes, and the prick of a pin was attended with no
manifestation of pain. The sittings were continued, and the
patient’s insensibility daily tested by myself and others in
various ways.

“On the 9th January, I invited Professor Ford to be pre-
sent, and after pricking and pinching strongly the patient
without evidence of pain, the mesmeriser was requested to
leave the room, when we exposed the breast, handled it
roughly in examining the tumor, and readjusted the dress,
without the consciousness of the patient. We then held to
her nostrils a vial of strong spirits of hartshorn, which she
breathed freely for a minute or two, without the least indica-
tion of sensation, unless the fact that she swallowed once be
regarded as such, instead of a mere reflex action. On the
llth of January, in the presence of Professors Ford and
Mead, in addition to the usual tests, I made with my pocket-
knife an incision about two inches in length, and half an
inch in depth, into the patient’s leg, without indication of
sensation.

“ Fully satisfied now of our power to induce total insensi-
bility, I determined to operate upon her the next day at noon,
but carefully concealed any such design from the patient and
her friends, who did not expect its performance until several
days later.

“On the 20th January, at twenty minutes past 11, a.m.,
Mrs. Clark was put to sleep in forty-five seconds, without
touch or pass of any kind, the facility with which the mes-
meric influence was produced having gradually increased at
each sitting. At 12 o’clock, a.m., in the presence of Profes-
sors Ford, Mead, Garvin, and Newton, and Dr. Halsee, the
patient being in a profound sleep, I prepared her dress for
the operation, and requested my professional brothers to note
her pulse, respiration, complexion, countenance, &c., before,
during, and after the amputation, in order to detect any
evidence of pain, or modification of the functions. As Mr.
Kenrick had never witnessed a surgical operation, he feared
he might lose his self-possession, and requested to be blind-


382 Surgical Operations without pain.


folded, which was done. He now seated himself on the couch
near the patient, and held her hand in his during the opera-
tion. This was accomplished by two elliptical incisions about
eight inches in length, comprehending between them the
nipple and a considerable portion of the skin; after which
the integuments were dissected up in the usual manner, and
the entire mamma removed. It weighed sixteen ounces.
The wound was then left open about three quarters of an
hour, in order to secure the bleeding vessels, six of which
were ligated. The ordinary dressing was applied, and all ap-
pearances of blood carefully removed, so that they might not
be seen by the patient when aroused. The amount of he-
morrhage was rather more than is usual in such cases.

“During the operation the patient gave no indication
whatever of sensibility, nor was any of the functions observed
to those present modified in the least degree. She remained
in the same sound and quiet sleep as before the use of the
knife. Subsequently the pectoral muscle, which had been
laid bare, was twice or thrice seen to contract when touched
with the sponge in removing the blood. About 15 minutes
after the operation, a tremulous action was perceived in the
lower jaw, which was instantaneously arrested by the appli-
cation of the mesmeriser’s hand to the patient’s head. This
phenomenon recurred in about ten minutes after, and was
again in the same manner requited. Professor Ford, who
counted the pulse and respiration, states that before any pre-
paration was made for the operation, the pulse was 96, and
the respiration 16 per minute ; that after removing the patient
to arrange her dress for the operation, and just before this
was commenced, the pulse was 98, and the respiration 17 ;
that immediately after the detachment of the breast, the pulse
was 96—respiration not counted ; and that after the final ad-
justment of the bandages and dress, which required the
patient to rise and move about, the pulse was 98 and the re-
spiration 16. All present concur in stating that neither the
placid countenance of the patient, nor the peculiar natural
blush of the cheeks, experienced any change whatever during
the whole process; that she continued in the same profound
and quiet sleep, in which she was before noted, and that, had
they not been aware of what was being done, they would not
have suspected it from any indications furnished by the
patient’s condition.

“The patient having been permitted to sleep on about
half an hour after the final arrangement of her dress, the
mesmeriser made passes over the seat of the operation in
order to lessen its sensibility, and aroused her in the usual


Surgical Operations without pain. 383


manner, when she engaged in cheerful conversation with
Mr. Kenrick and myself, as though she had no suspicion of
what had taken place. I then introduced to her the gentle-
men, who had placed themselves so as not to be seen by her
on awakening, and observed that I had invited them to come
in during her sleep, in order that we might fully test her
insensibility preparatory to the operation. After a few minutes
of conversation, I asked her when she would like to have the
operation performed? To which she replied, ‘The sooner
the better,’ as she was anxious to get home. I added,
‘Do you really think that I could remove your entire breast
when asleep without your knowledge? Answer—‘ Why,
doctor, the fact is, that from the various experiments I am
told you have made on me, I really do not know what to
think of it.’ ‘ Well, madam, suppose I were to perform the
operation one of these days, and to inform you of it when
you would awake, would you believe me, and could you con-
trol your feelings on finding that it had been done?’ Answer
—‘I could not suppose that you would deceive me, and of
course I would be very glad, but would try not to give way
to my feelings.’ ‘Have you perceived, since your arrival
here, or do you now perceive, any change in the ordinary
sensations of the affected breast?’ ‘No, sir, it feels about
as it has done for some time back.’

“ About a quarter of an hour having elapsed since she
awoke, I then told her that as we found her in a proper state
for the operation, I had performed it, and that the breast was
now removed. She expressed her incredulity—said I was
certainly jesting, as it was impossible that it could have been
without her knowing it at the time, or feeling anything of it
now. She became convinced only on carrying her hand to
the part and finding that the breast was no longer there.
She remained apparently unmoved for a few moments, when
her friends, approaching to congratulate her, her face became
flushed, and she wept unaffectedly for some time. The wound
healed by the first intention.

“In laying the above narrative before the profession, it is
due to the cause of truth to state, that it has been submitted
to all the physicians at the operation, and that I am author-
ized by them to say that it accords in every particular
with their own observations so far as they were present. I
should also add that, having no other object in view than the
establishment of the fact that a surgical operation may be
performed under such circumstances without the conscious-
ness of the patient, I have designedly avoided any mention
of the various and interesting mesmeric phenomena mani-


384 Surgical Operations without pain.


fested prior and subsequently to the operation. These have
been carefully and judiciously recorded by Mr. Kenrick, whose
well-directed zeal has enabled him to collect a body of highly
important facts from a field unfortunately explored too exclu-
sively in ignorance and charlatanism.

“ Augusta, Ga., Ist Feb., 1845.”


II. Removal of a Polypus from the Nose.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE BOSTON MEDICAL AND SURGICAL
JOURNAL,


“ Dear Sir,—Additional to the accounts of like results that
have lately reached us from various quarters, an experiment
has dragged me into being a witness of the particulars that
are hereby detailed to you as follows, for what they are worth,
attending the removal, in July, 1843, of a polypus from the
nose of a patient in the mesmeric condition. I| give this
name to the condition she was in, for want of a better one;
but names are of little consequence, the facts only (from
notes taken at the time) being intended to be regarded. The
patient came from Montville, 14 miles distant, to Belfast, for
the purpose of having me operate. She was a very respect-
able woman, of mild disposition and manners, of considerable
energy and activity, fair complexion, about 24 years of age,
married, had one child, was a person of good constitution,
and to every appearance healthy at the time.—That tumor
was of an oblong-rounded form, largely attached base, pro-
bably half an inch in its smallest diameter, and had been
there three months. The base was larger proportionally than
the average of cases within my experience, and so firmly ad-
herent, that in removing it I was obliged to tear it away in
pieces. I had laid out my instruments and was about pro-
ceeding in the operation, when she proposed to be magnetized
if it was possible, as she dreaded the pain that would have to
be borne; and as she was entirely unacquainted in town, at
her request I procured the attendance of a gentleman who
had the reputation of being a good magnetizer (Mr. P. P.
Quimby), although entirely faithless on my own part, as I
told her at the time, as well as others before who had asked
what I thought of animal magnetism. I am quite confident
that the lady and Mr. Quimby had never met before, and
that there was nothing previously concerted. I am also con-
fident that she took no medicine to induce stupor. In ten
minutes after commencing, she was put into a state of appar
rently natural sleep, sitting upright in her chair, breathing


Surgical Operations without pain. 385


and pulse natural—colour of countenance unchanged. We
then moved her from the back part of my room, where she
happened to be sitting, to a window, for the light. Mr. Q.
asked her if she felt well. She answered distinctly, “ Yes.”
I immediately (in the presence of several of our most noted
citizens, who had been called in at their own request) began
to remove the polypus, and did it thoroughly, scraping the
sides of the nostril repeatedly with the forceps so as to be
sure that I had removed all the remaining fragments. There
was some hemorrhage, say nearly an ounce of blood. I was
operating four or five minutes at least. During the whole
time, she evinced not the slightest symptom of pain, either by
any groaning, sighing or motion whatever, but was in all
these respects precisely like the dead body. I felt convinced
that I might as well have amputated her arm. The circum-
stance that struck me at the time most singularly of all, was
this ;—as soon as the blood began to run down the fauces,
there was a slight, rough, rattling sound of the breathing.
One of the bystanders said, “She is choking to death.”
Mr. Q. hawked and spit repeatedly, when she did the same,
and spit the blood out of her mouth. In about ten minutes
after she was awaked, but said she was unconscious that any-
thing had been done, complained of no pain, and found that
she could now breathe freely through her nose, that had been
entirely closed up for several preceding months,
“ Yours, very sincerely,
“ Atpurt T. Wueetock, M.D.”


III. Amputation of the Leg without Pain.


I find the following in the Critic of last June :—

“Thomas Dysart, a young man of this place, was for a
period of two years confined to his bed by a sore leg. During
that period every thing that medical skill could suggest was
done for him; but in spite of every effort the disease con-
tinued to increase. His body became quite emaciated, and
it was apparent that his disease would carry him off in a very
short time. As a last resource, his medical attendant re-
solved to amputate the leg. This, considering the extreme
state of debility to which he had been reduced, was looked
upon as a most dangerous experiment.

“Tn order, if possible, to alleviate the pain, his medical
attendant (Dr. Fenton) mesmerised him almost daily for a
number of weeks, and at last, in the presence of a number of
medical gentlemen, amputated the leg. During the operation
he was in the mesmeric sleep, the leg being in the cataleptic


386 Surgical Operations without pain.


state. During the operation of amputating, the patient
moaned heavily, especially at the taking up of the arteries.
The patient states that he had no sense of pain, nor any idea
of what was going on, until he saw the amputated leg lying
before him, although his eyes were open during most of the
operation.

“ His being in this state is easily accounted for, when we
consider that for some days previous to the operation he was
in a state of the greatest excitement, expecting that it would
take place every day. By mesmerism he got a sound and
refreshing sleep after the operation ; and subsequently, when-
ever he has felt pain, a few passes of the hand or of a book
have given him immediate relief. He is now completely re-
covered, and it may truly be said that mesmerism has saved
his life.

“The subject of the above remarks is very poor, and a few
benevolent friends are anxious to get one of the artificial legs
for him which you mentioned in the Critic some time ago,
as being an invention of the greatest importance to those
who had been deprived of this useful member. 1 am requested
to address a letter to you, respectfully requesting that you
would inform us of the plan we ought to pursue to procure
one of the artificial legs.

“ Ropert MarsHatt, Bookseller.
“‘Alyth, Perthshire, N.B. June 17th, 1845.”


IV. Dr. Esdaile’s Mesmeric Feats.


I have found the following account in an East India Paper.


“We were not amongst the spectators of Dr. Esdaile’s
mesmeric feats, but we have received from eye witnesses very
startling accounts of what took place. The operation on a
Native during the mesmeric state, was not quite so successful
as was expected, for the man woke in the middle of it; but
he was immediately thrown back again into a state of coma.
Though most of the company present had collected to witness
this operation, it was very far from being the most interesting
portion of the morning’s entertainment. The feat which
excited the most unqualified surprise was, Dr. Esdaile’s mes-
merification of several Natives through a thick wall—the ope-
rator and the patient being in separate rooms. Another most
remarkable effect was exhibited in the case of a Native, who,
in the mesmeric trance, echoed and mimicked every word and
movement of the operator. Dr. Esdaile uttered words and
sentences in the learned languages, which were repeated,


Surgical Operations without Pain. 387


with wonderful exactness, by the poor ignorant Bengallee.
The Doctor then sang an English song, which his patient sang
after him ; and when the former burst into a fit of laughter
at the performance of the latter, the patient laughed also,
with a perfect imitation of the Doctor’s merriment. The
muscles about the mouth of the mesmerized man were per-
fectly flexible, but the eye maintained, all the while, a death-
like stare and rigidity. The effect is said to have been truly
awful.

“ Some water was mesmerized. Certain Natives who drank
it were thrown into the mesmeric state, but it had no effect
on a European Officer, who ventured to take a large draught
of it. In one case, a patient was struck with the mysterious
influence just as he was in the middle of his potation. It was
like magic—as if he had been touched with the wand of an
enchanter. The lips closed on the rim of the tumbler—
where the stiffened hand still held it. These are strange facts
and show that there is something more in nature than is
dreamt of in philosophy of men in general.”


V. Tooth Drawing.
From the Critic of May 31st.


Alton, July 31st.

In the present sceptical state of the public mind as regards
the subject of mesmerism, an important fact, and that bear-
ing on its most valuable feature—the relief of human suffer-
ing—must be worthy of record. .

On Tuesday, February 4th, before a numerous company
assembled to witness the operation, I extracted a large molar
tooth without the knowledge of the patient whilst in the state
of mesmeric sleep. The patient is a girl in the employ of
Messrs. Spicer and Poulton, paper manufacturers in this
town. She had previously been mesmerised only a few times
by Mr. Poulton, for the sake of trying a few of the ordinary
experiments, and for the relief of tooth-ache.

Her employers are gentlemen who have no interest in sup-
porting or refuting the phenomena of mesmerism; they are
as anxious to arrive at the truth as any reasonable men
should be, and would be equally happy to expose any attempt
to deceive.

I am perfectly convinced, and so are all present, that she
was not in the slightest degree conscious of the operation ;
and it can scarcely be imagined that a simple and compara-
tively ignorant mill-girl could have any motive to deceive

VOL, III. DD


388 Surgical Operations without Pain.


sufficiently strong, to induce her to bear so painful an opera-
tion without any visible change of countenance.
Witiiam Curtis, Jun.,
Surgeon, Alton.


Signed also by the following gentlemen, who were
present—
W. Newnham, Surgeon, Farnham.
John Edward Spicer, Alton.
Cornelius Poulton, ditto.
W. F. Poulton, Architect, Reading.


VI. Extraction of a Tooth without Pain.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—The following fact may prove of interest to some of
your readers. Attending a family at Clifton, I was asked to
see a young woman who had been suffering from violent
tooth-ache, and had not resolution to have her tooth extracted
in the natural state. On first trying to mesmerise her, an
impression was made. My second trial convinced me that
there was insensibility to pain. On my mesmerising her
again, on Saturday last, I found she was fully equal to any
operation. I made an appointment with a dentist to meet me
at 29, Park Street. In less than ten minutes, the patient, a
timid and excitable young person, was sent into the mesmeric
state. The tooth was a double one, with three fangs, and
was firmly rooted in its socket; in truth, a powerful wrench
was required to extract it. The gum was afterwards firmly
pressed with the fingers. During this oe the patient sat
with her hands quietly resting on her lap; not the slightest
motion or resistance could be detected by the lookers-on.
After the operation, Mr. Mosely, the dentist, was asked his
impressions from what had passed. His reply was, “That
there was perfect insensibility, and that she remained as pas-
sive as a block of wood.” ‘This opinion was the more satis-
factory to me, Mr. Mosely being a perfect stranger, and
having expressed himself as very doubtful whether mesmerism
could be brought to such a — bearing. On being
awoke, the young woman looked about, surprised at seeing
strangers in the room : and when told that she would not now
feel the tooth pain her, she doubtingly enquired, “ What,
then, is it out?’ I need hardly say that such a result was
as gratifying to those who witnessed the operation, as to the
patient who lost her tooth without knowing it. This case,


More of Alexis Didier. 389


though only one out of many, I feel ought to be made known,
occurring, as it does, in the centre of much medical scepti-
cism; and I beg to refer any sceptics to Mr. Mosely, the
dentist, of 28, Park Street, and to Miss Smith, of 29, Park
Street, Bristol, both of whom witnessed this interesting ope-
ration. The members of the Provincial Medical Association
will perhaps say this is only the effect of imagination. They
shall have the fall benefit of this opinion. My reply is, that
if imagination will allow limbs to be amputated, teeth ex-
tracted, and tumors removed without pain, to say nothing of
the most distressing nervous diseases cured, the sooner ima-
gination is allowed to become an active agent of the curative
art the better. To medical sceptics I would say, in the lan-
guage of the late Mr. Chenevix on this subject, ‘‘ Would it
disgrace the greatest man whom England has ever produced
to attempt an experiment or two upon a doctrine which
Hufeland, Juissen, Cuvier, Ampére, and Laplace believed ?”
Nay, would it not disgrace him more to condemn, without
knowing anything about what such men knew and believed ?
Surely, what great men believe, ordinary men may try.”
I remain, Sir,
Yours obediently,
27, Brook Street, Bath. ' Henry Storer, M.D.


XIII. More of Alexis Didier. By Dr. Ex.iorson.


Tue Zoist informed its readers last October, on the authority
of M. Marcillet, that Alexis Didier would return to London
in the spring. He did not return. I think that he acted very
improperly in not fulfilling the promise; because, from his
brain being overworked at clairvoyance by M. Marcillet, he
had latterly failed very much, and his abrupt departure from
London had given a shadow of probability to the bold and
false assertion of Mr. Wakley, that his publication of what
he vain-gloriously and puffingly termed Dr. Forbes’s complete
exposure of the youth had put him to flight. This was,
however, a trifle compared with the diabolical falsehoods
alleged by some medical men as the reason of his departure.
It seems that Alexis had resolved to enter into a profession
and no longer to exhibit his clairvoyance in public. This
gave rise to other false reports :—that M. Marcillet was dead
and that Alexis had confessed the whole to have been a cheat.
Subsequently he relinquished his resolution, and has shewn
his powers in public with M. Marcillet in several places. I
will translate for your readers part of an article in the Journal
DD2


390 More of Alexis Didier,


de Cherbourg of the 24th last July. After relating the pro-
duction of sleep-waking, rigidity and relaxation, and the
card-playing with the eyes bandaged and the cards reversed,
the editor proceeds :—

“ Alexis read fluently with his eyes still bandaged. A
book was opened by chance, ‘ Stop,’ said Alexis, ‘it is a Latin
book.’ ‘You are wrong,’ was the reply. ‘I am certain of
it,’ rejoined Alexis, and immediately he read a Latin line
which was alone on the top of the page. His lucidity in-
creased ; his bandages were removed, and he read notwith-
standing two hands and a handkerchief were placed over the

age. I have seen him read with perfect accuracy a page,
pointed out by one of the party, of an uncut book. A person
went up to Alexis, ‘Can you tell me what I placed upon my
chimney-piece before I left home?’ ‘ Willingly: give me
your hand. The object is not there generally ; you took it
from a shelf in the next room ; it is very near the clock ; it is
black ; there is something white that runs round it on the
top ; what can it be? stop: it is leather; shining; oh, what
a fancy to put it upon a chimney-piece; it is a boot.’—This
was true. A lady asked him what she had done in the course
of the day, and what was her name. ‘You have received a
letter from one of your friends who has three daughters, and
it begins thus: My dear L.’—That was true. M. H. had
concealed a word in his double watch case, ‘ Will you tell me
what it is? ‘Iwill. In the first place it is a name; it is
composed of five letters.’ ‘True.’ ‘It is the name of one
of your relations.’ ‘True also. ‘I will write it for you,’
and immediately he writes Jes; then he said, ‘I begin with
the end, for the word is Jules,’ which it was. The watch had
not been taken from the owner’s pocket. A lady goes up to
him, ‘ Be so good as to tell me my Christian name.’ Alexis
takes her hand and instantly says, ‘ 4t—Ad—Adele.”’ The
astonishment and admiration of all was extreme.

“A naval officer presents himself, “Tell me what you see
in my cabin.’ After describing the furniture and the name
of the ship, Alexis adds, ‘I see a frame with an engraving ;
it is a female ; there is written below, Angleterre ; the female
has a butterfly upon her finger.’—The officer declared this
was perfectly true. Alexis continued, ‘In such a year you
were in a storm at sea; you were borne away by a wave and
cast by it upon a heap of cordage; you were injured in the
head and leg.’—The officer declared that all these particulars
were exact.

“Miss P. asks, ‘ Who am I thinking of at this moment”
‘One of your parents; your father; he is far away; in a


by Dr. Elliotson. 391


country beyond the sea; give me your hand, think atten-
tively, and I will tell you the country ; he is in England—in
London.’ ‘Quite true.’ ‘Now I will tell you the street;
it is near Regent Street, a little to the left and lower down.’
Immediately he wrote with a pencil, Leicester Street. ‘No,’
replied the lady, ‘it is Leicester Place, not Leicester Street.’
The difference was trifling. He added ‘ Your father has had
a fall, a severe fall, and injured chiefly his right leg. In fact
the gentleman has been tussed by a bull and received a severe
wound in his right leg.

“One of the company takes the hand of Alexis, “Try
and tell me what I have put on the chimney-piece of my
room in the night.’ ‘I see it perfectly ; it is a plant; it has
three flowers like roses, but they are not roses; two are
blown, the third is small and scarcely opened.’ ‘ Perfectly
true.’ ‘What do you see behind this flower?’ ‘A daguer-
reotyped portrait ; it is your wife’s; you have another of her
in your bed-room, but not so good.’ ‘I have put several
things on the top of my secretary and in one of the drawers.
Do you see them?’ ‘ Quite well. In the first place there is
an engraving in a frame upon the top of the secretary: in the
back ground are houses and small figures ; in the fore ground
a pillar; no, it is a crucifix; it is Christ on the cross; a
woman is near him with dishevelled hair; one of the drawers
is full of pence; in the other I see a box containing a chain
and key.’—All this was correct.

“ We should never finish if we were to attempt relating
all the beautiful experiments, of which more than 400 per-
sons were witnesses during eight days, and which proved the
prodigious lucidity of Alexis. Thus he told one person what
he had done at a particular time of the day; another what
was the hour by his watch ; another what was at the bottom
of his pockets; another a remarkable circumstance that had
happened to him, with the year, the day, and the hour.

“Such is a brief sketch of what we have seen and heard
at these remarkable meetings, in the midst of the electric
excitement and bravos of the assembly.

“When we hear for the first time of the extraordinary
phenomena of mesmerism, we cannot help smiling with
incredulity. When we are present at experiments of this
nature and witness facts so astounding, our feeble reason still
refuses to believe the supernatural things which pass before
our eyes, and sometimes startle even those who show them.
But belief takes the place of doubt, and we are compelled to
yield to evidence when we have frequently witnessed the
beautiful powers which Alexis possesses, or when turning ex-


392 More of Alexis Didier,


perimenters ourselves, we obtain phenomena which prove our
own power.

“To the conscientious observer who is anxious to investigate
this subject and who perceives all the importance of mesmer-
ism, these are not experiments of mere curiosity. It is a
philosophical matter of vast extent, and of which no educated
person has a right longer to remain ignorant. This science
may, in many cases, aid the healing art, especially in the
treatment of nervous affections; it displays to the physiologist
new views of life, and throws a brilliant light upon psycho-
logy. In fact, somnambulic lucidity is but one of the truths
of mesmerism; there are twenty others as interesting, and
possibly more useful to study : a volume would be required to
make them known.

“ Allow me to express my regret at seeing so many re-
spectable and well informed persons give themselves up to
obstinately denying instead of studying a science which opens
so vast a field for their reflections.”

In Vol. II. of The Zoist, p. 482, after slightly mentioning
a number of facts witnessed, and detailed to me from his
notes, by Colonel Gurwood, proving beyond all doubt the
extraordinary powers of Alexis, I stated that the Colonel had
promised to give me a full account for publication, but after-
wards excused himself. I consider him on every account very
wrong: and am now enabled, notwithstanding the non-fulfil-
ment of his promise, to furnish your readers, in a circuitous
way, with his own account of the extraordinary revelaticus
made to him by Alexis respecting some testimony of which
he had long stood in need to do justice to himself. In the
Journal de Havre, last August, 20th, is an extract from the
Journal Pandore, containing an account by a gentleman of
his journey in the Malle Poste from Bordeaux to Paris, acci-
dently with Colonel Gurwood, on the 24th of last November.
After a time, the conversation turned upon mesmerism, in
which the gentleman was a decided unbeliever, while Colonel
Gurwood, who till two years ago had been a despising sceptic
too, declared his firm conviction of its truth. A friend, he
said, had with difficulty prevailed upon him at Paris to visit a
sleep-waker and mesmeriser. I give you the rest of the
account in the writer’s words, translated in the Cheltenham
Free Press, of September 6th.

“The mesmeriser was M. Marcillet, the patient, Alexis
Didier.

“T shall pass over without notice a game of cards played
between me and Alexis, and gained by him through his nam-
ing the cards, although I had myself attached a triple band-


by Dr. Elliotson. 393


age over his eyes. I shall not observe either upon the tetanic
state of his legs, which were stiff and insensible, under the
influence of the fluid. I hasten to come to the statement of
facts personal to myself.

“ After several experiments, I seated myself by the side
of Alexis, my hand in his, and there we were chatting.

“ «My friend,’ said I to him, ‘I am incredulous, but I
am so with good faith ; so do not fear on my part a systematic
opposition.’

“ *Oh! I know that well! you have too much good sense
to deny evidence, and too much heart not to love those who
love you—and I love you much myself, Englishman as you
are; I love you because you generously saved the life of a
Frenchman !


“Singularly struck by this remark, I begged him to
continue.

“ ¢ Yes, continued Alexis, it is a long time ago! ‘It is,’
added he, after a pause, ‘thirty years!’ The affair took
place there away, in the south, during the winter. The
country is wild. There, see, the night, and your troops,
provided with scaling-ladders, appearing under the walls of a
strong place. My God, what a noise! what a battle! Poor
man, you were wounded,’ said Alexis, placing his hand on
my head; ‘it was there that the blow fell—but your wound
did not stop you. I see you farther on, mounting to the
assault—on the breach. Stifled cries come to your ears:
some English soldiers surround a Frenchman, whom they
wish to kill. You run bravely. You lift up with your arms
the weapons that menace his head, and you command them
to respect his life. Oh! come, I love you, indeed. The
officer follows you to a square tower, where several of his com-
rades are made prisoners. You traverse the town to find your
general, to whom, by your orders, the French general surren-
ders his sword.’

“ * And what became of this sword ?”

“ «Your general presented it to you—and you have it still
in London, suspended to the wall of your room; the blade
only is the same ; the scabbard was changed in 1827.’

“ ¢ And does the officer, whose life I saved, still exist ?’

“*Yes, he exists; and for a long time you have made
useless researches to find him again. But have good hope,
come again to-morrow, and we will discover him.’

“Struck, affected by what I had just heard, I went out
from M. Marcillet’s with my head all on fire, not knowing


what to think or believe; for, in fine, Alexis had said what
was the truth.


394 More of Alexis Didier,


“Yes, the 19th January, 1812, at the siege of Ciudad
Rodrigo, in Spain, I was wounded in the head, and at. the
very place Alexis indicated.

“ Yes, on the same night I had the happiness to save the
life of a French officer.

“Yes, I received from Lord Wellington the sword of
General Barrie, after the assault took place.

“Yes, the scabbard of this sword was changed about the
epoch fixed by Alexis.

“Yes, I have been making researches to find again this
French officer, saved by my care, because General Napier
(in his History of the Peninsular War) refuses me the honour
of having conducted the assault of Ciudad Rodrigo, and de-
signates Major Machis as having the right to the sword which
was given me by Lord Wellington. Judge, then, of what
importance it was to me to find again a witness who could
certify the truth of facts already thirty years old! Unfortu-
nately, I had no longer, as to this officer, the least notion
which might aid me in my researches.

“On the morrow I returned to Alexis, whom I pressed
with questions touching the French officer.

“*T avow,’ the somnambulist replied to me, ‘ that I feel
some embarrassment in following him in all the changes of
his military career: he is found mixed up in my mind with
other officers who were present, as he was at the siege of
which I have spoken. Let us search well, however! Yes, I
see our man, about eight years later—at Paris—Rue Saint
Antoine—during the night..... There! they remit to him
a despatch of great importance—and, with a company that
he commands, as captain, he hastens to the Rue Richlieu,
near the Royal Library, where I see a riotous crowd. Ah!
there has just taken place a fatal event.’

“« “What has taken place, then ?”

“*A crime—an assassination—committed upon an illus-
trious personage.’

“«Let us see, Alexis; follow the captain down to the
present time, and tell me where I ought to seek for him.’ _

“ *Tt is in vain that I pursue him—my sight cannot attain
tohim. But, hark ye, address yourself to the colonel of the
42nd regiment of the line in garrison at Valenciennes.
However, you need not hurry; for, if you write to him to-
day, he will not receive your letter immediately ; he is at
Maubege.’ :

“Curious to verify these facts, I consulted ? Annuaire,
and I addressed my letter to M. Husson, colonel of the 42nd
of the line, in garrison at Valenciennes. Five days after, I


by Dr. Elliotson. 395


received from Colonel Husson a reply, in which he excused
himself for his delay, occasioned by his tour of inspection. It
was not him who was at the siege of Ciudad Rodrigo, but his
brother, whose address he indicated at Paris.

“TI wrote then, immediately to this brother, and here is
the substance of his reply. After having confirmed his pre-
sence at the siege of Ciudad Rodrigo, M. Husson continues
thus :—


* «Tt was reported to me, and I heard several English officers
say, during my stay at the general quarters, that an officer of the
company of sharpshooters, charged with the defence of the small
breach, was assailed and nearly overcome by some soldiers, when he
uttered the Mason’s cry of distress ; an officer saved him and took
the greatest care of him afterwards; he recommended him to his
comrades on the route that the garrison followed, I believe, as far
as Lisbon. It is without doubt you, Colonel, who, in the midst of
a sharp action, saved the life of this officer, whose name I have
never known.

(Signed) *** Husson, Retired Colonel of Artillery.
“ * Paris, 17th January, 1843.


“The same day I communicated this letter to Alexis.

“ * Courage,’ said he to me, ‘we are in the right road.
On your return to London consult the documents relative to
the months of January and February, 1812, and I answer
for your success.’

“ A month later, I was in the Tower of London, hunting
among the papers of Lord Wellington all the documents rela-
tive to the affairs of Spain of the above epoch. All of a sud-
den my eyes fell upon an indorsement thus worded :—

“ ¢ BonFitn, 34th light.’


“This name struck me like a ray of light, and I felt my-
self seized with an inexplicable conviction ; I opened the let-
ter, exclaiming, “ Without doubt it is him !’

“ By this letter, signed ‘ Bonfilh,’ a French officer asked
Lord Wellington to send his letters to the advanced posts.

“There was nothing in that which served to fix me;
nevertheless, urged by an internal voice, I wrote to Colonel
d’Artois, secretary to the committee of fortifications at Paris,
begging him to make researches in the War-office.

“Colonel d’Artois replied that there existed no person of
the name of Bonfilh on the army-list ; but he sent me a cer-
ficate proving that the Commandant Bonfilh, who served in
the 34th light, received his half-pay at Villineuve-d’Agen,
and lived at Villareal (Lot et Garonne).

“The 23rd of April, 1844, I addressed a letter to the
Commandant Bonfilh, in which I made known to him my re-

VOL, III. EE


i


396 More of Alexis Didier,


searches and my hopes, and on the 7th May following I re-
ceived the following reply :—


** € Villareal (Lot et Garonne), Ist May, 1844.
** €«To Colonel Gurwood.

*« «Sir, —I received from you a letter, dated the 23rd April, in
which I read with the warmest interest the details on the taking of
Ciudad Rodrigo.

* « After the recitals you have made, Colonel, there is no doubt
that I am the French officer whose life you so nobly saved, and for
whom you have so long time sought.

** *T recollect that when you arrived to my aid, I was down on
the ground, surrounded by six or eight English soldiers, some of
whom held their bayonets to my body, while others were tearing
open my clothes and taking my money away. You ran to me,
Colonel, and making the soldiers retire, you took me under your
protection. We went to the square tower, near the gate of Almeida,
where General Barrie surrendered to you, saying, ‘‘ Respect my
soldiers.” This General offered you his watch; but you replied,
** Preserve your watch, General: honour brings me here, and not
pillage.”” He wished also to give up his sword to you, and you re-
fused it, saying, “ You will remit it to General the Duke of
Wellington.”

*«*T shall add, Colonel, that when they were conducting us
prisoners towards Portugal, you made me enter a house in a little
village, El Codon, where there was given me a cup of rum, anda
rations loaf, for the route. In fine, you had the goodness to accom-
pany me as far as the column of prisoners, which was in advance;
and without you, Colonel, the Spaniards would infallibly have cut
my throat before I could have joined my comrades in misfortune.

** «T have often reproached myself, Colonel, for not having asked
the name of my benefactor: but for which, believe me truly, I should
have taken the advance in writing and testifying my lively and eternal
gratitude. In fine, I pray continually for your happiness; and beg
of you to sacrifice a moment of your leisure to write to me.

** «Him who owes life to you,
(Signed) * *Boneitu, Chief of Battalion on Half-pay,
“* * Officer of the Legion of Honour.’


“At length, I received the price of my labours! The
letter of this brave commandant rendered me so happy, that
I promised myself to go and see him on my first journey to
France ; and you see me, young man, returning from Villa-
real, where I have passed some days that I reckon among the
number of my most fortunate. Oh! that you had been pre-
sent at our mutual recognition! You would have taken a
lively part in the joy of all that family, whose benedictions I
bring away! With what charming recollections M. Bonfilh
entertained me of the events of his life, entirely conformable,
by the bye, with the narration of Alexis. Thus, for example,


by Dr. Elliotson. 397


on the 13th of February, 1820, M. Bonfilh, captain of the
47th of the line, in garrison at Paris, was going the rounds
in the evening, in the Rue Saint Antoine, when they informed
him of the assassination of the Duke de Berri. Immediately
he repaired, with his troops, to the Rue Richlieu, and passed
the night at the post of the Royal Library.”

“Colonel, I am confounded. Mesmerism plays so great
a part in the recital that I have just heard, that you have
almost converted me: and, hence, on my arrival at Paris,
my first visit shall be to M. Marcillet.”

My amiable companion stopped at Orleans, where he was
to remain ; and I arrived alone at Paris, about seven o’clock
in the morning. At two o’clock in the afternoon, the same
day, I knocked at the door at M. Marcillet’s, where, by a
lucky chance, Alexis was sleeping, giving a séance.

The master of the house gave me a reception full of
kindness, and consented to place me en rapport with the
somnambulist.

Then, addressing myself to Alexis,—

“ My dear Sir,” said I, “could you divine who I am ?”

These were his first words :—

“You are a friend of Colonel Gurwood’s !”

* * * OK OK OK OK


J.S. De Gosse.”


The account given in Vol. II., p. 292, of Colonel Gurwood’s interview with
Alexis at my house, last year in June, a month after he had received Command-
ant Bonfilh’s letter, may be looked at as well as p. 482.


ERRATUM.


In Vol. III., No. 10, p. 153, in Mr. Noel’s paper, for ‘‘ lunatic views,’’
read somatic views.


BOOKS RECEIVED.


Kosmos. Parts II., IIJ., and IV.

A Plea for Phonotypy and Photography; or, Speech Printing and
Speech Writing. By Alexander John Ellis, B.A., Fellow of the Cam-
bridge Philosophical Society, and formerly Scholar of Trinity College,
Cambridge ; Honorary Member of the Phonographic Corresponding So-
ciety ; Author of the Alphabet of Nature, &c. 1845.

A Manual of Phonography or Writing by Sound; a natural method of
writing by signs that represent the sounds of language, and adapted to the
English language as a complete system of Phonatic Short-hand. By Isaac
Pitman. 7th Edition. 1845,

The Phonographic Class Book. By Isaac Pitman. 1845.

The “* Fonografic Corispondent.” Conducted by I. Pitman, Fonografic
Institution, Bath. No.18. June, 1845.

The Phonotypic Journal. Nos. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43.


398 Notices to Correspondents, &c.


Supplement to Vol. I. of the Phonotypic Journal. December, 1844.

Retrospect of the Progress of the Writing and Printing Reformation
during 1844.

Abridged Report of the Proceedings at the Brighton Phonographic
Soirée, held February 18th, 1845.

Phonography. Nos. 4, 5, 6.

The Phonographic and Phonotypic Alphabets.

A Penny Sheet of the First Style of Phonography.

Phonographic Wafers.

Edinburgh Phrenological Journal. July.

Third Annual Report of the Sheffield Phrenological Society, held in the
Assembly Rooms, Sheffield, during Session 1844-5, with the Proceedings
of the Year, Rules, List of Members, &c. Sheffield, 1845.

Lettre 4 Timon sur son Pamphlet Feu, Feu. Par J. B. Mége, D. M. P.
Paris, 1845.

Contributions to the Mathematics of Phrenology, chiefly intended to
aid Students. Illustrated with a Plate. By James Straton, Secretary of
the Phrenological Society, Aberdeen. Aberdeen, 1845.

The American Journal of Insanity, Edited by the Officers of the New
York State Lunatic Asylum, Utica. Vol. I., Nos.2and4. Vol. II., No. 1.
We acknowledged in No.7 the receipt of Vol. I., No. 1, but have not
received Vol. 1., No. 3.

Regeneration of Society, the only correction for the Distress of the
Country ; or, an Appeal to the English Nation in the cause of Humanity-
Reform, Religious and Political; a Restitution for the Debt she owes to
Germany and France, for the work of first Reformation and the enactments
of the Revolution. By John Lhotsky, Ph. D. 1845.

The Life of Moses. 1845.

The New York Dissecter. A Quarterly Journal of Medicine, Surgery,
Magnetism, Mesmerism, and the collateral Sciences. New York, 1845.

Mesmer, Galvani et les Théologiens. Par M. l’Abbé Compte de Robiano.
Bruxelles, 1845,

Mesmeric Experiences. By Spencer T. Hall, Author of ‘‘ The Forester’s
Offering,” ‘‘ Rambles in the Country,” &c., and Editor of the “‘ Phreno-
Magnet.” Price 2s. 6d.

We are requested by Mr. Arthur Wallbridge to state that his work
called ‘‘ Torrington Hall” is a fiction.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


The obliging communications of Mr. Childs, Mr. Chandler, Dr. Elliotson,
Mr. D. Hands, Mr. Kiste, Mr. Magendie, and Mr. Topham, will appear in
our next,

Madame F.’s case lies at the publisher’s for Mr. V.

Mr. B.’s paper is good ; but contains only what has been often urged.

A. B. Age does not destroy mesmeric susceptibility. Dr. Elliotson
informs us that Mr. Jago lately sent a gentleman 63 years of age into the
mesmeric sleep, at Bodmin, the first time, in about ten minutes; and after
a dozen trials, in half a minute; and that Mr, Kiste lately mesmerised a
lady at Plymouth nearer 70 than 60, with the effect not only of producing
mesmeric sleep and curing her of debility and pains which had tormented
her for years, and of rendering her a beautiful sleep-waker, and after
some sittings a clairvoyante of the highest order.


BENJAMIN ELLISON,
(aged 6/


Receiving sentence g Death, ifr the murder of Ely Rath Serman


Madeley bith, JWollangten J trana

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. XII.


JANUARY, 1846. s


I. On the application of Phrenology in the choice of Par-
liamentary Representatives.*


“ What the Atomic Theory has effected for the science of Chemistry, such is Phrenology
calculated to effect for all those sciences whose laws depend upon the constitution of the
haman mind; and these comprising Education, Legislation, and Ethics, are beyond comparison
the most important of all kinds of knowledge to the happiness and welfare of the human race.”


NorwitustaNnp1nG the number of years phrenology has been
before the public, the importance of its objects, and the
simple, easy, and conclusive tests of its truth, which are
within the reach of all who are not too indolent and apathetic
to employ them; such are the prejudices of mankind, and
so small is the portion of the human race who ever emanci-
pate themselves from their leading strings, that I am fully
aware the title of this essay will be quite sufficient to excite
— on the countenances of many of the literati of th
ay.

"Truth, however, is in its essence eternal; and it is some
consolation to the philosopher to know, that the merits of a
proposition depend essentially on the nature and relations of
things in themselves, and not at all on the wideness of its
divergence from preconceived notions, or the sneering recep-
tion it may meet with from those superficial intellects, who
are indebted for all their ideas to time and place. To be en-
slaved by the prejudices of their era is the infirmity of feeble
minds, as surely as to overleap these barriers, is the attribute
of great ones.

* This essay was written in 1839, on the occasion of a prize of £20
being offered by the Editor of the Phrenological Journal for the best essay on
the subject. -The essay was not successful; and never having been pub-
lished, we gladly avail ourselves of the permission of the author to insert
it in our pages.—Zoist.


VOL, III. FF


400 On the application of Phrenology


To those who are disposed to.dispute the utility of the
proposed application of phrenology I shall merely observe,
that if it is desirable to select for the station of parliamentary
representative, a man who combines certain talents with
certain moral endowments, (which I hold to be undeniable),
and phrenology affords the means of making such a selection,
(and this is capable of demonstration), the question is set at
rest.

Let it also be borne in mind that the same arguments
which show that phrenology is capable of useful application,
in the choice of members of the British Parliament, are equally
conclusive in establishing its claims to utility, in the selection
of legislative representatives universally ; and when it is consi-
dered that a representative form of government is the only one
under which any nation having any pretensions to civilization,
can ever be contented to exist, a faint glimpse of the import-
ance of phrenology in one of the many modes of its applica-
tion to the affairs of life is obtained. This view of its import-
ance is however immeasurably increased by the reflection,
that it is equally capable of being usefully applied in the
selection of the occupants of subordinate offices, as in the
selection of individuals to the important posts of legislators ;
and when we consider how numerous are the cases in which
mankind are necessitated to confide to individuals the dis-
charge of certain duties involving their own interest and
comfort, and that this necessity extends through all the ra-
mifications of social life, we shall perceive that the capacity
of phrenology for useful application in this particular, is
co-extensive with the existence of society.

‘The utility of the employment of phrenology in the choice
of Parliamentary Representatives’ is then, properly speaking,
a branch of the more extensive question, which treats ‘ of the
utility of the application of phrenology to the selection of the
oceupants of all stations, or offices, having certain duties
attached to them.’

When changes in existing institutions are proposed, it
naturally becomes a subject for enquiry whether the defects
in the present system are such as to justify its being inter-
fered with; for if though not absolutely perfect, it approaches
so near perfection as to accomplish in a very tolerable degree
the objects of its institution, and gives at the same time
satisfaction to the great majority of the people, the prudent
and the circumspect may well be excused for resisting the
introduction of changes. If however we consider for a mo-
ment what is the object of all government,—‘ that it is the
happiness of the people,’—and then enquire how far this


in the choice of Parliamentary Representatives. 401


object has been hitherto attained, I think we shall speedily
come to the conclusion, that the science of government is the
least entitled of all sciences, to plead present perfection, as an ex-
cuse for neglecting to listen to suggestions for its improvement.

Coeval with the formation of society and the institution
of laws for its regulation, is the selection of individuals to
execute and apply them. An investiture with power is almost
synonymous with an investiture with the capability of ‘doing
evil;? and the moral and intellectual qualifications of the
individuals elected must ever be the only safeguard society
can possess that evil will not be done; for how limited soever
the trust reposed, and how carefully soever the abuse of this
trust may be endeavoured to be restricted, yet a discretional
power within certain limits, and for a certain period, must una-
voidably be confided, and within these limits, and during
this period, may beabused. How frequently and how fatally
for the happiness of man it has been abused, it is almost super-
fluous to mention. History is little else than a chronicle of
such acts,—a record informing us how often the sword con-
fided to authority for the safeguard of society, and to be the
terror of evil doers, has been converted into a weapon of ty-
ranny, and its blade reddened in enslaving those who were
entitled to its protection :—how often the power of levying
taxes for the benefit of the common weal, has been made a
plea for the most monstrous extortion,—for seizing the mite
of the widow, and wringing the hardly-earned pittance from
the hands of the labourer, to glut the insatiable avarice, or
pamper the pride of some sordid and selfish ruler, or for the
still more execrable purpose of bribing the steel of the merce-
nary, to enable a tyrant to enslave a people, who first con-
fided power to his hands for the preservation of their liberti
—how often in fact delegated authority has been abused, and
the happiness of the many, sacrificed to the selfishness of the
few. And with such examples of the misery arising from
committing power to the unprincipled before our eyes, are we
to treat lightly a science which renders it easy,

**4 des signes certains
Reconnaitre le coeur des perfides humains.”
A science which will enable a nation to select for an important
post, an individual with the absolute certainty, that he would
rather lay his own head on the block than betray the trust
confided to his charge.

Upon taking a review of the past history of man, and
seeing how universally hitherto his career has been marked
by disorder and misery, many perhaps will be inclined to
believe such a state of things unavoidable, and to consider it

FF2


402 On the application of Phrenology


folly to believe in man’s possessing a capacity for compara-
tive perfectibility, and presumption to attempt to bring about
such a state. Those however who imagine that human affairs
are constantly to move round in a circle, commit the common
error of analogical reasoners, that of arguing from precedents,
without sufficiently considering whether the parallel is so
exact in every particular as to warrant the deduction of simi-
lar inferences.

In the present instance the discovery of printing and
phrenology are either singly sufficient to destroy the parallel
between past and present times, but taken together, the
change they are calculated to effect in the condition of man
is so mighty as to baffle conception, and render futile all an-
ticipations founded on states of things so totally dissimilar.
Instead then of adopting the opinion so paralyzing to exertion,
so inimical to improvement, thatthe confusion which has hither-
to pervaded human affairs, and the misery which has so abun-
dantly fallen to the lot of the species are evils inseparable
from the nature of humanity and the state of society, man
ought rather to regard them as originating in his own conduct,
and exert himself first to discover, and next to remove, their
cause; and as soon as men shall have become fully convinced
that ignorance and misery stand in the relation of cause and
effect, to each other, and that knowledge is the only remedy
for the evils which environ them, they will have made a most
important step towards effecting these objects.

Foremost amongst the sources of misery, which it is to be
hoped increased knowledge will remove, are those political
commotions, in which institutions, long grown distasteful to
the bulk of a people, are swept away with a violence which
shakes the whole fabric of society. Phrenology, by specifying
the fundamental powers of the human species, gives us the
data for constructing a form of government as immutable
in its general principles, and as capable of modification in its
details, as the constitution of man, on which it is founded.
To ensure stability, there ought, in all governments, to be
a constant recurrence to first principles; or rather first prin-
ciples should never be lost sight of. Such governments carry
within themselves ample means for self-modification, to suit
the modified modes of thinking and feeling, which time will
inevitably introduce amongst their subjects. To attempt to
bind down posterity to the same regulations which men think
fit to impose upon themselves, is an act of folly and presump-
tion; and laws which have become offensive to the genius of
a people, can only be persisted in at the risk of a convulsion,
and with the certainty of that gradual extinction of manufac-


in the choice of Parliamentary Representatives. 403


tures and commerce, which is the inseparable attendant on a
state of protracted instability.

The endeavour then to uphold institutions in opposition
to the wishes of a people, can only originate in folly or
wickedness, and must ever end in disappointment and defeat.
The moment the bulk of a nation are agreed as to the changes
they demand in its institutions, and sufficiently organized to
be able to rely upon acting in concert, from that moment
nothing can resist their will. The single word comBINaTION,
is the death-warrant of all tyranny ; and tyrants well aware
of this fact, have always endeavoured to prevent their sub-
jects, or rather slaves, from associating themselves together.

A nation can only be coerced, by being prevented from
combining. No nation is ever tyrannized over by a domestic
ruler, and but seldom by a foreign power, in which the sor-
rowing patriots and enraged sufferers, who wear their chains
in silence, but would gladly risk their lives to snap them,
had they the least chance of success, are not tenfold more
numerous than the supporters of their oppressor; and hence
it is only by preventing the people from organizing, and being
able to rely upon each other’s co-operation, that tyranny can
ever exist ; and it is evident that the more intelligent mankind
become, and the more the means of intercommunication are
increased, the less easily will they be able to be subjected to
the will of others.

Happily then for the happiness of man, fortunately for
the lovers of liberty, a high state of civilization, with its
attendants the printing press and the rail-road, will produce
an atmosphere in which oppression must languish and decay,
and freedom only can flourish. And O! let none seek to
retard the growth of the glorious tree of liberty, under the
mistaken supposition that there is something in its fruit in-
imical to the repose of society, and that personal freedom
and social order are incompatible. Nothing is more common
than such an opinion, but nothing is more opposed to the
truth. To suppose that a nation requires to be coerced to
preserve order is a fatal error. Legislators have only to allow
the mass of the people to assist in framing the laws, to ensure
their assistance in enforcing them. They have but to show
them that they have an interest in preserving order, to ensure
its preservation. Restrictions which affect equally all the
members of a community, and are known to be wisely
adapted to the benefit of the whole, are never murmured
against, but on the contrary always enlist the feelings of the
people in their support. Class legislation, exclusive privi-
leges and monopolies, must on the contrary, from the very


44 On the application of Phrenology


nature of man, excite jealousy and dissatisfaction, and by
creating conflicting interests, give origin at their imposition
to a struggle which will only cease with their overthrow, and
which by exciting internal discord will paralyze the resources
of a state, and render it powerless abroad by being divided
at home.

The stability of institutions then, is not only compatible
with the liberty of those who live under them, but actually
becomes encreased in proportion as the basis of the latter
becomes widened, and diminished in the same ratio as it is
curtailed. In fact the contrary opinion is only one of those
gross errors, the prevalence of which shows how prone men
are to be led away by superficial analogies, and how few scru-
tinize the evidence on which the opinions they adopt are
founded. Because the encreased power which every fresh
acquisition of liberty gives to a nation still partially enslaved,
from being immediately very properly employed by it as a
lever for overturning remaining abuses, frequently has the
effect of producing temporary commotion rather than tran-
quillity ; it has been most sagaciously concluded, that the
same commotions would continue, when from all exclusive
laws being abolished, there would be no longer any abuses
to struggle against. So far, however, are mankind from
being partial to discord and political convulsions, that they
often submit to great abuses rather than have recourse to
those means for their overthrow; and they can be much more
justly charged, with a blind partiality for whatever is anti-
quated, and a culpable apathy with regard to their rights
and privileges, than with any predilection for change or undue
jealousy of their liberties. Seldom indeed till want and
misery are at their doors, do the generality of the people con-
cern themselves at all about the management of their poli-
tical affairs; and it is quite certain that great abuses must
exist in the institutions of any state before the mass of its
inhabitants can be roused to exert themselves for their re-
moval. Repose, then, and not commotion is the natural
object of man’s desire, and if blest with the means of obtain-
ing the necessaries of life, the majority of the individuals
composing a nation will each seek to pass a life of peace and
tranquillity under his own vine and under his own fig-tree ;
and the same motives of convenience and desire of security
which prompted men to enter into the social compact will
always be sufficient to ensure its preservation. The timid
then may rest assured, that the great bulk of a nation must
always be desirous of social order if the condition of the
mass of the people is such as it should be, and that the


in the choice of Parliamentary Representatives. 405


number of restless spirits in a community will always be
comparatively few, and utterly unable to put the body in
motion, except when that body is suffering for want of the
necessaries of life; and as it may be laid down as an axiom,
that unless the fruits of the earth are destroyed by some
very unusual vicissitudes of the seasons, no individual can
want for sustenance, without individual or collective mis-
management; when industrious individuals find themselves
confronted with starvation, it is not only natural but proper
that they should direct their attention to that part of the
frame-work of the social system, the erroneous construction
of which is the cause of their suffering.

We have now established the competency of phrenology
to be applied to the end proposed,—and pointed out the very
extended bearing of the question, which its proposed applica-
tion involves.. We have shewn that the existing imperfections
in legislation, are such as to authorize the propriety of the
adoption of suggestions for its improvement ;—that in all
societies the necessity of entrusting to individuals a certain
amount of power must always exist, and that the only security
the body can ever possess against its abuse, is in the qualifi-
cations of the individual confided in; and consequently that
the possession of a criterion for correctly discovering these
qualifications, is of the highest importance, (a point we have
still further illustrated by recurring to the many evils, mankind
have suffered, by committing power to the unprincipled.)
We have shewn that the evils which have marked the past
history of mankind, are not inseparable from the nature of
man, and the state of society, but the result of faulty insti-
tutions, founded in ignorance, and consequently that there
is legitimate ground for inferring, that the condition of the
human race will be happier in future, than in times past,
and in confirmation of this view, we have demonstrated, that
the progress of civilization, and knowledge, has a direct ten-
dency to remove those prolific sources of misery,—political
convulsions, by rendering it impossible to enforce institutions,
at variance with the wishes of the majority of a people, by
discovering to men (no longer kept in a state of irritation by
coercion), that their true interest must ever be associated
with peace, and order, and by unfolding those immutable
principles [founded on the nature of man], on’ which le-
gislation should be based; and if we have devoted consider-
able space to the examination of these general questions, it
has been from a conviction, that a demonstration of principles
is necessary, before an attentive consideration can be secured
for the details to be employed in carrying them into operation,


406 On the application of Phrenology


and the belief, that it would be labour lost to discuss the
merits of a remedy, for evils, the existence of which is
doubted, the possibility of removing them denied, or the pro-
priety of doing so disputed; and because we are convinced
that it would be useless to expect a cool, and dispassionate
examination of a question by men, till they are disabused of
their fears and prejudices relating to it. It now remains for
us to consider society, as it immediately exists at the present
day, and among ourselves as a people, and from what has
been already stated, it is evident that the existence of grave
political evils must be considered as establishing the necessity
for amending the institutions, which have given birth to them;
and by tracing the cause of their origin, in the faulty con-
stitution of our legislative body, we shall be able to judge
how far phrenology (a science which unfolds the nature, and
specifies the fundamental faculties of the mind of man, and
teaches how to discover the capacities, and dispositions of
individuals, by ineffacable indications) is capable of being use-
fully employed as a remedy.

No government is so demoralizing to a nation, none so
complete a tyranny, as a corrupt representative one, because
people suffer themselves to be deluded by the semblance of
liberty, whilst they are deprived of the substance. That the
British nation are at the present moment suffering from
having been long ruled by such a government, none com-
petent to give an opinion can have any doubt; and saving
and except the valuable privilege of being allowed to discuss
their grievances, it would be difficult to point out in what the
much-boasted liberty of Englishmen consists. Certainly in
no other nation is so large a proportion of the produce of
their labour taken from the producing classes for the support
of the government; in none are the poorer classes more de-
moralized, in none are they consigned to such unremitting
toil, and in none do they fare more scantily ;—a state of
things which has produced, as might be expected, great and
general discontent.

This result however is to be rejoiced at rather than other-
wise, for were it not a universal law, that the endurance of
misery, and the subjection to injustice, had a direct tendency
to engender this feeling, these evils might be perpetuated for
ever, instead of which it is wisely ordained, that, from the
very nature of things, they shall carry within themselves the
seeds of their own decay, and after the lapse of time be
unfailingly destroyed by their own effects. The knowledge
of the ultimate extinction of evils, is however but poor con-
solation to those who are suffering from their existence and


in the choice of Parliamentary Representatives. 407


disturbed by the struggles for their overthrow. It does not
ameliorate the lot of the over-worked and under-paid artizan,
whose health is irremediably impaired from having been sub-
jected from infancy to the close air of a factory, from 12 to
14 hours out of the 24, to know that in future ages of the
world the hours of toil will be abridged, and man will be
enabled to devote a proper portion of his time to the cultiva-
tion of his intellect, his sentiments, and his physical health ;
neither is it of any avail to the wretch pining for want of
sustenance, to be told that future generations will be blest
with plenty and abundance.

In short, it is painful to think on the mass of misery
and suffering, at present endured by a large portion of the
community, and still more painful to reflect, that it owes its
existence and finds an obstacle to its removal in the obstinacy,
ignorance, and selfishness of our legislators.

We are in the habit of considering ourselves, as a nation,
in a highly civilized state, and relatively to antecedent periods,
and as far as physical science alone is concerned, this belief
may not be altogether unfounded ; but whatever strides we
may have made in the physical sciences, with regard to moral
science, and more particularly in the department of legislation,
we are in a state of the grossest ignorance and barbarism ;
and what is worse than the mere total absence of knowledge,
its place is supplied by a mass of prejudice, which presents
a serious obstacle to improvement, and the removal of which
must necessarily precede the recognition and application of
any sound and practically useful principles. That such is the
state of Society at present, is not certainly generally recog-
nized, but this forms no argument against the correctness of
the picture ; for a certain amount of knowledge, with reference
to a subject, is requisite to enable men to discover the extent
of their ignorance respecting it; hence the most ignorant are
ever the least sensible of their condition, and this is the pre-
sent state of the mass of the people with regard to the
science of government.

Numberless instances of defects and abuses might be
named, the existence of which will be looked back upon with
wonder by succeeding generations, and each of which is
singly sufficient to establish the barbarism of the present.
The only fixed principle of our legislators appears to be, to
sacrifice the interests of the many to that of the few, and to
uphold the vested rights (monopolies) of classes, founded in
usurpation, at the expense of the rights of the community,
founded in nature. Our civil jurisprudence, on which we so
much pride ourselves, appears to be rather a scheme for en-


408 On the application of Phrenology


riching a class, at the expense of the nation, than for ren-
dering substantial justice to any. And the justly-boasted
integrity of our judges, and our much-lauded freedom of
appeal, are of little avail, whilst the laws are framed either
with such exquisite folly, or such consummate wickedness,
that it is notoriously more prudent for a man to relinquish
his right than to sue for it. Our criminal laws are, if pos-
sible, in a more disgraceful state than the civil, whilst the
mode in which they are carried into execution, surpasses in
faultiness the laws themselves: reason tells us that the ex-
istence of ignorance in a community invariably diminishes
its security, inasmuch as an ignorant populace will be ever a
mass of inflammable matter, capable of being fired at will by
the artifices of the designing, and we are in possession of the
clearest evidence to prove, that a judicious education has a
direct tendency to diminish crime, and yet we neglect to make
provision for the education of the rising generation on the
plea of economy!!! And whilst we pay many millions an-
nually in inflicting punishment for crime, refuse to expend a
mere fraction of the sum, in educating them to prevent it.
A species of economy on a par, in point of wisdom, with
that of a merchant, who, to save expense, should send his
ship to sea without caulking or coppering her, and then to
prevent her from sinking send a dozen extra hands on board
to work the pumps.

Another point which our legislators may justly be blamed
for disregarding, is that of Medical Police, and as if the
total neglect of this important subject was not a sufficient
display of their folly, light, ventilation, and cleanliness, have
been made the objects of taxation. And we must not close
our catalogue of evils, without adverting to the corn laws;
which, opposed as they are to the clearest and simplest maxims
of legislation and humanity, are alone sufficient to stamp the
era of their existence as barbarous, the people who submitted
to them as unenlightened, and the legislature who framed
them as miserably short-sighted and intolerably selfish. Two
centuries ago all Europe denounced the Dutch for burning a
cargo of spices to keep up the price. The English, at the
present day, (O! indelible disgrace, and acme of wickedness!)
discharge the contents of their granaries into the ocean,
when thousands around can with difficulty procure sustenance.
The Dutch sought to gratify their covetousness at the expense
of the luxury of foreign nations. The English sacrifice to
the demon of avarice, at the expense of the lives of their
fellow countrymen.

From considering the state of our institutions, let us turn


in the choice of Parliamentary Representatives. 409


to the consideration of the condition of our legislators; and
great as are the evils, and monstrous as are the abuses, which
afflict the former, our surprise at their existence will cease as
we come to examine the character of the latter. Instead of
a display of those high moral qualities which might be ex-
pected in the representatives of a great nation, their conduct
is characterised by a disregard of principle, disgraceful alike
to the age and nation. Speeches are unblushingly delivered,
which our special pleadings for the support of monopolies, and
abuses, and individuals do not scruple to undertake the ad-
vocacy of schemes of private jobbing and corruption in the
hopes of sharing in the plunder. National prosperity is in-
variably sacrificed whenever it clashes with personal interest ;
an artificial and discreditable distinction is drawn between
public and private morality ; and the sacred name of religion
made a stalking-horse to effect the purposes of party. Instead
of a display of those intellectual endowments, so requisite
for the adequate discharge of the momentous duties of their
station, they have no fixed principles of legislation to guide
them, but steer according to passion, prejudice, and caprice ;
pay a greater deference to musty precedents, than to the
clearest dictates of reason, resist all suggestions for improve-
ment, and are chiefly remarkable for the absence of all those
qualities, they ought to possess; and their debates instead
of being conducted in a manner befitting the importance
of the subjects of their deliberations, exhibit a total want of
any enlarged, comprehensive, and systematic mode of treating
things, and consist of a mere miserable skirmishing among
the outworks of a question, whilst the really important points
of the position are left untouched.

As our surprize at the innumerable evils in our institu-
tions ceases, when we come to contemplate the depraved
character of the legislators by which they are framed, so our
astonishment at the character of the latter diminishes, when
we come to examine the mode in which they are elected, and
the criterion by which their competency is measured. To
enable a man to exercise a calling or profession in a proper
manner, some little previous study and training is generally
considered necessary; but the science of government seems
to be regarded as an exception to this rule; so that judging
from our practice, it might be supposed, that by how much
the importance of the duties attached to a station become
mcreased, by so much does the necessity for any previous
study for competently discharging them become lessened.
Legislators appear to consider themselves born ready made,
and being enabled, owing to another and a false standard of


410 On the application of Phrenology


rank being admitted, in place of that instituted by nature,
to ensure for themselves a certain station in society, no neces-
sity exists for them to make themselves worthy of it; and
the result of this state of things to our laws and institutions,
is similar to that which would take place in our arts and ma-
nufactures, did no necessity exist for our artists and artizans
to make themselves proficient in their various occupations to
pursue them with success. These latter display skill and in-
genuity in the exercise of their respective trades and avoca-
tions, because they bring to their task a knowledge of the
effect they wish to produce, and a competent acquaintance
with the tools and materials with which it is executed. Did
we see a number of workmen engaged in erecting a building
without knowing the purposes for which it was designed, or
the nature of the materials used in its construction, we
should certainly anticipate a failure: and in like manner,
when we see a number of legislators engaged in framing
laws, three-fourths of whom never asked themselves the
question, What is the ultimate object of legislation ?—much
less ever proposed to themselves any means for carrying this
object into effect—we can only anticipate mischief from the
result of their deliberations. In short, if the propriety of
regulations is to be judged by their effects, then most assur-
edly the existing criterion of legislative competency, consisting
as it does solely of a property qualification, must be condemned;
and it appears almost superfluous to enter into arguments
to shew the impropriety of a system, which creates constitu-
encies who barter their franchise for gold; which promotes
individuals to a seat in parliament, whose only recommenda-
tion is their capacity for giving utterance with volubility to
promises they have no intention of fulfilling, and of making
protestations of feelings which never throbbed in their bosoms;
under which, the enormous evils existing at the present time
have sprung up; and between which, and the qualifications
which ought to be possessed by the elective body, no sort
of relation exists. Were however any further considerations
required to shew the evils of a property qualification, they
might be found in its tendency to establish an artificial and
injurious standard of rank, which by granting to wealth what
should be accorded to merit alone; lessens the practice of
virtue, and retards that desire for physical health, strength
and beauty, and for energy of character, intellectual acute-
ness and moral excellence, so conducive to the true happiness
of mankind. Happiness is the aim of man; to attain this
object, the efforts of each individual composing a common-
wealth will ever be directed ; and as long as wealth and hap-


in the choice of Parliamentary Representatives. 411


piness continue to be regarded as synonymous, or inseparably
connected, many and serious are the evils which must result
to society from so grievous an error.

From tracing the evils of our institutions to the defective
character of our legislative body, and the defective character
of the latter to the defective criterion employed in its selec-
tion, we naturally arrive at the question, What are the best
means to be employed to procure the election of the most com-
petent individuals to the office of legislators ?

Now the selection of the most efficient individuals to the
office of legislators, is to be effected in two ways; by the
requiring of certain qualities in the elected, and in the body
of electors, and preparatory to considering the best method of
ensuring the possession by the two parties of those qualifications
which will be most conducive to the attainment of the desired
object, it is evidently necessary to decide first, in what these
qualifications consist, and secondly, on what conditions they
depend. Without then going into details, it may be stated
in general terms, without fear of contradiction, that it is
requisite for a legislator,

lst. To be endowed with a certain portion of intellect and
acquired knowledge.

2ndly. To have the capacity for making practical applica-
tion of this intellect and acquired knowledge to business.

3rdly. To have the requisite integrity and sense of duty
to ensure the right application of the intellect, knowledge,
and energy of character possessed.

That it is requisite for one who has a voice in the choice
of legislators,

lst. To prefer the interests of the community to all bribes
and selfish considerations.

2ndly. To be able to discover whether a candidate for the
office of representative has the requisite intellect, knowledge,
energy, and integrity for the station; and to be able to do
this, presupposes both a competent knowledge of the duties
his representative will have to discharge, and the capability
of discovering by external indications the dispositions and
talents of individuals; (it should however be observed, that
the establishment by law of a comparatively efficient test for
the fitness of representatives, would go far to do away with
the necessity for the possession by the constituent of this
latter capability.)

Having decided the qualities requisite for a representative
to be a certain portion of intellect, cultivated to a certain
extent and in a specific direction, a certain amount of energy
of character, and a certain measure of integrity; and that


412 On the application of Phrenology


nearly the same qualifications, though perhaps in rather a less
prominent degree, are essential to the elector; let us proceed
to enquire, on what conditions these mental qualities depend ;
premising, that if it should prove that the conditions on
which they depend are discoverable conditions, then it neces-
sarily follows that the indication of the presence of these con-
ditions is the desideratum of which we are in quest.

Now we fearlessly assert, and the truth of the assertion
is easily capable of conclusive demonstration, Ist, that the
condition on which the mental qualities in question, and all
other mental qualities, are dependent, is a certain develop-
ment of brain; and 2ndly, that there are discoverable indi-
cations by which the existence of this requisite development
may be ascertained : and these positions being established, it
follows as a corollary, that the indications of cerebral deve-
lopment, or in other words, the size and shape of the head,
are the proper measure of fitness for the offices of constituent and
representative, as well as for all other offices requiring certain
mental endowments for the adequate discharge of their duties.

The preceding assertion may probably appear to some to
border on the extravagant; but I would suggest to these
individuals, whether it may not be possible that the absurdity
which strikes their eye is not inherent in the subject itself,
but a quality imparted to it by the deceptive and party-
coloured glasses of ignorance and prejudice through which
they regard it. Nature knows neither absurdities nor excep-
tions in her laws, and all conclusions legitimately deduced
from them, are susceptible of practical application ; and the
ignorance of a people, rendering impracticable the adoption
of a proposition for their advantage, can take nothing from
its abstract merits.

From the consideration of the requisite qualifications for
the electors and the elected, and the mode in which the pre-
sence of these qualities is indicated, constituting the most
eflicient test of fitness for the discharge of the duties of the
two offices, we come to the consideration of the best method
of practically applying this test; a question which presents
some difficulties, and in answering which, many conditions
have to be considered. Practical phrenology itself is yet
comparatively in a state of infancy—a circumstance which at
first sight seems to augur ill for the success of our enquiry ;
but upon a narrower examination, I think we shall find the
difficulty presented by the present imperfect state of this
science much less than might be supposed ; for the point on
which practical phrenology is least advanced—the mode of
accurately appreciating the development of individual organs


in the choice of Parliamentary Representatives. 413


when modified in appearance by peculiarities in that of the
adjacent ones—is a point not necessary to be had recourse
to; whilst the simpler branch of the subject—the method of
ascertaining those general features of development on which
it would be most advisable for a standard to be framed—is
comparatively well understood and easily put in practice.

It is evidently desirable that the test adopted should be
so simple and defined in its character, as to leave nothing to
the variable judgment of individual examiners ; and to attain
this object, it will be necessary to make measurement from
undebatable points the standard, and to be content with ob-
taining the general character without descending to specific
qualities. Indeed, I should propose to restrict the test to
the estimation of the general force of character and the
amount of morality, as I conceive that by omitting any spe-
cial regulations for estimating the intellect, the simplicity of
the measurements required would be much encreased, without
any counterbalancing disadvantages ; for independently of a
certain general relation, which would in a great majority of
cases subsist between the intellect and force of character as a
whole, other methods may be employed for ascertaining not
only that the intellect of those who aspire to the office of re-
presentatives has the requisite acuteness, but also (and this
should be considered indispensable) that it has been suffi-
ciently directed towards the science of political economy, to
have acquired a competent knowledge of the duties they will
have to perform. In fact, a criterion for morality is in reality
the all-important point, as being the only one on which men
have the power of greatly deceiving each other ; and it is with
a view to measure this quality as accurately as is compatible
with simplicity and practical convenience, that a test should
principally be framed.

The test I should propose, would be in the first place to
require the head to possess a certain circumference ; and in
the second place, to require that the sum of the two measure-
ments, from the root of the nose to the occipital spine (over
the head), and from the orifice of one ear to that of the op-
posite ear (over the head), subtracted twice the depth of the
orifice of the ear below a right line from the top of the eye-
brow to the occipital spine, should bear a certain proportion
to the measurement first obtained (that of the circumference
of the head).

This system has the merit of possessing great simplicity
and facility of application, only four measurements being
required to be made, and these all from points concerning
the situation of which no debate can arise. I will not enter


414 On the application of Phrenolegy


into the consideration of the precise length of measurement
most advisable to be required for the circumference, nor the
proportion which it would be desirable should subsist between
this measurement and the succeeding ones, because these
points are open to much debate; and it would be advisable
before determining them, to possess a considerable mass of
information as to the general measurement of the head
among the inhabitants of the empire. Probably a circum-
ference of 21 inches would be about a desirable standard for
an elector, and 22 for a representative. As a guide to the
measurement and proportion to be fixed on, I would suggest
that the standard should be so framed, as to include half the
adult male population amongst the electors, and render one
fourth of the electors eligible to the office of representative.

Although the desirability of having a test extremely sim-
ple and easy of practical application may render it advisable
to restrict the legal criterion to the appreciation of those
prominent features of development—the relative size of the
different cerebral organs—it by no means follows, that a con-
sideration of the minuter shades of development may not be
most advantageously had recourse to, for the assistance of
private judgment. On the contrary, it would constitute a
most valuable adjunct to the established test: and it ought
to be required, that casts from the shaved heads of all candi-
dates for a seat in parliament should be open to public inspec-
tion for a certain period prior to each election.

I will take this opportunity of observing, that it must not
be supposed that the institution of a test of fitness for the
exercise of the office of elector at all trenches upon those
common rights of men maintained by the advocates of uni-
versal suffrage. An equality of political rights is clearly the
only rational foundation on which any association or compact
between individuals for mutual advantage can ever originate,
and the only one on which it ought to continue to subsist ;
but at the same time it is not less evident, that all regula-
tions approved of by the majority, and which are equally
applied to all, must be held to be binding on the whole social
body ; and therefore supposing the regulation in question to
have received this sanction, the consequent exclusion from
the franchise of a considerable portion of the community,
would be no more an infringement on their rights, than their
exclusion from participating in any other public deliberative
act performed by a body selected for the purpose.

Many will no doubt be ready with criticisms on the pro-
posed phrenological test ; but I would suggest to these indi-
viduals, that before they advance their objections, it would


in the choice of Parliamentary Representatives.


.


be regarded with je


ance toward unmasking their own features.


operation.


met with, will constitute a severe satire upon the age.


undergo.
VOL, III, GG


be well for them to prepare themselves with the details of
some other measure of qualification, and provide themselves
with arguments to shew that their criterion is better adapted
to effect the end required than the phrenological. In the
meantime, I am under no apprehension that the phrenolo-
gical test will lose anything in public estimation by having
its claims discussed; but think, on the contrary, that the
more it is compared with any property or knowledge qualifica-
tion that could be devised, (and neither of them are capable
of being framed so as to give the slightest indication of the
moral qualities,) the more its superiority to either will become
apparent. ‘That many will always remain opposed to its in-
troduction there can be no doubt, for it is in the nature of


gusy by those who feel conscious of hav-
ing much to concea; and the intellectually feeble and the
morally depraved can never be expected to lend their assist-


things that a ith el for discovering innate qualities should


I cannot omit this opportunity of observing, that among
the benefits to be expected from the introduction of cerebral
development as a criterion of competency, not the least would
be those which would accrue from having the value of the
nobility of nature publicly recognized and forced upon the
attention of the people. Nothing is more certain than that
the happiness and power of a nation are almost totally depend-
ent upon the cerebral conformation of the individuals compos-
ing it ;* and it were well if more attention were paid to those
causes (such as luxury, deficient food, excess of toil often at
an immature age and in an impure atmosphere, &c.) which it
is to be feared are silently at work in this country, deteriorat-
ing the development of the human frame as a whole in large
masses of the people, and necessarily impairing alike the
vigour of the vegetative, muscular, and nervous systems, and
producing weak minds in feeble bodies ; for be it remembered,
that the ignorance of our legislature of those laws which
regulate the decay of empires, will not exempt us from their


Before concluding this essay, I will take the liberty of
recording my conviction, that the reception phrenology has


a science, having for its objects the determination of the men-
tal constitution of man, and by consequence the development


_* It must be recollected that the character of laws and institutions is
principally, if not entirely, the result of the prevailing national qualities,
and has a constant tendency to assimilate itself to the modifications these


416 Phrenology as it affects Free-will.


of the principles on which all human institutions should be
framed ; one moreover so easy of verification, and so abound-
ing in evidence of its truth, should remain for forty years
before the world, and then at the end 6f this period, that the
main body of the people, who are accustomed to rest their
belief in all sciences on the authority of others, should be
taught by those who assume the right of instructing them,
to regard it as a chimera,—is indeed a phenomenon which
will justly form a subject of wonder to future generations, and
of reproach to the present.*


T. S. Pripeavx.
June, 1839.


II. Phrenology as it affects Free-will. With a Note by
Dr. Elliotson.


PuHRENOLOGIsts assert that each lobe or portion of the
brain possesses an innate bias towards certain outward things,
and that the peculiar tendency which these lobes exhibit in
different individuals, is the base of varied character. If this
assertion be true, then, what is called self-government can
be in reality nothing more than these organs acting upon and
governing each other; and if each of these faculties possess a
different essence distinct from, and inherent in each, it follows,
that varied inclinations must result and the tenor of these wili
of course be according to the nature of the essence that is
willing ; for the same function of the brain cannot incline and
decline (as no one essence can of itself act against, or contrary
to its nature) neither can it change or modify itself by its own
power.

Phrenologists tell us that we ought to control our faculties.
If by this, is meant that the organs of our brain are to con-
trol each other, the injunction is futile, because they are by
their very nature NECESSITATED to do so,—the most powerful
essences will govern the weaker. But if this is not what phre-
nologists intend to inculcate, the advice appears to me of an
extremely unphilosophical and unnatural kind, for it is to assert
that a portion of the brain is possessed of a peculiar nature,


* It must be remembered that this was written nearly seven years ago.
Phrenology since this period has made rapid strides towards being regarded
as an accepted science. A phrenological chair has lately been instituted in
one of our universities. The subject has been popularized by the allusions
of writers of fiction and others, and an expression of disbelief in the science
would not be considered a mark of ignorance by most persons having any
pretension to keep pace with the knowledge of the day.—T. 8S. P.


Phrenology as it affects Free-will. 417


and yet can by its own essence act against it when it is not
even possessed of the ingredients (if I may so speak) to do so.

People say “I can act against my inclination.” This is
not the case ; our passions may will one mode of action, and
our reason another; but if our judgment is stroncER than
our affections, the former will conquer; therefore we do not
go against the whole of our inclinations, but against some of
them : the strongest governs, and that is the inclination.

Phrenologists say “ you have a certain organ too power-
fully, and another too weakly developed, you must strengthen
the weak ones, and keep down, or only moderately excite the
the strong organs.” To this I simply ask how the strong can
make itself weak, and vice versa.

A celebrated phrenologist once told a lady that her organ
of comparison was too small, that she would not judge correctly
of anything. He immediately added, “ you must be careful to
come to accurate conclusions.” !! If the organ of comparison
was so small as to be incapable of judging accurately, how
could it give itself the power to judge rightly ?

Phrenologists say “you must exercise your weak develop-
ments ” but we cannot exercise them without inclination to do
so; and to will this, either an outward circumstance must be
more powerful than the organ or organs it addresses (and so
governs), or, the internal will control the outward.

If a lover of mine desires me to exercise some particular
mental organ ; that outward circumstance may be more power-
ful than my original inclination, but if an indifferent person
entreated me, perhaps, and most likely the inward circum-
stance of my dislike would ru/e the outward action. But as
long as the circumstances (both external and internal) remain
equally balanced, we must remain without sufficient stimulus
to execute the proposed action.

The true nature and control appears to me to be the in-
ward and outward circumstances acling upon each other, (i. e.
internal organization and external vibrations upon it) these
acting and re-acting. And according to the kind of outward
circumstance moving a particular organ or organs, and its or
their sympathy with or otherwise, so will that external thing
govern the internal, or the native rule the outward circum-
stance ; in either case, the strongest must act.

There is an important question embodied in the doctrine
of libertarian phrenology, which I think has not occurred to
the professors of that theory. If we all have (as phreno-
logists assert), the requisite organs for perfection, and that
we can exercise them for good; why do we not do so?
These theorists say that each organ of the brain is intended
GG2


418 Phrenology as it affects Free-will.


for good. “ Combativeness,” for instance, is to produce an
energetic spirit to battle for truth. “ Destructiveness,” to
destroy evil, &c. &c., and that to fight and to kill are the
abuses of these organs, but if we have free will (in the usual
acceptation of the term) what makes us abuse these natures ?
“Our evil inclinations? How can “ good tendencies” pro-
duce evil inclinations? or why do’nt we, (if we can, be our
organization what it may) incline for good? When we are
daily ruing the consequences of our evil deeds! From these
reflections it appears to me that a /ogical and consistent phre-
nologist, must either believe in the doctrine of necessity, or
give up phrenology altogether.

EmILine.


P.S. The authoress of this Essay has written in manuscript
a complete analysis of the doctrine of necessity: those persons
who wish for further elucidation on the subject may subscribe
for the publishing of that Essay.


*,* Every thought, feeling, and will, is merely cerebral
action. When we will, this cerebral action results of necessity
from something which is sufficient to excite it. Every thing
in nature has a cause; and every thing or effect results of
necessity from the cause, in the circumstances. We cannot
will without a cause, and this cause produces the resuit,
and makes us to will, of necessity. When we control an in-
clination of our brain, some stronger motive excited in the
brain of necessity, by some causes, makes us of necessity
to will to control it—to resist it, and the stronger wish suc-
ceeds.* Our inclinations depend in health both upon the


* The following dialogue puts the matter in a clear point of view.

A, There’s a battery firing in our ears; are you at liberty to hear it or
not hear it?

B. Certainly I cannot help hearing it.

A. Do you wish the cannon to carry away your head, and the heads of
your wife and daughter who are walking with you ?

B. What a question! I cannot wish such a thing while I am in my
senses: it is impossible for me.

A, Well: you hear this cannon of necessity; and you are unwilling of
necessily that you and your family should be shot while you are walking ?

B. That is clear.

A. Therefore you have walked thirty steps aside to be out of the way of
the cannon; you had the power to accompany me these few steps.

B. That also is clear.

A. And if you had been paralytic, you could not have avoided exposure
to the battery. You would not have had the power of being where you are;
you would of necessity have heard and received a cannon ball, and of
necessity been killed?


Phrenology as it affects Free-will. 419


excitability and strength of the respective portions of the brain,
native and from external training, and upon the influence


B. Nothing can be more certain.

A. In what then does your liberty consist, but the power which you have
exercised of doing what your will required of absolute necessity?

B. You embarrass me. Liberty then is only the power of doing what I
wish ?

A. Consider; and see if liberty can be understood in any other sense.

B. In that case my dog has the same degree of liberty that I have ; for
he necessarily has a wish to run when he sees a hare, and the power to run
unless he is crippled. I am therefore not above my dog ; and you reduce me
to the condition of the brutes.

A, Such are the sophisms of the wretched sophists who educated you.
You are quite hurt at possessing liberty like your dog. Do you not eat, do
you not sleep, do you not, &c, like him? Do you desire to smell otherwise
than with your nose? Why do you wish to possess liberty in a manner differ-
ent from your dog?

B. But I have a soul which reasons a good deal, and my dog scarcely
reasons at all. He has almost only simple ideas, and I have a thousand me-
taphysical ideas.

A. Well, then, you are a thousand times more free than he; that is to
say, you have a thousand times more power to think than he; but you do
not possess liberty differently from him.

B. What! I am not at liberty to will what I choose?

A. What do you mean by that?

B. I mean what all the world means. Do not people every day say, wills
are free ?

A. A proverb is not a reason: explain yourself better.

B. I mean that I am free to will as I choose.

A. With your leave, that is not sense. Do you not perceive that it is ridi-
culous to say, I choose to will,—I willto will? You will necessarily, in con-
sequence of the ideas which are presented to you. Do you wish to marry
or not?

B. I told you I wished neither the one thing nor the other.

A. That is answering like the man who said, ‘‘ Some believe Cardinal
—— to be dead, others alive, but I believe neither the one thing nor the
other.”

B. Well, then, I wish to be married.

A. That is an answer. Why do you wish to be married?

B. Because I am in love with a young girl, handsome, amiable, well
educated, pretty rich, who sings well, whose parents are very respectable
people, and I flatter myself I am loved by her and am very well received by
her family. .

A. That is a reason. You perceive, therefore, that you cannot wish
without a reason. I tell you that you are at liberty to marry, that is to say,
you have the power to sign the contract, to go through the ceremony, and to
sleep with your wife.

B. What! I cannot wish without a reason? Why what becomes of the
proverb, ‘ Let will be the reason—sit pro ratione voluntas,”—my will is my
reason ; I will, because I will.

A, That is absurd, my dear friend; there would then be an effect with-
out a cause.

B. What! When I play at even or not, have I a reason for choosing even
rather than odd ?

A. Yes, undoubtedly.

B. What is this reason, I beg?

A. It is that the idea of even has presented itself to your thought rather
than the opposite idea. It would be droll if there were cases in which you
willed on account of there being a reason for willing, and cases in which
you willed without a cause. When you wish to marry, you see the reason;


420 Phrenology as it affects Free-will.


which they experience at the time from external causes of
excitement ; and in disease upon all the causes of disease that
can act upon the brain. A bad man and a good man are
equally products of necessity. The good man we ought to
love, not for merit of his own, but as a beautiful inevitable


clearly : you do not see the reason when you wish or do not wish to play at
even ; and yet there must be a reason ?

B. But, once more, am I not free?

A. Your will is not free, but your actions are. You are free to act when
you have the power of acting.

B. But all the books which Ihave read upon the liberty of indifference—

A, What do you mean by the liberty of indifference ?

B. I mean the liberty to spit to the right or the left, to sleep upon my
right side or my left, to walk four turns or five.

A, That would bea very pretty liberty! God would have bestowed a
beautiful gift upon you! That would be a fine thing to boast of! Of what
use to you would be a power which could exercise itself on such ridi-
culous occasions only? But in truth it would be ridiculous to fancy the
will of wishing to spit on the right or on the left. Not only is this will of
wishing absurd, but the fact is that many little circumstances determine
those acts which you call indifferent. You are not more free in these acts
than in the others. But, once more, you are free at all times and in all
places, as you do what you wish to do.

B. I suspect you are right. I'll think more of it.

This dialogue Voltaire inserted in the article Liperty of his Diction-
naire Philosophique, and considered the most concise exposition of the matter
that had appeared in France. He thought that Collins, “‘a celebrated
London magistrate,” was the only philosopher who had gone to the bottom
of the question. (A Philosophical Enquiry concerning Human Liberty, by
Anthony Collins, London, 1717.) But Collins owes his views to Hobbes.
(A Treatise of Libertie and Necessitie, wherein all Controversie concerning
Predestination, Election, Free- Will, Grace, Mercy, Reprobation, §c., is fully
decided and cleared, by Thomas Hobs, London, 1654.)

In his article on free-will, Voltaire remarks, Liberty being only the power
of acting, what is this power? It is the effect of the constitution and pre-
sent condition of our organs. When is it that a young man can master the
violence of his passion? When a stronger idea determines the play of his
powers in an opposite direction. ‘‘* What! Have other animals, then, the
same Liberty, the same power?’ Why not? they possess senses, memory,
sentiment, perceptions, as well as ourselves; they act of their own accord,
as we do; they must possess, like us, the power of acting in virtue of their
perceptions, in virtue of the play of their organs.

* People exclaim, ‘if that is the case, every thing is a mere machine,
every thing in the universe is subjected to eternal laws.’ Well; would you
have every thing placed at the mercy of a million of blind caprices? Either
every thing results from the necessity of the nature of things or from the
eternal order of an absolute master ; and in either case we are but the wheels
of the machine of the world.

**It is vain jesting or common place to say that, without the pretended
freedom of the will, punishments and rewards are useless. Reason, and you
will come to a perfectly opposite conclusion, If, at the execution of a
brigand, his accomplice, who witnesses the execution, has the liberty of
not being dismayed by the punishment,—if his will determines itself, he
will leave the scaffold to go and assassinate on the highway: if his organs,
struck with terror, cause him an insurmountable terror, he will not steal
again. The punishment of his companion is useful to him, and gives secu-
rity to society as far only as his liberty is not free.

“* Liberty, then, is and can be nothing more than the ability to do what
we will. This is all that philosophy teaehes us.”


Phrenology as it affects Free-will. 421


production of the formative powers, or of these and external
circumstances together,—as a gem of fine water: the bad
man we should detest, not for demerit of his own, but as
a sorry, inevitable product of the formative powers or of
these and external circumstances together,—as an inferior
article, and, so far from blaming him, we should so pity
him as to wish to surround him with favourable circum-
stances which of necessity may produce the best possible re-
sults from his organization. The object of rational punish-
ment is to supply more motives to good than those which have
hitherto proved or are likely to prove insufficient: and, before
we apply what is called punishment, we ought to be certain
that it is indispensable, and that better external circum-
stances within our power would not effect the desired im-
provement, and effect it much better.

This doctrine of philosophical necessity, as it is termed, is
neither more nor less than a fact. It is not a dogma. Allis
cause and effect throughout nature; and the brain and its
phenomena, being a portion of nature, must likewise all be
cause and effect.

In the ignorance and superstition of the earliest periods of
our race, when every natural event or result was ascribed to
some invisible being, demon, angel, god, demi-god, or spirit,
—as children in their ignorance beat the table or the ground
if they hurt their heads against it, fancying it alive and
blameable,—men fancied an inconceivable and imaginary
something called spirit or soul, distinct from the brain, not
matter, nor a property of matter; and, as ignorance and
superstition still frightfully prevail, in the highest seats of
education as well as in ordinary schools and among the
uneducated,—for the present period is but the childhood of
our race,—the absurdity is successfully propagated from older
to younger, and rejected by those only who think courage-
ously for themselves and venture to read books which are
besottedly condemned. Such observing and reflecting persons
cannot conceive anything in nature but matter and properties
of matter; and some of these are honest enough to declare
their convictions,—while some, wise as serpents, conceal them,
and generally are so base as not merely to conceal them, but
to profess in their writings and conversation, and perhaps
vehemently, the popular crudities on this and on other
topics, and to laugh inwardly at the folly of mankind and the
worldly success of their own cunning, but despicable, course.

This inconceivable thing—not matter, aud produced no-
body knows when, whether when the earth was formed, when
the offspring is formed, or at some subsequent weck or mouth,


422 Phrenology as it affects Free-will.


upon which points the stupidly learned have held diverse
opinions, as may be seen in Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy,*
—would still be a portion of nature, and therefore subject
to nature’s laws. Its devotees imagine that it has absolute
will,—can will simply because it chooses; effect thus occurring
without cause. But, it being a portion of nature, and therefore
subject to nature’s universal laws of cause and effect, some
cause, when it wills, must make it will, just as much as
must be the case with the brain when the brain wills; so that
the spurners of the truth of necessity gain nothing in this
respect by their fancy.

Neither do they gain as regards a future state. For the
fancy of a soul and its immateriality does not imply immor-
tality. “The immortality of the soul,” says Dr. Rush,
“depends upon the will of the Deity, and not upon the sup-
posed properties of spirit. Matter is in its own nature as
immortal as spirit. It is resolvable by heat and moisture
into a variety of forms; but it requires the same almighty
hand to annihilate it that it did to create it. I know of no
arguments to prove that immortality of the soul but such as
we derive from the Christian revelation.”+ Indeed, if imma-
teriality did imply inherent immortality, inherent or natural
immortality would imply previous existence, if not existence
without beginning; yet we are not aware of having been
alive before our brains.t But really the anxiety to believe
in this fancied inconceivable thing, for the sake of believing
in a future state, shews a sad want of high estimate cf
Christianity and of confidence in it. Christianity assures us
that we shall live again and for ever: and this ought to be
enough for Christians, without looking out for considera-
tions to make a future life probable, or in truth to make it
certain, without Christianity. For this is the argument of the
soul fanciers—We must live for ever because we have a soul:
and thus they would make the assurances of Christianity
altogether superfluous.$


* “Hierome, Austin, and other fathers of the church, held that the soul
is immortal, created of nothing, and so infused into the child or embryo in
his mother’s womb six months after conception; some say at three days,
some six weeks, others otherwise.” p. i., s. i., mem. 2., subs. 9.

+ Med. Obs. and Inquiries. vol. ii., p. 15. Dugald Stewart concedes
that ‘‘ the proper use of the doctrine of the immateriality of the soul is not
to demonstrate the soul is physically and necessarily immortal.” Outlines,

. 227.
. ¢t Dr. Cudworth affirms that there never were any of the ancients before
Christianity that held the soul’s future permanency after death, who did not
likewise believe its pre-existence.

§ Lord Stanhope, in a note to the second edition of Dr. Binns’s Anatomy
of Sleep, p. 452, says, ‘* The final cause of dreaming is, I believe, to con-
vince the unlearned and the unthinking, of the immateriality of the mind,


Phrenology as it affects Free-will. 423


Let not, therefore, the Christian hug the fancy of a soul
that he may believe in a future state: he wants no soul for
this. He believes that “his body, though torn in pieces,
burnt to ashes, ground to powder, turned to rottenness, shall
be no loser,’* but be reproduced and rise from the grave,
and be given up by the sea—he believes in the resurrection of
his decomposed body: and even this cannot but be a miracle
—a thing out of the course of nature, and to be believed
solely on miraculous assurance. The learned and able Bishop
Law asserts that the sentence passed upon Adam and Eve
meant nothing less than a ¢otal destruction of existence ; and
that the idea of its implying a continuation of consciousness
and real existence in some other place than earth, is not
sanctioned by Scripture, but is the philosophy of after ages.+
He adds that Archbishop Tillotson confesses that the notion of
continuation is not found in the Bible; and, after a critical
and elaborate examination of the words used in Scripture to
denote soul and spirit and their various applications, he sums
up the enquiry thus: “ But neither do these words, nor any
others, so far as I can find, ever stand for a purely immaterial


which my friend Dr. Elliotson does not seem to admit, although he ought
to be convinced of it by his own researches in animal magnetism or mes-
merism.” Now I admit the immateriality of the mind, just as I admit the
immateriality of muscular motion or secretion : a phenomenon is not matter,
neither is the power or property of matter that produces the phenomenon,
matter. The meaning of the excellent Earl, however, I suppose is that mental
phenomena depend upon a certain thing called souland immaterial. Now what
the purpose of this fancy is I know not, unless to include the useless belief of
the immortality of this soul, which it evidently does not. But my dog, now
sleeping at my feet, is evidently dreaming away, for his legs move and he
is barking, and most brutes dream, as Lucretius described. Is this to prove
to them or to us that they have immaterial souls? If our dreams (which are
nothing more than partial and imperfect excitement of the brain) prove we
have a soul, they equally prove that brutes havea soul. Indeed, the cheese-
mite has as real personality as the Archbishop of Canterbury : has perception,
desire, will, &c. &c. Many horses and dogs are superior in intelligence to
some human beings, and superior in moral worth to others.

Some have other arguments for the immortality of the soul. The heavenly-
minded lawyer Tangle, as he poured from one hand to the other the guineas
which were to bribe the electors to vote for Lord St. James, exclaimed,
“Wonderful invention, gold coin, Sir! wonderful thing. If there is any-
thing, Sir, that shews man to be the creature that he is, it’s this. Scholars,
when they want to raise man above the monkey—heaven forgive the Atheists
—call him a laughing animal, a tool-making animal, a working animal.
Sir, they’ve all missed the true meaning; they should call him a coining
animal. I’ve thought of the matter much, Mr. Folder: and this”—and
Tangle rattled the coins—“ this is the true weapon against the Atheists, Sir,
—and nearly all scholars are every bit the same as Atheists—just as toad-
stools are often taken for mushrooms. No, Sir, no: they may call me what
they like, but I see proofs of the immortality of the soul in this, Sir. No
unbelief—I’m sure of it, Mr. Folder—no unbelief can stand against this,”
and Tangle again laid his hand upon the gold. Shilling Magazine, p. 489-90.

* Lord Bacon’s Christian Paradoxes, 34.
+ Theory of Religion, p. 345.


424 Phrenology as it affects Free-will.


principle in man, as a substance, whatever some imagine they
mean by that word, wholly separable and independent of the
body. Bishop Jeremy Taylor assures us that the words of St.
Paul in Corinthians directly affirm that a resurrection or being
made alive again is granted, assured, and executed by and in
Christ alone, and evidently suppose that the dead are not
made alive till the resurrection, and that, had not a resurrec-
tion been provided, we should never have been made alive
again after death.*

Let him look boldly at nature as she is, and not ig-
norantly rail against materialism. Let him acknowledge
the fact which stares him in the face, that all the mental
phenomena of man and brute equally are phenomena of
brain—as heat and light are phenomena of inanimate matter.
Its function is to produce these phenomena as much as the
function of the liver is to secrete bile and of the muscles to
contract and move our bodies. Not that cerebral phenomena
are secretion and contraction, as some pious spiritualists vir-
tuously misrepresent these expressions, but as much the func-
tion; that just as biliary secretion and muscular contraction
are functions of the organs called liver and muscles respec-
tively, so the production of mental phenomena is the function
of the organ called brain, and the result of its composition
and organization under the due influence of proper circum-
stances, a supply of suitable blood, warmth, &c., &c.; and
as the brain is affected, healthy or unhealthy, so do these
phenomena vary.

Let him not say, stupidly and untruly, that matter is
inert and cannot think. Matter is nowhere and at no time
inert—it is instinct with endless properties, and can and does
think : our senses and our consciousness prove that it does.

The question of materialism is one of natural philosophy,
and to be settled, like all considerations of nature, by the
study of nature only, and not by reference to supernatural
information, which should be appealed to for supernatural
things only, such as we have no means of learning by observa-
tion and experiment (see pp. 137, 280); and wherever the Bible
speaks of natural objects, it cannot be of greater authority
ion the sight of nature itself. Its writers spoke of natural
things according to their own experience and opinions and

* Doctrine of Original Sin, p. 24. Brought up in the Church of England,
and compelled to sign the thirty-nine Articles at Cambridge or have no
degree in physic (the outrage upon common sense!) I was never taught to
think so ill of matter; for I learnt the resurrection of the body, and that
God himself (Article 2) sits in heaven with “his body, with flesh, bones,”


&e., &c. (Article 4.) Some bigots will think it an argument to urge that
these are glorified. But glorified flesh and glorified bone are still matter.


Phrenology as it affects Free-wiil. 425


those of the parties to whom they addressed themselves ; and
it is now a settled point, that all enquiries into nature are to
be conducted independently, without any reference to revela-
tion (see p. 137); the only question among us being—is your
statement true and your reasoning sound? I should, there-
fore, not have alluded to supernaturalism at all, but that there
is such a childish, senseless outcry against materialism, that
I was anxious to shew that materialism does not imply infi-
delity. But if it did imply infidelity, the only question still
ought to be—is it true? and it should be argued on perfectly
independent grounds: and in all circumstances, a noble nature
will aim at doing all that is right, not to avoid punishment or
gain reward, here or hereafter, but because his mature con-
victions satisfy him it is right. The doctrines of materialism
and necessity are delightful, as far as they are merely truths.
For the contemplation of unembarrassed truth is always de-
lightful. They are also amusing ; for to observe human beings
and the brute creation all acting according to their organiza-
tion and education, while each fancies himself acting of his
own free, uninfluenced, causeless will, is the highest enter-
tainment. To observe members of the same family, long
separated from each other, not only resemble each other in
features, but speaking, treading, nay, coughing like each
other, and, if similarly organized in their heads, thinking
and conducting themselves like each other, and to notice the
effects of external influence upon them, so that the admission
of an evangelical or a catholic governess among girls shall
cause them to change their religious views and act for the
rest of their lives under the new influence,—all thinking all the
time how free and independent are their coughing, walking,
speaking, and their convictions,—is an endless amusement.
But the moral good is incalculable; for the result of truth
must always be good. These truths teach us to be humble,
however excellent our natures, for, not having made our-
selves, we perceive that we act and think according to inevi-
table laws: and if our nature is bad and we act ill, though
we may feel we deserve pity, we do not the less perceive that
we are miserable human specimens—vessels of clay and not
of gold. They teach us compassion and forgiveness; for we
perceive that bad original constitutions and bad external cir-
cumstances are the cause of the wicked being wicked. There
is no reason that we should not reprove the bad, in order to
excite them to virtue,—that we should not for their good re-
prove them gently at first, and sternly afterwards if they will
not listen to mild rebuke: there is no reason that we should
subject ourselves to repetitions of ill-treatment by associating


426 Contributions to the Mathematics of Phrenology,


with the bad (life is too short for this worry): but these
truths make us anxious to urge upon mankind the duty of
marrying only among healthy and virtuous stocks, and of
endeavouring to enlighten the understandings and reform the
circumstances of individuals and of society at large, in order
to ensure happier results.

Joun E tiorson.


III. Review of “ Contributions to the Mathematics of Phrenology,
chiefly intended to aid Students. Illustrated by a plate.
By James Srrarton, Secretary of the Phrenological Society,
Aberdeen, 1845.” 8vo. pp. 35. With a Communication
from the Author.


Mr. Srraton’s object is,


First, to show how the human head, or cranium, may be mea-
sured by very simple means, and with an approximation to mathe-
matical accuracy, sufficient for practical purposes. Secondly, to gra-
duate a scale, indicating the average size, the average range, and
the extreme ranges of size which have been found among the various
races of men. Thirdly, after measuring the head as a whole, and
determining its place in the scale of size, to measure that whole in
separate parts. And, fourthly, to determine the relative size of those
parts in equally balanced heads.

His principal aim, in measuring separate parts, is to furnish the
eye of the observer with a more definite range or standard whereby
to estimate the more minute portions—the individual organs. He
has, therefore, attempted instrumental measure to the /east possible
extent only, which would be useful for that purpose. The principal
object in view, throughout, is to remove perplexing uncertainties,
in attaching a meaning to the language of the masters, and thereby
to impart a proper degree of confidence to the student, and, to the
more advanced, an uniformity in the estimating and recording of size
and proportions, which he believes has hitherto been unnecessarily
difficult to attain.


He remarks that,


The shape of the human head, or cranium, may be described as
partly cubical, and partly spherical. The latter seems to the eye to
predominate so much, that, previous to an extensive series of mea-
surements, it might readily be supposed that spherical was the only
measure likely to approach accuracy.

Yet according to his experience,


Ninety-five cases at least in each hundred give results varying
from 15 to 40 cubic inches below the truth.


He therefore regards the spherical as unsuitable for the
purpose of measurement.


by Mr. Straton. 427


The cast or skull may be measured to any degree of accu-
racy by marking the quantity of water which it displaces in a
receiver of known dimensions. He immerses it, with the top
downwards, till the surface of the water touches the articu-
lation of the nasal and frontal bones and enters the openings
of both ears. The receiver is as nearly square as possible,
10 inches long, 10 inches broad, and 8 inches deep inside,
of pine deal, except that one side is a plate of glass, furnished
with a perpendicular scale, divided into inches and tenths of
inches. The Zero is about five inches from the bottom of the
inside of the receiver, which is accurately filled with water
up to this point before the head is immersed.

Every inch that the water rises will correspond to 100


cubic inches ; that is, 10 by 10; and each tenth to ten cubic
inches.


_ The above wood-cut represents a skull, on which the lines and
points are marked, from which measurements are taken.
The anatomical parts are briefly the following—
Bones.—O the occipital, P the parietal, F the frontal, N the
nasal, M the malar, S the sphenoid, and T the temporal.
Surures.—The Lambdoidal articulates the occipital to the pa-


rietal bones from 3 to a, and to the temporal from thence
downwards.


428 Contributions to the Mathematics of Phrenology,


The Sagittal unites the superior margins of the parietal bones,
along the line 3, 15, 14.

The Squamous joins the temporal bones to the sphenoid and the
lower margin of the parietals.

The Coronal touches the sphenoid at each side, and unites the
frontal to the parietal bones.

The Transverse connects the frontal with the nasal at 22, with
the malar at 29, and others more deeply seated.

POINTS OF MEASUREMENT.
1. Occipital spine.

. Posterior margin of P at half the distance from a to 4.

. Termination of the sagittal suture at the occipital bone.

. Middle of the posterior margins of the parietal bones.

- Middle of the straight line from 2 to 7.

. External opening of the ear.

- Middle of a straight line from 6 to 12.

On a straight line, joining 7 and 28, place—

. Equidistant from 7 and 9, and

. Equidistant from 28 and the parietal bone.

11. Middle of the line from 4 to 12.

12. Centres of ossification of the parietal bones.

13. On the middle line of F, equidistant from 14 and 22.

14. Middle of the coronal suture.

15. Middle of the sagittal suture.

16. Half the shortest line from 12 to the sagittal suture.

19. One third the horizontal line from 35 to 12.

22. Nasal vertex or middle of the transverse suture.

23. Internal angular processes of F.

28. Commencement of the temporal ridge.

29. Junction of M with the external angular processes of I’.

30. Centre of the forehead.

32. Middle of the line joining 29 and 35.

35. Centres of ossification of F.


SIG Sr & G bo


ie 2)


GENERAL DIRECTIONS.


Having selected a suitable cast or skull, mark with a pencil or
bit of chalk the points 4, 12, 29, and 35; join these by lines and
mark the points 11, 19, and 32. Finish the pointing in the follow-
ing order :—1, 3, 15, 30, 22, 23, 28, 7, 2, 8, 9.

In measuring, the callipers is the only instrument required. In
practice, I have found the time and labour very much abridged by a
peculiar construction of the instrument. It has a scale attached, on
which the inches and tenths “imperial standard,” are marked the
full length ; these can be accurately read as soon as the instrument
is adjusted to the intended points of measurement.

Mr. Straton considers that the human head or cranium
may be measured as an irregular cube with almost perfect
accuracy, and gives the following formula as the most simple
and accurate, and applicable to’every variety of case :


by Mr. Straton. 429


To find the average

Breadth.—Add the measurements from 5 to 5, 7 to 7, 8 to 8,
and from 9 to 9; divide the sum by 4; the quotient is the

average breadth.
Length.—The measurement from 3 to 30 is the average length.
Height.—Add the measurements from 6 to 16, from 1 to 3, and
from 22 to 13; divide the sum by 3; the quotient is the

average height.
Multiply the height by the breadth, and the product by the
length. The result represents the cubic measure.


Examete I.


4.1+2.3+2.=—8.4—3=2.8 Height lS 5 tk, ,
4.5+5.1+4.6+3.8=18—+4=4.5 Breadth........ 4.5
3.60
9.0
12.60
From 3 to 30......6.5...... Length...... 6.5
6.300
75.60
Cubic inches.......... 81.900
Examp te II.
5.64+3.24 2.6=11.4—3=3.8 Height . et
5.44+6.4+6.24+5.4=23.4—4=5.85 Breadth .... 5.85
-190
3.04
19.0
22.230
From 3 to 30.......... Length eee
8.8920
177.840
Cubic inches...... ... 186.6320
TABLE OF CUBIC MEASURE,
HEADS.
Height. Breadth. Length. Cubic M. Proof.
BOG ccs scarce 28 5°8 7°35 170 174
Rev. Mr. M. ...... 3°9 5°5 it 165 165
R. B. Sheridan .... 3° 5°6 7°8 165 165
F. Cordonnier...... 4° 6°2 7s 178 180
Rajah R. Roy ...... 3°8 5°8 8°4 185 190


&e. &e.


430 Contributions to the Mathematics of Phrenology,


We have heard Gall express his conviction that the head
grow till at least forty years of age, and mention that Napo-
leon’s hatter informed him that Napoleon’s grew till it was
at least five and thirty years old. “A physician, who was
not a phrenologist, the late Dr. John Sims, bestowed great
labour in weighing brains, and his results are very different
from those of his predecessors. After weighing 237 brains,
from the age of 1 year to above 70, he ascertained “ that the
average weight of the brain goes on increasing from 1 year
old to 20: between 20 and 30, there is a slight increase in
the average; afterwards it increases and arrives at the maxi-
mum between 40 and 50; after 50, to old age, the brain
gradually decreases in weight.”* This, like all accurate ob-
servations on points investigated by Gall, confirms the state-
ments made by Gall years ago. Tiedemann, as correctly
quoted by Mr. Straton, asserts and declares in the Philoso-
phical Transactions, 1836, “ that the Wenzels have shewn, that
the brain arrives at its full growth about the seventh year,
and adds that Gall and Spurzheim maintain that it grows
till the fourteenth.” Now Gall, in his second 8vo. volume,
p- 157, says, “that the brain arrives at its full growth be-
tween the twentieth and fortieth years:” and at p. 430,
“that the cerebral parts acquire their full development be-
tween the age of full growth and forty years :” and again in
his third volume, p. 31, “that the brain of most men has
hardly acquired its full growth before the thirtieth year ;
often not before the fortieth.” No paper ever more disgraced
the Philosophical Transactions, or the council who ordered the
publication, than this of Tiedemann’s. Mr. Straton very pro-
perly contends that our enquiries into measurements should
embrace all ages and sizes from birth to fifty years at least,
that we may learn the average size of the head and the range
of sizes at birth, the ratio or rates of increase at different
periods, the modification of development between infancy
and maturity, and the effects on development and character
from training.

The following gradation Mr. S. has seen so often, that ina
similar family he would expect to find it as a matter of course.


M. aged 6 months,—size of head 72 cubic inches.


Te Ashh! Mb ekvkacesoune ae
Se Freee ry
| Se. Serre crre tS: Maerrere
G _ SERA er rer. 121
Pe Serre Teer eT


* Dr. Elliotson’s Human Physiology, pp. 997.


by Mr. Straton.


Mt. .. 20 years,—size of head 128 cubic inches.


> 4 Mae ce yn uate mae eae es ve ee
SET ORe Tee we L  aErerer
BB vide Mba dn havc tacbseuese, GE “wedues


Here, it will be observed, we find a gradation of relative age
and size, which may be termed regular with irregularities. Wm.,
aged 15, had a larger head than any other member of the family at
birth, and he still retains the peculiarity. Mt., the daughter, 20,
has rather less than Js., the son, at 18, a fact quite in harmony
with the well-known relative proportions of the male and female
head. The other members of the family exhibit a regular gradation
of age and size. To affirm that the head of any one of the family,
even A., 22, has attained its full size, would be an assumption
altogether unwarranted by any extensive class of facts that I know.


In Dr. Morton’s Crania Americana, the internal capacity
of many specimens of the five races into which Blumenbach
divides mankind is given, and Mr. 8S. infers the external di-
mensions and the size of the head by his method, as follows :


No. AVERAGE. | LARGEST. SMALLEST.
of S.
Int. | Ex. | H. Int. | Ex. | i. Int. | Ex. | i.
Caucasian..........| 52 || 87 |105 |130 |109 i131 159 || 75 | 92 {114
Mongolian. ......... 10 || 83 {101 |125 |) 93 112 |138 || 69 | 85 |106


Malay............--| 18 || 81 | 99 |123 || 89 {107 |132 || 64 | 78 | 98
American Aborigines. .|147 || 80 | 98 |122 |,100 |119 |146 || 60 | 74 | 93
Ethiopian ..........| 29 || 78 | 96 [119 | 94 i 139 || 65 | 79 | 99


The Caucasian specimens are all but one taken from the
lowest classes of society—a great defect.

From eight measurements of each of the heads of fifty-two
leading men in America, Mr. S. infers the average size of the
whole to be 165 cubic inches: the largest 170, the smallest
145 cubic inches.

Professor Tiedemann measured the internal capacity of
skulls with millet seeds ; and Mr. S. has calculated upon his
measurements. But dry millet seed can hardly weigh exactly
the same, measure for measure, at all times, and in all coun-
tries. It positively does not, Mr. S. has ascertained, occupy
the same space, whatever care be taken in shaking, packing,
and adjusting it. We can, therefore, not attach much im-
portance to Dr. Tiedemann’s data.


SMALLEST SIZES.


After ten years’ practice in observation, during which I have
VOL. III. HH


432 Contributions to the Mathematics of Phrenology,


measured more than 3000 heads, and formed an eye estimate of
more than ten times that number, measuring every head in any way
remarkable to which I could obtain access, I have to report the
following as unique in my experience in the respective classes to
which they belong :—

, Esq., a gentleman of talents and learning, size of
head, 111 cubic inches. C. A., aged 60, a village politician, orator,
wit, t, and tinker, a little above 100. Robert Duncan, aged 29,
found employed in a large manufactory, 92. Robert Gibson, ——
found in the Public Soup Kitchen, Aberdeen, one day,—18th May,
1845,—when all the youths found begging were conveyed there,
during a benevolent effort to suppress juvenile mendicity, age about
7, 82 cubic inches. Girl belonging to a fisher’s family, age between
6 and 7, size of head, 72 cubic inches.

From the hatter’s evidence previously quoted, we learn that 80
cubic inches is a common size of adult male heads in Spitalfields
and some other parts. We are warranted from thence to infer that
adult female heads are to be found somewhat less—say 70 inches,—
and boys and girls still less, at or below 60 inches.

Dr. Voisin, of the Hospital of Incurables, Paris, as quoted by
Mr. Combe, in his System of Phrenology, 4th edit. p. 40, states
that ‘‘ heads, 13 inches round and 9 over, are idiots of the lowest
class. Heads, 17 inches round and 12 over, give glimpses of feeling
and random intellectual perceptions, but without power of attention,
or fixity of ideas,” and ‘‘ heads of 18 inches round give intellectual
manifestations, regular, but deficient in intensity.” Now, heads
of 13 inches round and 9 over will generally range between 40 and
50 inches, cubic measur¢. Those of 17 round and 12 over will
range about 70; and those of 18 inches round would, if tolerably
well balanced, range 80 to 85 cubic inches I must take leave to
doubt the inferences which the latter part of the quotation would,
without explanation, lead to. The pauper boy that I found in the
Public Soup Kitchen had, as I have stated, a head of only 82 cubic
inches, but it was well balanced, the constitutional temperament
highly nervous, and the boy is quite as intelligent as could be expected
at his age, in his circumstances.

I think it highly probable that the heads of 17 and 18 inches
round, noticed by Dr. Voisin, were defective in regard to either
balance of parts, health, normal structure or temperament: the latter
I think most likely. And, to show cause for my conjecture, may
here remark that, from the study of, not individuals only, but whole
communities, living distinct from each other, but in precisely similar
circumstances, I am disposed to believe that a person in whom the
nervous temperament predominates, with a head of 120 inches, is
equal, or nearly so, in mental scope and energy, to a person with a
head of 140 inches, in whom the lymphatic temperament pre-
dominates.

In a quotation from a Memoir by Dr. James G. Simpson, Pro-
fessor of Midwifery in the University of Edinburgh, given in the
Phrenological Journal, for July, 1845, p. 245, we find the average


by Mr. Straton. 433


measurements of the heads of 60 male and 60 female children at
birth given thus: —
Males, ...... 13°983 in. round, and 7°429 in. over from ear to ear.
Females, ....13°617............ 7°SS1 eye

This implies an average cubic measure of about 40 inches. And
as some are more and some less, the probable range of the infant
head at birth may be from 30 inches, or less, to 50 inches, or more,
but evidence to fix the limits is wanting.


LARGEST SIZES.


The Maxtmum.—The highest point, on the scale of size, should
not be so very difficult to determine, seeing that the largest heads
are precisely those most likely to make their existence known among
their fellow-men—to stamp their impress, good or bad, as the case
may be, on the age in which they live.

Caucastan.—The largest head of which I have had an oppor-
tunity of measuring the plaster cast is that of Joseph Hume, Esq.,
M.P. After making ample allowance for hair, the cast gives a cubic
measure above 210 inches. I have been told, by what I believe to
be good authority, that Mr. Hume requires a hat of 83, and that
Daniel O’Connell, Esq., the famous Irish M.P., requires a hat
nearly the same size. If this be true, and if the ordinary portraits
which we see of him be tolerably correct, his head is broad in more
than the average proportion, and must, therefore, be about equal in
size to that of Mr. Hume. Mr. O’Connell appears also to combine
a peculiarity which I have rarely found in large heads, namely, a
very active and enduring temperament. Napoleon Buonaparte was
an extraordinary example of such a combination. In short, we may
safely assume that 220 cubic inches is about the extreme limits of
size which the healthy human head ever attains among the Cauca-
sian race.

Moncou1an.—The largest head of this race which I have seen
a measurement of, and whose history is known, is that of Tyloolick,
an Esquimaux, who accompanied Captain Parry in one of his expe-
ditions. The skull, according to Professor Tiedemann, measures
inches internal, hence the head must have been about 145 cubic
inches. Eenoolooapik, a young Esquimaux chief, who accompanied
Captain Penny in the whaling ship, St. Andrews, to this country, a
year or two ago, has a head about the same size as his countryman
just named.

American Aporicines.—The largest head of this race, whose
measurement and history I have seen, is the famous warrior and
chief, ‘‘ Black Hawk,”—rather more than 165 inches.

Asratic.—The Rajah Rammohun Roy stands pre-eminent among
the Asiatics known in this country for a head of great size, finely
balanced. The cast we possess measures, after allowing for hair,
above 185 inches.

Matayan.—Professor Tiedemann gives a male native of Hua-
heine, equal to 159 inches. We have no sketch of history, however,
whereby to discover whether the head was healthy or not.
HH 2


434 Contributions to the Mathematics of Phrenology,


Erniop1an. —The cast of the head of Eustache, the amiable
and talented negro of St. Domingo—one of the finest specimens of
human nature ever known—measures 155 inches. Professor Tiede-
mann gives a negro of Congo equal to 170 inches; but it is so far
above the next highest specimen measured, that, in the absence of a
sketch of history, I do not venture to adopt its measure.

The following is a condensed view of the entire evidence con-
nected with this department :—-


Average. | Average Range. Extreme Range.

| {
Caucasian............| 137 | 100 to 160 40 or less to 220
Mongolian ...........| 127 90 ,, 140 40 - 145
ee | 98 ,, 132 40 mm 159 |
BE ccecccseces| Bae 100 ,, 139 40 ” 155 |
American Aborigines ..| 122 93 ,, 146 40 we 165 |
OO ee | 95 ,, 137 40 *” 185 |


It remains in this department to suggest a scale, by the use of
which the student will obtain definite ideas of what is meant by a
**large head,” a small, a full, a moderate-sized head, &c. It for-
tunately happens that this is a very simple and easy part of the
matter, inasmuch as we find it already in use all but complete.

The following scale which we are in the habit of using to desig-
nate size in our ordinary practice, will, with the simplest possible
addition, be admirably adapted to the purpose in view.


SCALE IN USE.


1. 12. Rather full.
2. Idiocy. 13. Rather full or full.
3. 14. Full.
4. Very small. 15. Full or rather large.
5. Very small or small. 16. Rather large.
6. Small. 17. Rather large or large.
7. Small or rather small. 18. Large.
8. Rather small. 19. Large or very large.
9. Rather small or moderate. 20. Very large,
10. Moderate. 21. Very large or extra large.
11. Moderate or rather full. 22. Extra large.


To designate the absolute size of the head, it is only necessary
to add a 0 to each number of the series, to represent the cubic
inches, and the words, retained as they stand, have a definite ma-
thematical meaning which cannot be misunderstood.


by Mr. Straton.


PROPOSED SCALE.


C. Inches C. Inches,
10. 120. Rather full.
20. 130. Rather full or full.
30. Idiocy 140. Full.
40. and 150. Full or rather full.
50. Infancy. 160. Rather large.
60. Small. 170. Rather large or large.
70. Small or rather small. 180. Large.
80. Rather small. 190. Large or very large.
90. Rather small or moderate. | 200. Very large.

100. Moderate. 210.

110. Moderate or rather full. 220. Extra large.


ExampLe.—Given, a head of 140 cubic inches, in which five
different degrees of size of organs are just perceptible, two above
the medium or average size, and two below. The proper designa-
tion of size for the medium organs would obviously be 14, i.e.
“full.” The next size above medium, if only just perceptibly larger
to the eye of a competent observer, must be 15, “ full or rather
large,” meaning thereby just equal to the organs in an accurately
balanced head of 150 cubic inches. The largest organs in the given
head will be 16, “rather large,” or equal to an equally balanced
head of 160 inches.

The next size below the medium would be 13, ‘‘ moderate, or
rather full,” and the smallest would be 12, ‘‘ moderate,” equal to
the organs in a truly balanced head of 120 cubic inches.

The same method might, of course, be adopted with heads of
100, 150, 160, or any other size, and whether the organs exhibited
one, two, three, or more gradations of size above or below the
medium.


MEASUREMENT OF PARTS,


The regions proposed for separate measurement are—
The Frontal,—seat of the Intellectual Faculties
— Coronal, ————— Superior Sentiments.
— Occipital, ————— Inferior ditto,
and Domestic Feelings, .


— Lateral, — Aggressive Dispositions.


It is proposed to measure each region or position just
named, as if it were formed like a pyramid—the apex dipping
into the chorda oblongata, and the base being a specific part
of the surface. Mr. 8S. believes that there will be sufficient
accuracy, if we measure the largest possible portion, or nearly
so, in each region, to which a regular outline of surface can be
easily and certainly found by observing anatomical points and
lines—provided that the part measured always bears a pro-


436 Contributions to the Mathematics of Phrenology,


portional relation of size to the entire region. The superficial
space measured of each region will therefore be a parallelo-
gram, always below the actual size of the phrenological group
measured.


ANTERIOR.


(The numbers refer to the wood-cut, and points of measurement, describ-
ed page 427.)


ae From 32 to 32
Breadth.......... From22 ,, 13
Height............ From 6 ,, 32


Nore.—Breadth—From 22 to 13, and from 23 on one side to 35
on the other, are measurements so nearly uniform in most cases,
that, in practice, I generally prefer the latter, because the
points are readily seen.


CORONAL.

Length............From15 to 13
Breadth..........From19 ,, 19
Height............ From 6 ,, 16


Nore.—Length—From 15 to 13, and from 12 to 35 are usually the
same, except in peculiar cases. The measure may therefore
be taken from any point on the line joining 15 and 12, ¢o any
point on the line from 13 to 35, which obviously gives the
truest average of the space indicated.

Breadth.—Avoid irregularities on the temporal ridge.

Height.—In most cases the calliper may be passed on line from 16
to near 35, touching the surface at all points.


LATERAL.
Length ..........From 2 to 9
Breadth .......... From 6 ,, 12


Height .. The average breadth of the head.


Notre.—The Lateral is really two parts, one on each side, and may
be measured as such by taking one-sixth the height, calculating
twice, and adding the products ; but as only additional trouble
would be gained, it is better to calculate the two as one, fol-
lowing the general rule.


POSTERIOR.

Length .......... From 1 to 15
Breadth .......... From ll ,, 11
Height ..........Raom 6, $3


Nore.—Length—In most cases the calliper may be passed from
near 12 on one side to the other, touching the surface at all
points. It is, therefore, easy to avoid irregularities.

Height—avoid irregularities at 3, by measuring a little to one side.


by Mr. Straton. 437


Generally—Avoid local irregularities by taking that which is most
obviously the nearest average of the specified measurement.

Rute.—To find the cubic contents, multiply the length by the
breadth, and the product by one-third the height.


Example. Lath. Brdth. Hght. C. M. or nearest integer.
Anterior . . .. 3°7 x 2°7 x 4°9 (i.e. 1°5)=14985 say 15 c. inches.
3


Coronal .... 4°4 x 5*2 x 4°8 (i.e. 1°6)=44°928 ,, 45 do.
3

Lateral... .. 4°9 x 3°4 x 5°4 (i.e. 1°8)=29°988 ,, 30 do.
3


Posterior... 5°2x5* x95°2 (i.e.1°7)=44-28 ,, 45 do.
3


Aggregate .. .. 134°881 say 135 c. inches.


The above measurement in regions, is that of a head which by
proof gives 150 inches. The aggregate is, therefore, less than the
proof by 15 inches, 7. e. equal to one-tenth part of the whole head.

The deficiency is, as I have already stated, intentional, and
practically unavoidable. It is of no consequence, however, if it be
very nearly equal on each part in proportion to its size. The student
may easily examine for himself by lining and pointing a cast or skull
in the manner specified page 7, and then measuring the specimen,
when he will find that the anterior is measured slightly too short.
The coronal is measured rather too narrow. The lateral does not
include a part near the medulla oblongata; a protuberance, so to
speak, on the lower side of the pyramid isnot measured. The same
remark applies to the posterior portion. I repeat, then, that each
part is deficient, as nearly as can be, in proportion to its size, and
that deficiency is a constant quantity, viz. one-tenth part. The cor-
rection is, therefore, so simple, that it can be instantly made to any
possible number within our range of calculation. Thus the preceding
example is corrected as follows, and all others in the same way :


Measured. Add One-tenth. Corrected.
Anterior........ 15 inches. 1°5 = _ 16°5 inches.
Coronal........ 45 ,; 45 = 495 ,,

Lateral ........ 3 is 3s. ws 3. be
Posterior ...... 45 ,, 45 = 495 ,,
135 13°55 = 148°5 proof 150.


In practice, it simplifies the process very much to omit the cor-
rection in all the parts except the aggregate; and every useful pur-
pose is answered, when it is distinctly understood and recollected
that the correction has to be made.


EQUALLY BALANCED HEADS.


Such are those which exhibit a certain relative proportion
of all the parts, whatever be the absolute size of the head.


438 Contributions to the Mathematics of Phrenology,


The balance is rarely complete. Mr. S., from measuring a
large number in the manner mentioned, infers that the fol-
lowing are the proportions of the regions.

The Anterior or intellectual, one-tenth part of cubic mea-
sure of the whole head.

The Coronal, equal to three times the anterior, or three-
tenths of the head.

The Posterior, equal to the Coronal.

The Lateral, equal to twice the Anterior, or two-tenths
of the measure of the head.


It will readily be understood that every variety of size may exhi-
bit the same shape and proportions, and that the same size may
exhibit every variety of shape and proportions, but it may not be so
readily admitted that the same size and proportions may be found in
a considerable variety of shapes; yet so it appears to be. The long
and narrow head, such as Mr. Goss; the short and square heads,
such as Dr. Gall, or Cordonnier; the round and high heads, such
as Mr. King, and the common busts of Sir Walter Scott, may, I
believe often do, exhibit the same size in whole and proportion of
parts as the type represented by the model bust.


Mr. 8. gives a long list of the measurements of regions
in the heads and skulls of intellectual, moral, and criminal
persons, and of different nations, and thus comments upon
a few examples, first remarking :


That it is the constant, or general features only, of the individual
character, which will be made apparent in most cases by the mea.
surements. When striking features of character turn upon one or
two prominent or defective organs in one or more of the groups,
such features will appear in the measurements so far only as the
general size of the region is affected by the excess or deficiency.


Exampte I.


Intel. Mor. Ager. Dom.


Caucas. Model, average size......137 .. 14... 41 .. 27... Al
ES eg nsiacmieatee ++ nm. ..83.8.. &
Model, correspond. size,..174 .. 17... 52... 35... 52


The first remarkable peculiarity of Dr. Gall’s head is great size,
174 inches—the average of his race being 137. The second is the
still greater size of the anterior, or intellectual region, 20 inches—
the model proportion being 17 inches for the corresponding size, and
14 inches for the average. The coronal region appears, by the cast
to be unequally balanced in some of the organs; but, upon the
whole, it is slightly above the model proportions, and far above the
average—being 54 to 4]. The lateral is slightly below the model
(34 to 35), and the posterior still farther below (46 to 52).


by Mr. Straton. 439


Examp te II.
Intel. Mor. Ager. Dom.
Asiatic. Model, average size,.....119 .. 12... 36... 24.. 36
Rajah Ramah. Roy...... 190... 19... 64.. 38... 45
Model, correspond. size..190 .. 19 .. 57 .. 38... 57


Rajah R. Roy, the famous Hindoo chief, was a philosopher and
a philanthropist of the highest order. In size of head, he towers
above his fellow-Asiatics like a giant among pigmies—he being 190,
they averaging 119. The intellect is exactly the model size on the
whole, but some of the organs are slightly above and others slightly
below the equal balance. The coronal is far above the model size.
—_ of the organs are far below and others farther above the model

alance.


Examp te III.


Intel. Mor. Ager. Dom.
Caucas. Model, average size......137 .. 14... 41 .. 27... 41
eee: Pe ee Fe


Model, correspond. size..150.. 15... 45... 30.. 45


Hare, the associate of the notorious Burke, it is allowed by all,
was the most infamous of the two. Burke had the first offer to be
admitted king’s evidence, and he refused. Hare sacrificed his asso-
ciate to save himself. His head is considerably above the average
(150 to 137). The intellect is above the model proportion (16 to 15),
and still farther above the average (16 to 14). The coronal is not
only below the model (40 to 50), but even below the average (40 to
41). The aggressive is far above the model (40 to 30), and still
farther above the average (40 to 27). The disproportion between
the moral (5 below) and the aggressive (10 above) is 15 inches, being
nearly the entire size of the intellect.


Exampte IV.


> Intel. Mor. Ager. Dom.
Ethiopian. Model, average size ...... 123..123 ..36 ..24..%6
EEE eee 155..15 ..51 ..31..41


Model, correspond. size... . 155. . 15°5. . 46°5. . 31. . 46°5


Eustache.—‘“‘ No situation could be more unfavourable to virtuous
conduct than that of Eustache when he was a slave, associated with
slaves in a war of extermination against their masters; yet such was
the preserving power of a high moral and intellectual organization,
that he nobly discharged his duty to both belligerents, and triumphed
over every temptation.” Mr. Combe’s System, p.776. During an
msurrection in the Island of St. Domingo, he was the means of
saving the lives of more than 400 of the white population. In every
situation in which he was placed, he discharged his duty with unex-
ampled industry and fidelity. The French Institute awarded to him
the “ Prize of Virtue,” on the 9th of August, 1832, and the Govern-
ment gave him a handsome annuity.

The head of Eustache is far above the Negro average, (155 to 123).
The anterior is equal to the model proportions. The coronal is above


440 Contributions to the Mathematics of Phrenology,


the model (51 to 46), and several of the organs are much farther
above the equal balance.


Among the multitude of comparisons which will readily suggest
themselves to the mind of the student, I shall only instance one
more, viz. :—instead of comparing the size of the different regions
with each other, and with those of other heads, compare the different
sizes of model, or equally balanced heads which correspond with the
separate regions of the individual heads, thus—


M t of Regi Corresponding size of Model Heads.

Intel. Mor. Ager. Dom. Intel. Mor. Ager. Dom.

Dr. Gall....20 54 34 46 200 180 170 = 153
R. R. Roy ..19 64 38 45 190 210 190 150
Hare.......16 40 40 44 160 130 210 = 145
Eustache....15 51 31 41 150 170 155 = 140
Linn ......18 46 46 46 180 153 230 153
Greenacre...14. 32 32 42 140 110 160 = 160


Here we see the anterior region of Dr. Gall’s head is equal to the
same part of a model of 200 inches. The coronal in R. R. Roy equals
that in a model of 210. The lateral region of Linn is equal to the
same region in a model head of 230 inches. Thus may the com-
parisons be varied to any extent, and in any way which may be
deemed most appropriate to elucidate the concomitance of size and
character.

It must be admitted, however, that we are not yet prepared to
understand the full force or value of such comparisons, and indeed
cannot be so, until it is known what degree of functional energy, or
what amount of mental manifestation corresponds to given sizes of
heads, regions, and organs, under specified circumstances; the first
essential step towards the solution of this problem, or rather series
of problems, is to determine absolute size of parts with the necessary
degree of accuracy.

From what has been stated regarding the measurement and pro-
portions of parts, it will be obvious that the volume of each region,
as ascertained in the manner specified, determines its place on the
scale of size, or, in other words, gives the average size of the organs
composing the group. Thus,

Anterior.—The cubic inches and the point on the scale are
always the same.
EXAMPLES.


10 inches, moderate; 14, full; 16, rather large; 18, large.
Coronal.—The cubic inches divided by 3, gives the point on


the scale.
EXAMPLES.
42—-3=14, full. 48-—-3= 16, rather large.


Occipital.—Same as the coronal.


Lateral.—The cubic inches divided by 2, gives the point ou
the scale. :


by Mr. Straton. 441


EXAMPLES. :
20-—-2=10, moderate. 30+2=15, full, or rather large.


It remains for the eye to determine the size of the individual
organs, guided throughout by the ascertained average, in retaining
as nearly as possible the mathematical value of the terms used.
This is to be done in the manner described page 23, with this differ-
ence, that the absolute size of each region (instead of that of the head)
is now to be taken as the basis of estimate and comparison.


We have not hesitated to make these copious extracts
from Mr. Straton’s pamphlet, because he evidently has pub-
lished it not for emolument, but for the dissemination of
truth, and because so little is published on cerebral science
that is an addition of real knowledge. At our request, com-
municated through a friend, he has furnished us with the
following additional matter.


8.1. T.O.


Gratified to find the conviction very unanimous that our
present mode of estimating size in phrenological observation
is so imperfect as to warrant any change, however little, pro-
vided it be for the better ; and supported by some of the most
eminent phrenologists in the opinion that we are prepared to
advance some steps in this department, I gladly avail myself
of permission to submit a few statements, which are chiefly
intended to elucidate more fully some of the points treated of
in my Contributions to the Mathematics of Phrenology, and to
which my wish to economize your space will induce me to
make frequent reference for additional information.

The anxious desire which exists to effect improvement in
our mode of observation is indeed little to be wondered at,
seeing that the instant we can substitute fact for opinion (well
founded though it be), accurate measurement for empirical
estimate, recognized standard value for variable, indefinite,
individual judgment, we rank phrenology among the “ exact
sciences” in the strictest sense of the term; we invest our
science with precise and uniform ideas of size ; we extend our
field of accurate comparison over every accessible portion of
the human race; we secure the co-operation of many power-
ful minds who can admire no evidence short of mathematical
demonstration in cases where that may reasonably be re-
quired; and we enable the intelligent, honest, scientific
phrenologist to take his proper place, apart from the igno-
rant, impudent, money-hunting quack, who can then, and


442 Contributions to the Mathematics of Phrenology,


then only, be tried by a standard which will secure his con-
viction, and before that tribunal from which there can be no
appeal.

Absolute size of the head. This is necessarily the basis of
all the subsequent steps in estimating development ; hence it
is of the utmost importance to be accurately determined:
nevertheless in prosecuting my investigations in the mathe-
matics of phrenology, nothing surprised me more than the
fallacious nature of our ordinary modes of measurement for
effecting this purpose. It soon appeared to me that it is far
better to leave the eye alone to judge of the absolute size of
individual heads, because in so doing the chances of error are
considerably lessened ; or at any rate the eye is not misled by
trusting to a false guide. The few examples taken at random,
and quoted in the following table, will make this point plain
to such as may not have previously happened to notice it.
The first column contains the sums of six measurements taken
by a tape-line, as follows: 1. greatest circumference of the
head; 2. from the oc. sp. over the top to the transverse
suture ; 3. from the oc. sp. over Cautiousness and Causality
to the transverse suture; 4. from ear to ear over Self-esteem;
5. from ear to ear over Veneration ; 6. from ear to ear over
Comparison. The above series is perhaps as good for our
present purpose as any other that could be taken by the same
means; we shall judge of their accuracy presently.

The second column contains the sum of six measurements
by callipers, as follows: 1. from Secretiveness to Secretive-
ness; 2. from Constructiveness to Constructiveness; from
Concentrativeness to Eventuality ; 4. from ear to Concentra-
tiveness; 5. from ear to Firmness; 6. from ear to Eventu-
ality. This series is all taken from and to central points, and
are consequently equal to any that can be taken and used in
the same way.

The third column shews the absolute size in cubic inches
as determined by displacing water.


No.1. 97 38 174 No. 8. 93 35 135
2. 98 37 165 9. 93 36 150
3. 98 38 180 10. 91 34 148
4. 95 38 180 ll. 87 35 138
5. 91 35 155 12. 92 34 145
6. 85 32 117 13. 88 34 130
7. 89 34 135 14. 86 33 130


By comparing the above columns, without referring to
the specimens measured, or aiding the memory and judgment
by looking at the names, the -fallacious nature of such mea-


by Mr. Straton. 443,


surements taken to ascertain absolute size will be obvious;
they are not simply useless, they are positively pernicious,
because they mislead when trusted in.* It can hardly be
otherwise than that innumerable errors should be fallen into
by those trusting to such measurements ; for the fact cannot
be got over, that an accurate estimate of the absolute size of
the head is the basis of all subsequent steps in the taking of
development.

In the Contributions to the Mathematics of Phrenology,
page 8, it is shewn how the absolute size of the head may be
determined by a few measurements and a simple calculation.
It may here be added, that after measuring a few dozens of
specimens by the method referred to, individuals possessing
full average powers of observation will rarely find it neces-
sary in ordinary cases and, where great accuracy is not re-
quired, to have recourse to actual measurement, (though after
some practice the whole can easily be done in from three to
five minutes) the human head is an object which the eye can
easily grasp—if I may so speak—and will at a glance in ordi-
nary cases form a very accurate estimate of the absolute
size. This statement may be doubted by parties not accus-
tomed to estimate cubic measure; be it so. But all my expe-
rience warrants the affirmation, that if the head to be
measured does not differ much from the ordinary shape which
the observer has practiced measuring, he will find that as a
general rule it is not difficult to say at sight what is the cubic
measure within five inches of the truth. Such being the case
then, it is obviously better, even on the score of mere saving
of labour, to practice measuring absolute size in preference
to any other mode; which, though it may appear at first
sight more simple, yet by which no extent of practice will
enable the observer to estimate size with the same degree of
accuracy.

The best rule for practice is te measure every head care-
fully, until the eye acquires precision and the observer con-
fidence ; after which, measure ordinary heads occasionally to
make sure that the eye retains its accuracy, and uniformly
measure every head in any way remarkable for shape or size,
when doubts are felt, or great accuracy required.

__ The proportional quantity of brain, which corresponds to
different sizes of head, is somewhat variable, and requires to
be noticed. Rules for estimating the brain, bone, and other


* The specimens measured are the casts of the following heads and
skulls in the order of the table,—Gall, Rev. Mr. M., Cordonnier, Linn,


Eustache, C, Fisher, M‘Innes, Greenacre, Hare, Burke, Martin, Burns
Swift, Wurmser.


444 Contributions to the Mathematics of Phrenology,


coverings separately, are given in the Contributions, page 14,
A few examples will here suffice to make the whole obvious.


Size of Head ..70 cub. in. Brain ..40. Coverings . . 30 cub. in.


” 93 >” 3 60. 3) 33 ”»
” 122 ” ” 80. 33 42 a>
” 146 2? ” 100. ”»> 46 >”
” 160 Pd ” 110. 3 50 ”
» 172 » 120. » 52
+B] 190 ” ” 135. 2” 55 ”
” 210 > 2” 150. ” 60 ”


Above it will be seen that the size of the brain increases
more rapidly than the coverings in proportion to the whole
head. ‘The first line multiplied by two would give size of
head 140 cubic inches, brain 80, and coverings 60 cubic
inches; and multiplied by three it would give, head 210,
brain 120, and coverings 90 inches, whilst the above table
deduced from actual measurement and calculations, shows
that a head of 146 inches encloses 100 inches of brain, and
has only 46 inches of coverings. And that a head of 210
inches encloses 150 cubic inches of brain, and has only 60
cubic inches of coverings.

It follows as a matter of course that if we assume 10
cubic inches to represent a gradation in size, and it is the
most convenient size perhaps that can be taken, a head of
140 cubic inches is not only equal to twice 70 in native
power, but two sizes more, t.e. equal to 160, as compared
with smaller heads, and that a head of 210 inches is equal
to three times that of 70, and three sizes more. In practice
it will be very near the truth to take 45 cubic inches as the
size of the coverings of medium heads; and it is only in very
large and very small cases of adult heads, where it is neces-
sary to substitute a different proportion in estimating deve-
lopment or mental power. I have throughout assumed, and
necessarily so, that the coverings are constant as regards
thickness. I believe that, as a general rule, they are suffi-
ciently uniform for our purpose ; but I have long suspected
that individuals in whom the lymphatic temperament pre-
ponderates greatly, have thicker bone and integuments than
those in whom the nervous preponderates.

The average, mean, or medium size of head which pre-
vails among different tribes and nations, is a point of great
consequence to be known; but it is difficult, or at any rate
laborious, to secure accuracy, as we shall see presently ; but
let us first distinctly understand, what is the precise nature
of the average or mean which it is important to know. There


by Mr. Straton. 445


are, strictly speaking, two average or mean sizes connected
with our enquiry. First,—the mean between the two ex-
tremes of size. Is this the important point to be determined?
We shall discover whether it is so or not by reflecting on the
points to be elucidated in this department. Let us see—

As size is, ceteris paribus, a measure of power, we con-
clude that among nations, as among individuals, force of
character is determined by the average size of head. And
that the larger-headed nations manifest their superior power
by subjecting and ruling their smaller-headed brethren—as
the British in Asia for example. Now shall we discover the
key to the superior power of the British character, by finding
the mean point between the extreme sizes of head? Assuredly
not; for we possess tolerably conclusive evidence that as large
heads may be found in Hindostan as in Britain, and as small
heads in the latter as in any part of Asia: such being the
case, it follows that the mean between the two extremes of
size is the same in both countries, it therefore affords no key
to national character.

But there is as we have said a second average or mean
connected with our inquiry which we will find more important
to know, and which we may illustrate thus.—Suppose that
1000 heads of any tribe or nation are measured accurately,
the sums added together and the result decided by 1000, the
quotient obtained would represent a head different it might
be from any of the 1000, but if so it is one which would
represent the true size of the national head more accurately
than any one of the 1000. Or suppose again that 10,000 or
100,000 heads were measured in the same way, the quotient
then obtained might be slightly different from the former,
considerably different from any one of the heads measured,
but in so far as it differed from all the others measured, so
much more nearly would it be a true representative of the
national head to which it belongs. Let us then for the
sake of simplicity call the head thus represented the average
a and the medium between the two extremes the mean

ead.

From the evidence which I have seen, I am led to sus-
pect that the extremes of size (and of course the means also)
are the same, or nearly so, in all countries. Be this as it
may, the evidence is conclusive that the average size of head
differs to a very great extent in the different races, nations,
and tribes of which the human race is composed. Such being
the case, it follows that when we have discovered the average
size of head of any tribe or nation, we are so far prepared to
estimate its national power of mind and force of character.


446 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


The following extract from the Contributions to the Mathe-
matics of Phrenology, p. 21, will illustrate our position :—


Average size of Caucasiau head ...... .. 137 cubic inches.
Pe Mongolian............ 127 Pa
» EL 5 44 oa 45044068 126 ie
- 0 ere 123 a
= American Aborigines. ... 122 A
‘is pet a


The sizes are given as approximations to the truth. From
the small number of specimens of mad of the races which
have been measured, we are quite unable to be sure of accu-
racy; this indeed cannot be looked for until extensive series
of measurements have been produced among each race on its
native soil.

James SrrRaton.


IV. Case of a Contracted Foot with severe Pain, cured with
Mesmerism. By Dr. Evtiotson.


(Continued from last Number.)


A TYPOGRAPHICAL error occurred in the last of the three
quotations prefixed to my account of this case. I remarked
that Mr. Evans Riadore’s charge of impiety was stale ; but no
such canting charge appeared, because the word injurious had
been printed for impious. The passage should have run thus :

“Thus we may hope, &c., to recover those strayed patients who have unwittingly confided


in the impious modern systems, of which it may be said, that they were conceived in selfish-
ness, and have been brought forth in murder.”


The case, it will be remembered, was perfectly, satisfacto-
rily, and pleasantly cured by mesmerism performed in the
ordinary mode, after the very coarse method of mesmerising
by making the patient stare upwards immoveably at some in-
animate object had failed,—coarse, because it is usually very
disagreeable, making the eyes smart and run or ache, the
head to ache, and occasionally inducing convulsions ; and no
wonder, since the deviser directs us in his book (p. 27) “to
produce the greatest possible strain upon the eyes and eyelids.”
Neither the failure nor the disagreeable effects in this case
can be ascribed to its not having been well performed ; be-
cause the deviser of it says in his book (p. 70), “ Dr. Chawner,
however,” who had accompanied Miss Collins to Manchester
and seen the staring-upwards plan practised, “hypnotized
her as he had seen me do, and _put it (her head) right imme-


by Dr. Elliotson. 447


diately ;” he did so again at the end of a week, when she
experienced a relapse, and again on a second relapse; and on
the occurrence of several relapses her mother always suc-
ceeded as perfectly as either the physician or surgeon (see
above, p. 343). Indeed, when the foot became affected, the
mother still succeeded in making her stare till she was asleep,
but no good resulted on the disease. At length Dr. Chawner
was unable to cause even sleep, though each trial lasted about
half an hour; and each caused pain of the head and eyes.
When again he became able to induce sleep, he “could not
in the least move her foot ;’ and, “after she had remained
asleep for two or three hours, he awoke her, and desired that
hypnotism (the staring upwards plan) should not be tried
again for some time, as it had made her so much weaker, and
had brought on great pain in the head and eyes’ (p. 346).
At the end of two months he tried again and sent her to
sleep, though without any beneficial effect on the ankle. I
shewed that the staring upwards plan was only a coarse mode
of mesmerising (p. 354-5): and I have since met with ano-
ther fact in it. I called upon a lady who wished to consult
me upon the eligibility of mesmerism in her case. A sister
was present, and said to be very susceptible. I requested her
to allow me to try. She sat down, and I raised my hand
above her eyes to begin a pass, when I observed she stared
fixedly upwards. I begged her to look without any effort to-
wards me, and asked why she stared upwards. Her reply
was, that this was the way she had been mesmerised ; for her
sister’s husband had been the operator, and he had learnt the
way at Manchester. She looked towards me, and, after
about a dozen slow passes, her eyes closed and she was in the
mesmeric state, though conscious of everything around her.
At length I restored her readily by transverse passes. When
I called again, she informed me that the condition I induced
was precisely the same in every respect as when she had been
made to stare upwards at an inanimate object ; that one was
as truly mesmeric as the other; and that she had on these
occasions as well as on that felt drawn to the mesmeriser,
but had restrained herself when I operated by passes, whereas
when her brother-in-law operated in the way which he learnt,
by making her stare upwards, &c., she could not help. yield-
ing to the attraction and moving in every direction that he
moved, and ran about the room or out of the room after him.
She, however, much preferred the mild method by passes, as
it was pleasant ; whereas the coarse method by staring up-
wards made her eyes smart, and be stiff and painful for some


time afterwards. I may mention that, as all the known effects
VOL, III. II


448 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


of mesmerism occur spontaneously, as we say, in diseases,
attachment to a particular person sometimes characterizes
cases of spontaneous sleep-waking or analogous states.


I now proceed with the account of the phenomena. Those
already mentioned are sleep-waking, and in it attachment to
the mesmeriser, with various consequent subordinate pheno-
mena, and the successful determination to do certain things
at certain times in the waking state, although in this no trace
of thoughts, words, deeds or impressions of the sleep-waking
state was left in the memory.

Catalepsy and rigidity.* The second time that I mes-
merised her—the first time that she went off—these symptoms
took place (p. 345). The catalepsy occurred first, and in a
few minutes was changed to rigidity ; and rigidity continued
to be the condition of the voluntary muscles of the extremi-
ties, back, and trunk ever afterwards, except at the end of
the first week for one day, on which the catalepsy, for no
apparent reason, occurred for a few minutes, and except at
the end of a month for one day, on which she was very low
spirited without, as she said, knowing why, when there was
not even rigidity. I know not why the disposition to cata-
lepsy or rigidity occurs in one case and is absent in another,
or occurs in the same case at one time and not at another in,
the mesmeric state; or why one sometimes changes to the
other. Like all the phenomena, the disposition comes forth
spontaneously ; and, if it is seemingly sometimes connected
with certain other phenomena or certain processes, at other
times no such connection appears. There is indeed no uni-
formity in the sequence or concurrence of any mesmeric phe-
nomena.

The upper extremities are usually much more rigid than
the lower,t in both spontaneous rigidity and that induced by
passes, and when there is feebleness this is greater in the
lower than in the upper extremities; and in disease, the two
legs are oftener palsied than the two arms. Her upper ex-
tremities, not the lower, were rigid, together with the neck
and trunk in some measure. The rigidity manifested itself
sometimes at once, if her arm, &c. was still; sometimes not
till an effort was made by others to move her arm, &c., when a
resistance was given and rigidity manifested ; if I held her
arm, &c. perfectly still as soon as I had brought it into a new


* Some persons, unacquainted with medicine, confound catalepsy and
rigidity (Vol. II., p. 67, &c.), as others confound coma and fainting (Vol.
I., p- 316; Vol. IIL, p. 42.)

+ See Vol. IL., p. 48-9,


by Dr. Elliotson. 449


position, it presently fixed. If, her hand being relaxed, I beg-
ged her to extend it, or a finger, and hold it still, or rub it on
the arm of her chair or any thing else—an action that did
not at all interfere with its extended state—it fixed presently.

The rigidity, however, did not prevent voluntary move-
ments if she was instigated by emotion to perform them.
She could not move her extremities by merely willing to do so;
but under an emotion, as when I suddenly touched any part
of her in fun as if to plague her, she would instantly stretch
forth her hand to seize me, or would withdraw her shoulder or
head from the contact.* But the act was only instantaneous,
and whether in this instant of time her wish was fully accom-
plished or not, the parts set again as if all solidified.t By my
suddenly touching her now here and then there with the point
of the finger, she could thus be rapidly put from one attitude
into another. On my touching the back of her hand, for in-
stance, she extended all her fingers widely and turned her
hand backwards towards mine ; but the movement was only
for a moment, and her hand remained wide open in the air :
if I touched her palm, the hand instantly closed in order to
grasp mine and moved after mine, and then in a second was
thus fixed. If strangers touched her, she suddenly withdrew
her hand or head, as it might be. The rapidity with which a
succession of these movements and the subsequent fixings
and new attitudes and positions might be made to occur, was
most amusing and most beautiful. Now and then I observed
that, when her arm had stiffened while elevated, she could
just afterwards bring it down a very little.

The rigidity of any part, even when it was in accordance
with her will, as when she had grasped my hand from affection
and was not only unable, but disinclined, to relax it, could
be at once dissipated by my breathing upon it; and we find
that when other patients voluntarily grasp our hand and we
cannot force their fingers open, a little breathing upon these
produces their relaxation in spite of the patient’s efforts,
equally as when there is involuntary rigidity. Noticing that,
in whatever strange position her arms and hands were fixed,
I thus set them at liberty so that they fell into one which was
natural and easy, she attempted to effect this by breathing
upon them herself, and invariably succeeded just as well as
myself. It was impossible not to laugh at seeing her stoop-
ing and stretching her head as far as she could to breathe


* See Vol. II., p. 61.

t See Vol. II., p. 63, where is pointed out the still greater appropriate-
ness of the term congelatio to rigidity than to catalepsy, to which it is given
by medical writers to catalepsy.

112


450 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


upon her hands or arms when these were stiffened in a posi-
tion she thought ridiculous; and to witness her joy at being
a match for me when she had thus succeeded in relaxing
them and moving them into an agreeable position: and then by
our touching her again with the point of the finger she would
be instigated in spite of herself to catch at me, or move her
hand and arm away if touched by a stranger, and again in-
stantly stiffen in a new attitude. She at last found it was not
necessary to breathe on the whole extremity, but sufficient to
breathe on any part of it, and therefore turned, lowered, and
pushed forward her head, and extended her lips, so as to breathe
on her shoulder, when her hands or arms were stiffened. I
never shall forget the scenes of mirth that all this produced
to those who witnessed them. I was a match for her, how-
ever, and by long passes down the sides of her neck stiffened
her head, and thus prevented her getting her head near enough
to her shoulder to breathe upon it. She would then blow to-
wards it out of one corner of her mouth as her head was fixed
straight ; in vain, however, unless after a length of time she ‘
could depress her head a little. But by stiffening and locking
her jaw also, I completely frustrated her.—I have not yet met
with another patient who could succeed as she did. I have
requested the rest of them when I had stiffened any part to
breathe upon it in order to relax it; nay, other patients learning
this in her case, have of their own accord breathed upon their
own stiffened arms and hands,—but all completely in vain.

I could of course remove the rigidity by transverse passes,
pointing, or contact. But the contact of a stranger could
not be shewn to have the effect, because the emotion of dis-
pleasure enabled her instantly to withdraw the part touched ;
and if I touched her hand and she continued to grasp mine,
her emotion of pleasure in grasping my hand surpassed its
relaxing power and enabled her to preserve a rigid grasp.
The superior relaxing power of the breath was shewn by its
producing complete relaxation under these circumstances.

She discovered a second mode of frustrating me when I
attempted something she did not like. If her joy was great
on finding that she could relax a stiffened part by breathing,
it was no less on her discovering at length that, when she was
grasping me, I could not relax her hand and compel her to let
go by my breathing upon it, if she grasped the fore-arm of this
hand with her other hand. This was very curious. However,
I soon devised a method of gaining the victory : for I breathed
on her hand which was grasping her fore-arm and thus relaxed
it, and made it let go its hold; and then I breathed upon her
other hand which was grasping mine and at once relaxed it.


by Dr. Elliotson. 451


Mine was now the joy and her’s the vexation. She also dis-
covered a mode of preventing her arms and hands from growing
rigid : and this was to keep themin constant motion. She, there-
fore, -was seen busily rubbing her hands as she sat, perhaps
singing or chattering in high glee at the same time, whenever
she could begin this before they stiffened after her going off
into the sleep-waking or after I had relaxed them by breathing.
For some time we were ignorant of her reason, and supposed
her rubbing them was a mere absurd trick : and it was not till
we laughed at her about it that she disclosed her discovery of
its preventing her arms and hands from stiffening. It was
this rubbing that occasioned her aunt to say, “ Why, Ellen,
you'll wear your hands out ;’—a remark which always vexed
her and was always heard by her, though not another syllable
that her aunt ever uttered, (and this lady was always with her
during the mesmerism,) was heard by her, as far as the closest
attention on our parts could observe, however annoying what
was said might be presumed to be (pp. 360-1).

After a few weeks, her lower jaw would on some days
become spontaneously rigid. This is not an uncommon oc-
currence. It will occasionally for a time take place and
remain, like the closure of the eyes, after the patient wakes:
and then may not occur for a long period. It was, as is
usual, readily removed by breathing upon it, or holding my
fingers upon it, even by pointing towards it close, and by means
not mesmeric, as the application of something cold.* I could
induce it at any time, just as I could fully stiffen her neck,
trunk, or legs, by long passes down its angles,—usually by
nine. What is curious, she could stiffen her lower jaw herself
under emotion. If by touching over certain cerebral organs
I gave her a strong disposition to say something which she
greatly disapproved of saying, her only mode of preventing
herself was to stiffen her jaw, and make utterance impossible :
as when I touched over the organ of Imitation, and in the
midst of saying a number of things, all which she repeated ra-
pidly after me, I said something disrespectful of myself or any
other person whom she liked; or when I touched over the
organ of the Love of Property, and made her feel dishonour-
ably avaricious, and conversed with her on subjects of pro-
perty, and she could not resist the mean and dishonourable feel-
ing, but at the very same time condemned it and was ashamed
of it. Volition alone could not have locked it. But under
emotion, she fearing the effect of her being able to speak
and thinking of its locking, the desired rigidity of its closing
muscles,—the masseters and temporals, took place.

* See Vol. II., p 61; also above, p. 449.


452 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


To illustrate this, I may quote what I have said elsewhere.
“Under emotion, the action of the heart may be excited or
depressed : any one part may grow turgid and red, or shrink
and grow pale: and, by thinking voluntarily of circum-
stances calculated to excite such emotions, we may volunta-
rily, in this indirect manner, affect the action of involuntary
parts; and even without thinking of circumstances affecting
ourselves, but by only dwelling on the circumstances of others,
—as in reading. Betterton, the actor, when playing Hamlet,
could cause his face at once to become bloodless. (Penny
Cyclopedia.) Blumenbach says he has seen ‘some persons
able at any time to produce a spasmodic horripilation of the
skin by representing some unpleasant object to their imagi-
nation. Others have had the power of exciting local sweat
in the hands, &c. (See, for instance, T. Bartholin, Acta
Hafniens. 1676. vol. iv. p. 194.) ”*

She could not, however, relax her jaw again; either
when she made attempts by merely willing, or was under
emotion. Droll indeed it was to excite her to say something
she did not like, and see her look vexed and her jaw suddenly
lock before the words came out of her mouth: and afterwards
to see her sit with it closed, after the disposition to say what
she did not like was over, and she would have been glad to chat
again but was compelled to refrain from even good words.
And then I would relax it for her, and she would laugh
heartily and chat merrily as usual. Of course after a length
of time spontaneous relaxation would have ensued. She al-
ways smiled with satisfaction, and seemed to chuckle, when
she had thus frustrated me in my attempt to make her say
something she did not like: and if I relaxed her jaw and made
the same attempt again by exciting the particular organs and
saying certain things, she instantly fixed her jaw again
as the words were coming out of her mouth.—Mesmerised
water applied to her hands greatly increased the force of their
rigidity.

Common sensibility or touch was abolished as to pain from
mechanical injury. She felt no pain from mechanical causes,
pinching, pricking, &c., nor was she very sensible of tempe-
rature. She felt no coldness from cold objects: nor warmth
from warm ones: but a Aof poker brought close to her hand,
gave her a sensation of warmth. She had a sense of con-
tact and resistance. If I pinched her and asked what she
felt ; her answer was, “I feel you.” “ But do I hurt you?”
“No.” “Don’t you feel me pinching you?” “No. I feel
you; but you do not hurt me.” This is a very common

* Human Physiology, p. 484-5.


by Dr. Elliotson. 458


answer in mesmeric insensibility to pain from mechanical
causes. Yet I have known her sometimes sensible to prick-
ing, &c., at the tips of the fingers, as Rosina always was ;
and as another patient of mine, in whom the seats of insen-
sibility are always changing, is not unfrequently.*

She heard unless when her feelings made her impene-
trable (p. 360—363). Thus she heard only me, and those
whom she supposed to be in the mesmeric state, and after a
time Dr. Engledue, and noises supposed by her to be made
by us, and one sentence, “ Ellen, yo’ll wear your hands out,”
whoever uttered it. If others touched me, still she could not
hear them; and she had no means of knowing that they
touched me, as she could not open her eyes. But she heard
every body and every noise while I touched any part of her.
My cockatoo’s loudest screams did not affect her in the least,
unless I put the point of my finger upon her hand, and then
they instantly went through her head. After she had become
mesmerisable by Dr. Engledue, and heard him, his touching
her had the same effect as mine upon her hearing. Her eyes
were never in the least open. I never found her possess
taste or smell.

Excitement of the Cerebral Organs. The first time she
went into the sleep-waking, I attempted to put a finger over
some cerebral organs: but she moved her head away in dis-
pleasure; perhaps considering it a liberty, for her sense of
propriety was at all times very great. She allowed me, after
much kind and earnest request, to touch her head, and I put
my finger upon the organs of Veneration. She had been con-
versing with me, but soon she became silent, and after some
time began singing a hymn. I breathed over the organ, and
she left off, and had no recollection that she had been singing.

In this particular a change took place after a few days,
and she remembered her previous thoughts and acts when a
particular organ was no longer excited or even another was
excited in its stead.

This variation is very common. Sometimes there is no
memory, sometimes imperfect and sometimes perfect memory,
of previous excitement of organs: just as when different states
occur in sleep-waking, (and changes of state in it are very
common,) there may be no recollection of one in another, or
there may. There is no rule for these points.

The next day, I touched over Tune, while she was talking,
and soon her words were drawled forth in a sing-song manner,
which increased to a chant: and without her being aware of


* See my remarks on the remarkable varieties in insensibility, Vol. I.,
p. 3389, 413; Vol. IL., p. 209; Vol. III., p. 59, 60.


454 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


it. When I asked her why she did so: her reply was, “I
don’t.” “You really do.” “No, I don’t.” “ But indeed
you do.” “ Well, I cannot help it if Ido.” These answers
were all chanted. I removed my finger, but the musical
ideas had perverted her understanding, and she fancied her-
self teaching her sister the harp, and went through the whole
process of a lesson, rebuking the child for playing false
notes, &c.

During her visits, I tried numerous cerebral organs, and
nearly all that I tried gave exquisite results. The effects
came instantly, but lasted long after my finger was removed.
In my patient Mary Ann they last long afterwards also, but
do not begin for some time. At length contact with her own
finger guided by my hand, nay, contact with any inanimate
substance, answered as well as with my finger; my nose or
chin had an equal effect. Pointing with even my finger
never produced any result. The effect continued about a
minute after my finger was withdrawn; but then ceased in-
stantly that I breathed over the organ, as well as if an anta-
gonist organ was touched over.

Miss Abbott’s organs could never be excited “ by placing
the ends of her own fingers upon their seat guided by mine”
(p. 70), any more than the rigidity of the hands or arms of her
or any other patient upon whom I have yet tried the experiment
could be relaxed by the patient’s own breath. Her organs were
less excitable, so that the difference between true mesmeric
influence and mechanical irritation or suggestion was evi-
denced by the frequently inferior excitement through the
latter ; and if their excitability happened to be declining, the
possibility of exciting them 4 inanimate substances would
lessen much faster than that of exciting them by the fingers:
sometimes inanimate substances scarcely excited them at all,
while the fingers succeeded well (p. 69, 70). But the excita-
bility of Miss Collins’s organs was such that I could discover
no difference of effect: yet mere pointing, with no effort at
willing, or with the utmost willing, was equally inoperative.

The power of breathing over the organs was such, that, if
any one was in a state of high excitement from abundant
excitability or conversation, or other external causes not
mesmeric, this excitement was at once equally reduced by
breathing; and, if the excitement was in only its ordinary
degree, it could be equally well brought down to nothing.

The effect of touching over Tune was always to bring
her utterance first into a sing-song, however fast she was prat-
tling: and at length she left off her conversation and began
singing something. When I touched over Colour, and asked


by Dr. Elliotson. 455


what she was thinking of, she always mentioned some cir-
cumstance in which colour was concerned,—walking in a gar-
den where there were beautiful flowers—looking at something
in which were pictures ; and she generally made no allusion
to the colours at first, so that I frequently did not compre-
hend she was thinking of colours till she went on to specify
the particulars, and then she always arrived at colours.

The effect of touching over Veneration was invariably to
give her a very serious look, and cause her to become
silent, to answer any question in only a whisper, to lower
her head—in fact to give the most perfect expression of
humility. In Mary Ann the effect is to bring the palms —
of the hands flat together and raise them, to cause great
seriousness, even sighing, and to make her wish for Sunday
and regret the many opportunities of religious improvement
she has lost; but she never bows her head. Others fall on
their knees. I cannot doubt that the primitive function of this
organ is humility and a disposition to reverence superiority.

Whenever I touched over Dr. Spurzheim’s alleged organ
of Hope, the same effects exactly came as from touching over
Veneration: yet I tried very often and very long at a time.
At length I spoke of it in her presence as the organ of Hope,
so that if suggestion could have had anything to do with the
original excitement of her other organs, which I believed it
had not, Hope might be excited in this way ; but no such ma-
nifestation ever came. I have not yet seen any proofs of this
organ by observation of development ; nor ever seen Hope ex-
cited by touching over this part ; nor read of the occurrence
when it was certain that due care had been taken to avoid sug-
gestion by selecting a person totally ignorant of cerebral phy-
siology and by rigidly preventing conversation which could en-
lighten him. Hope, I suppose, may be called the belief, or
disposition to believe, that what we desire will take place.
Some persons are prone to this belief, others not. But this
does not shew that Hope is a distinct faculty. Gall denied
the existence of such a faculty. “In the passions,” says he,
“the organs are active, excited in their fundamental func-
tions ; in the affections, on the contrary, the organs are pas-
sive, modified, seized in a particular manner, agreeable or dis-
agreeable. Shame, fear, anguish, sorrow, despair, jealousy,
anger, joy, ecstacy, &c., are involuntary sensations, passive
seizures, either of only one nervous system, of one organ, or
of the whole brain. There consequently can be no peculiar
organs for joy, for sorrow, for despair, or discouragement,
for hope, nor for any affection whatever.”* I have always
* Fonctions du Cerveau, t. vi., p. 431, &c.


456 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


noticed hope to be in proportion to the strength of a desire,
to the general ardour of temperament, and to the disposition
to look at all things present as well as past in a favourable
point of view, &c. The large size of individual organs of
desire on the one hand, and the smallness of the organs of
reflection and of circumspection on the other,—the relative
proportions and positive strength of all these, will affect it.
When a desire is strong and knowledge, intellect, or circum-
spection, poor, the improbability of success is not perceived :
and again, strength of intellect or knowledge may shew suc-
cess to be probable, when ignorance or poor intellect cannot
perceive the probability. A mother desiring the life of her
child and ignorant of medicine, may believe it will recover,
when the physician, not so anxious but well-informed, has
no hope. Yet when the physician’s child is ill, he, desiring
its life, may find his knowledge of too little avail in pre-
venting him from indulging in unfounded hope. Even self-
esteem may encourage the feeling of hope: and the faculty
of courage also. I am inclined therefore to consider it a
mode of action or state, and not a distinct faculty: and
especially when I observe that those who are inclined the
most to hope, that is, to look upon the future favourably,
are equally disposed to look upon the present favourably.
The latter circumstance cannot be hope or the result of a
particular organ, but must be a mode of feeling. It is
remarkable that Dr. Spurzheim does not inform us how he
discovered this organ, or give us a single example of it. He
seems to have imagined its existence, and then considered
where it must lie. This was his way. But Gall condescends
to relate the origin of his several discoveries, and gives us
abundant positive and negative instances in proof.* I may

* “ Dr. Spurzheim, in his fondness for changing his names, his arrange-
ment, and his numbering of the organs, introduced confusion without ad-
vancing knowledge. ‘To prove his speculative spirit, I may mention that,
instead of giving the origin of any of his asserted discoveries, as Gall did,
and adding a host of examples, he tells us, in regard to the organ of Inha-
bitiveness, only that a gentleman much attached to his house had a particular
spot of his head hotter than any other ; and in regard to the organs of Hope,
Marvellousness, Conscientiousness, Size, Weight, Order, Time, he neither
tells how he discovered them, nor adduces a single proof. Gall was too
much of a philosopher to wish others to examine a mere assertion.

** But, in regard to all the organs discovered by Gall, except that of
Colour. Dr. S. gives the circumstances which led to the discovery, and a
certain number of individual facts; though but a very small number of
those related by Gall. ‘ He has changed the names,’ says Gall, ‘ but treated
the organs according to my principles ; yet in so hasty and feeble a manner,
that this part of my doctrine would be deplorable, if it were not established
on a better foundation.” (I. c. 4to. vol. iii. Preface ; a part which every body
should read, for its exposure and demolition of Dr. S.’s unjust and weak
attempts.) His own alleged discoveries may be real; but the remarkable


by Dr. Elliotson. 457


remark that hope is denied by Dr. Spurzheim and Mr. Combe
to exist in brutes! Surely when my dog bounds with
joy at seeing its master take his hat for a walk, or a spaniel
accustomed to a lump of sugar at hearing the tea things
rattle, they both are full of hope; the former that he shall
be taken out of doors, and the latter that he shall have his
sugar.

As soon as Self-esteem was touched over, however amiable
and cheerful she was, a change came over her countenance,
she looked important, spoke decidedly and scornfully, raised
her head and whole body, and uttered the most self-sufficient
and contemptuous opinions: addressed me and others whom
she could hear as “ Sir’ and “ Madam :” would allow of no
contradiction: was as good as any body—if she was short,
she was none the worse for that—was as clever as you, perhaps
a good deal cleverer: was not ill-looking, was in fact, shaking
her head up and down, very well looking; it would be well
if others were as handsome. The scorn of her lips, the
movements of her head, her utterance, were such, that
when one of the most distinguished writers of the day beheld
the manifestation of the excitement of this faculty, as well
as of the rest, he turned round to his chaplain and asked, as
so many other rational people have done on similar occasions,
“Can this be called acting? What finished actor could equal
this? to suppose her acting would be more difficult than to
admit the reality and naturalness of what we witness.” Such
sights are familiar to mesmerisers, in patients, even children,
who have no idea of the cerebral organs, and but little of
mesmerism. Noone who ever saw the Okeys will forget their
manifestations of various faculties, though not through the
local mesmerisation of distinct cerebral organs. Mr. Wakley
was rivetted and laughed till he almost cracked his sides :
yet finding that nearly all medical men were against the
truth of mesmerism, and that he was inundated with letters on
the subject from medical men, nineteen out of twenty being
against it, as he told me, and nineteen men buying more
Lancets than one, he deliberately made up his mind, long
before he saw them I have no doubt,* to call the poor children
circumstance I have mentioned tends to create a suspicion that he reasoned
himself into a belief of certain faculties, and gave them localities according
to their nature ; having learnt from Gall where ‘ perceptive’ and where
‘ reflective faculties,’ where ‘ sentiments’ and where ‘ propensities,’ to use
his own language, reside. Localisation, after Gall’s discoveries, was easy,
especially as Gall had not mapped out the whole head, but left blanks where
he possessed no facts.”—Human Physiology, p. 379.


79
* See my Farewell Letter to the Students of University College ; quoted


in my Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations without pain in the Mesmeric
State, p. 84.


458 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


impostors, and has the effrontery to do so still, though he every
day hears from more and more persons, to his daily annoy-
ance, that mesmerism, as he has always well known, is true ;
and feels himself more and more nearly overpowered by the
public voice.

If accused of being proud, while the organs were influ-
enced, she justified it, for she “ had plenty to be proud of.”
“What?” “Every thing, Sir.” If I pointed out that she
was taught differently by her religion, “‘ Never you mind—
judge for yourself; leave me to judge for myself. Do you
think that I am not capable of judging? Indeed! a pretty
thing to be sure! If people are not proud, they are trampled
upon; I’ve a right to be proud.” When the influence was
over, I enquired why she had been so proud. Her answer
was that I was the cause of it, though she did not know how;
and that she could not help it.

The feeling of pride and of independence were equally
excited whatever part of the organ I touched over: but the
highest portions gave the greatest manifestation. Touching
lower, over Inhabitativeness or Concentrativeness, as it is also
called, had no obvious effect, till I came near the organ of
Self-esteem, and then pride was manifested.

Touching over the organ of Vanity, or the love of distinc-
tion, produced a very different effect. She was perfectly
amiable, though self-satisfied, cheerful, smiling, and speak-
ing kindly, fiddling with and arranging different portions of
her dress. Those who have visited insane-houses must have
marked the difference between the proud patients, who walk
in silence with their heads erect, taking no notice of you, or
replying scornfully, and the happy, chattering, good-natured,
vain patients, ornamented most preposterously ; and, if not
ignorant of cerebral physiology, must have noticed the
usually large size of the organ of Self-esteem in the former,
and of the organ of Desire of Distinction in the latter. The
bearing of my patient resembled most perfectly that of these
two sets of patients just as I touched over the one organ or
the other.

The first time (April 24th) that I touched over Love of
Property, she became silent, and would reply to nothing.
The next day, she apologized for this in her sleep-waking,
and said that she could not though she much wished it, and
feared I must think she behaved ill. I could not comprehend
how this effect resulted. The next time I did this (April
26th), she put her hands into her pocket, and fiddled about
in it. When asked what she was about, she replied that she
was trying to find if she had all her things right in it.


by Dr. Elliotson. 459


On the 27th I touched over Love of Property* again, while
we were chatting; she hung down her head and was silent,
and, on my urging her to speak, her jaw closed. On the 28th
she apologized to me for not having spoken, but would not
explain why, and hung down her head. On the 29th I
touched over Love of Property again, and she became silent.
I urged her to speak, but her jaw closed, as on the 27th.

From the excellence of her organization and education she
felt that cheating and stealing were wrong, and was heartily
ashamed of defending them or disclosing her desire to commit
them, and, therefore, when under the artificial excitement of
the organs, and led into conversation upon her thoughts, she
was most anxious to conceal them, and was silent when I
questioned her. On the 30th I again touched over Love of
Property, and she again became silent. I then touched over
the organ of Friendship at the same time, and she explained
to me in deep sorrow why she had been silent the other day :
—she had thoughts of contriving to get a piano for £25, for
which £60 were asked, and that price she knew to be below
its value, but she was nevertheless desirous of obtaining the
instrument at that price, and had hoped she should succeed.
If not under the counteracting influence of friendship,
which made her willing to disclose her avaricious thoughts
and, even while ashamed of them, to defend them when long-
continued contact of the finger greatly excited acquisitive-
ness, she contrived to bring on a rigidity of her jaw
and thus disable herself, at the same time hanging down her
head in shame. Indeed we tried so often and so plagued
her that she was delighted at frustrating us, and she would
then, as soon as she had locked her jaw, being speechless,
shake her head up and down in triumph over our endea-
vours to get her to tell her thoughts, her joy at doing
us overpowering her shame at being rapacious. At length
the very moment I spoke of her rapacity, even if I said only
piano, jew, Moses, or money, whether my finger was over the
organ of Property or not, her jaw closed. I could now under-

stand why the first day (24th) that I touched over the organ
of Property she became silent. I afterwards forgot the cir-
cumstance till I was looking over my notes for the publication
of the case, or I might have learnt the reason by touching
over Friendship and asking her. I have no doubt that, being
very anxious at the time to purchase the piano, which was
above her mark, she then felt some mean or dishonest desires
* I adopt the established and convenient custom of using the same ex-


pression for the organ as for the faculty. The context always makes the
meaning intelligible.


460 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


to obtain it at her price, and condemned herself for them and
was ashamed to mention them.

Afterwards, as the organ became more excitable and the
finger was held longer on it, she was not contented with look-
ing after her own, and thinking of overreaching, but endea-
voured to possess herself of what belonged to others. Her
hand did not go into her pocket, but began moving. Her
fingers began to move about a little, and then slid near me;
and nearer; and then she felt for my pockets, or my fingers,
and in the most cunning manner took off my ring, or took
something out of my pockets, looking greedy and rapacious,
craftily talking to me sometimes with a voice of unconcern on
some other subject, or so absorbed in the attempt as to be silent,
looking greedy, sometimes smiling and shrugging her shoulders
when she had nearly or quite abstracted something. Oh how her
“itching palm,” her every look, gesture, and intonation, sur-
passed all acting! If asked what she was doing or had done,
she “ was doing or had done nothing,” speaking as innocently
as the purest angel. If accused, she at first gently, and at
last resolutely denied the charge; and if I turned the con-
versation upon theft, she more or less justified it, by saying
that people must look after their own interest.—The words
covetiveness and acquisitiveness I never thought to be proper
appellations of the faculty. It surely gives a desire to retain
as well as to acquire, and Gall’s name for it,—sense or love of
property, is evidently the more correct. What other faculty
can make people miserly? If some thieves do give away what
they have stolen, this is from the action of some stronger feel-
ing; or, if they are careless about retaining what they have
stolen, this is but a modification of the action of the organ,
its impulse being expended at once. Even Dr. Spurzheim,
after insisting upon calling it the organ of acquisitiveness,
inconsistently finishes in these words: “ This faculty prompts
to say mine.” This must be the fundamental nature of it,
the disposition to acquire being a stronger excitement of it
than to retain.*

On my touching over the organ of Love of Offspring, she
used to begin to sway a very little, and then really rocked,
and, placing her arms as if holding a baby, began to hum a
tune and talk of, and even to, “the dear baby,”—an insane
delusion being absolutely produced that she was nursing her
brother’s child ; and if I slapped her hands or arms, of course
gently, and said I hated children and would injure the little

* I must remark that the point at which the Love of Property was ex-


cited by the finger was that marked by Gall, and not that new extent given
to the organ by Dr. Spurzheim.


by Dr. Elliotson. 461


wretch, she was agonized, and defended the imaginary being
by stooping over her lap, turning round from me, and or-
dering me not to touch it.

Nothing of this kind occurred if I touched over Friend-
ship. She then loved me and was all kindness to me ; squeez-
ing my hand and speaking in the most sisterly or filial, affec-
tionate tone and language.

The finger on the organ of the Disposition to Violence
(Destructiveness) instantly made her cross, and, if I still held
it upon the part, violent, saying she hated me, till at length
she began to strike me, and was absolutely ferocious. I have
no doubt that by the continued application of the finger,
some persons might be brought to commit murder.

Touching over Courage or Combativeness had no marked
effect the first time; but afterwards a degree of violence en-
sued ; not, however, to be compared with that from touching
over Destructiveness.

On the 24th of April, I put my finger on Alimentiveness,
as I thought; but no effect came. I was talking to her and
others. After a time, I looked and found my finger was too
high. I placed it on the proper spot, and instantly she
began munching; and, in answer to me, said she was eating
an apple,—an absolute delusion being induced by the force of
the excitement, just as had been the case with the Love of
Offspring: and so perfect was the delusion, that she picked
the imaginary pips and core from her teeth, and at length
threw herself back, saying she was full and had eaten enough.
When we asked her where and how she got the apples, she re-
plied that they had been sent her by her mother : and her aunt
informed me that her mother had just sent her up a bushel.
This circumstance no doubt directed the alimentary delusion
to apples, and rendered it more intense. The next day, on
my repeating the experiment, she fancied she was eating
apples and plum-cake, one having been sent from the country
with the apples. If I touched over Violence while Alimen-
tiveness was excited, she no longer ate quietly, but voraciously,
like a very hungry carnivorous animal: it was no longer to
essen but to fressen, as the Germans distinguish. Tanguam

bestia, was the expression of the spiritual peer above men-
tioned ; for our conversation was in Latin to avoid the possi-
bility of her understanding it. At length, she sometimes
under the excitement of Alimentiveness would fancy she was
eating biscuits; and, when she was satiated, would shake
the crumbs from her lap. We could make her believe she
was eating or drinking anything, by telling her that she was.
We gave her water, telling her it was wine, and she mistook


462 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


it for wine and relished it amazingly. Nay, I gave her
essence of wormwood and told her it was wine: it was equally
relished. After I had taken my finger off the organ, she no
longer tasted it as wine, and yet she did not taste its bitter-
ness. I woke her immediately, and she had a very bitter
taste, as she informed me the next day in her sleep, though
at the time, with her habitual lady-like reserve towards me
in her waking state, she did not mention it. One day, while
my finger was on the organ, I gave her a flat piece of aloes,
telling her it was cake; and she mistook it for cake, and
munched and munched it with delight, so that a very sharp
diarrhoea was the consequence, which she could not account
for. I have, on the other hand, under the excitement of the
organ, given her water and made her believe it was worm-
wood ; and then made her take the same water for brandy.

I find in my notes that on the 6th of May a bun was
given her, which she declined, having lost her appetite ; but
the moment I touched over Alimentiveness, she began de-
vouring it with delight.* Her taste was delusion (p. 453).

On the 29th of April, I first placed my finger on the
organ of Imitation, and she immediately, instead of answer-
ing questions and continuing conversation, repeated every
word I said. As long as my finger was over the organ she,
from my contact with her, heard everything spoken by others,
and repeated what others said equally with what I said. Nay,
if I or others made a noise of any kind, as in coughing, whist-
ling, clapping the hands, knocking, she did the same as well as
she could. But having no occult power of any sort, and her
eyes being always perfectly closed, she never imitated grimaces
or any noiseless act of others. The action of the faculty of imi-
tation was always most amusing. However animated she was


* Gall considered that there must be a cerebral organ for the desire of
taking food ¢ Fonctions du Cerveau, t. iv., p. 63), but he had not discovered
its situation, though he had left the spot unappropriated which is now con-
sidered to be its seat. This Dr. Hoppe ascertained in 1823-4 ( Edinburgh
Phrenological Journal, No. V., VII.), and says he admits the faculty as
distinct and cerebral, though without mentioning that Gall had already
done the same. Dr, Spurzheim gave the discovery to a Mr. Crook, most
unjustly and without assigning a shadow of reason. In truth, the latter has
not the shadow of aclaim. Mr. Crook never published or uttered a word
upon the subject till many months afier Dr. Hoppe’s first paper was printed
in the Edinburgh Phrenological Journal: in fact, six weeks after the second
paper had been read in the Edinburgh Society and three months after its date,
he astonished us by announcing his discovery in the London Phrenolo-
gical Society, 30th March, 1825, and he read a paper upon it on the 8th of
April. After a discovery has been announced to the public, it is preposterous
for any one to attempt to found a claim by saying he had made the same dis-
covery, though he had not mentioned it to his scientific brethren. Any one
can do this on every occasion of the announcement of a discovery.


by Dr. Elliotson. 463


and interested in conversation, as soon as I placed the point
of my finger over the organ, she no longer took part in it,
but merely repeated what I said, though in opposition to her
own side of an argument or statement. When we made a
noise too difficult for her, or spoke Greek or any language
she did not understand, as when one of the four young Hin-
doos now at University College spoke Hindostannee, she came

‘as near it as possible ; but, having no occult power or cerebral
sympathy, she was situated like any ordinary person deter-
wined to mimic another. If I enquired why she mimicked,
all I could obtain was a repetition of my question—“ Why
do you mimic me, Ellen?” But, after my finger was removed,
she allowed she mimicked, and protested, as in the case, for-’
merly mentioned, of pride, she could not help it—“ You made
me, but I cannot tell how.”

If I said anything she disliked or disapproved, she could
not by any effort of will prevent herself from repeating it ;
but if it seemed too bad to her, her jaw became locked, ex-
actly as when she was absolutely ashamed of disclosing any-
thing to me and yet strongly impelled. If I said, “It’sa
fine day, I’m a fool, I’m a rogue, I should like to kill a few
hundred people ;” she repeated all this rapidly—* It’s a fine
day, I’m a fool, I’m a rogue”—perhaps laughing heartily while
saying these things as rapidly as I did: but if I said, “ Dr.
Elliotson’s a fool, Dr. Elliotson’s a rogue”—her jaw instantly
locked. If again I said, “ Dr. Engledue’s tall and well grown,
Dr. Elliotson’s stumpy ;” she would say, “ Dr. Engledue’s
tall and well grown”—and then her jaw locked, and she ren-
dered farther utterance impossible to herself. If, while com-
pelling her to imitate, I uttered humble sentiments and in a
humble tone and placed a second finger on Pride as well as
on Imitation, she repeated my humble words, but in the
proudest tone, as if they were haughty sentiments: and, if I
uttered haughty sentiments with a second finger on Venera-
tion or Humility, she repeated my proud expressions in the
most lowly and humble manner.

If I touched over the organ of the faculty called by Gall,
Wit, Causticity, &c., and by Dr. Spurzheim, Mirthfulness,
she instantly began to laugh, and laughed more and more the
longer my finger remained upon it: and when I asked her
the reason, she always mentioned something that struck her
as droll. Mirthfulness is hardly a proper term, because there
may be mirth in endless circumstances. Men may be merry
when they succeed or are gratified in any way; the savage,
when he at length has caught his foe, laughs alond and capers


with joy; children dance and shout with joy; the kitten is
VOL. III. KK


464 Cure of ua Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


merry ; the cricket has its “cheerful mirth ;” and the highest
wit, although it excites a smile and gives a peculiar relish,
may be far from exciting mirth. The faculty of the organ
appears to me the sense of drollery and ludicrousness : and
there is wit when this is united with intellect. According
to the intellect of the individual will be the intellectuality
of his wit; and the wit of an unintellectual person must
be unintellectual. Punch caricatured me, Oct. 21, 1843,
exciting the cerebral organs. This was all very well, though
the article was too poor to have procured admission into
Punch as it now is. The effect of exciting the organ of Wit,
among others, in Captain Valiant’s nurse, was quoted. The
writer doubts “ whether the critical ear of Moore, or Sydney
or Horace Smith, would recognize the keen tone of wit” in
what she said. I am quite sure they would not. But she
was only a poor nurse, and her intellect and education did
not enable her feeling of drollery to give rise to intellectual
sallies. It was the best wit that her sense of drollery could
excite.

When I touched over what Dr. Spurzheim calls the organ
of Conscientiousness or Justice, there was no marked mani-
festation, because her habitual sentiments were strictly just ;
nor when I touched over Benevolence, because she was habitu-
ally benevolert. But the faculties of these organs shone
forth brilliantly when the organ of Property was already in
mesmeric excitement. When she was already bent upon
thieving, so that she had pulled my ring off my finger or
was quietly rifling my pockets, her countenance beaming with
delight and expressing at the same time the utmost cunning,
if I touched over Benevolence, she would instantly look sor-
rowful, and not merely desist, but begin anxiously to replace
the stolen articles: and, on being asked why, her invariable
reply was, “It would be so unkind to take anything from
another person—it would be wrong to injure any one.” If,
instead of Benevolence, I touched over Veneration, the
same effects resulted, but her invariable reply was, “ It would
be sinful—we are forbidden to steal.” If, instead of these,
I touched over Conscientiousness, she also instantly looked
sorrowful and anxiously restored what she had stolen, but
the reason she invariably gave was, it would be wrong to take
what belongs to another—it would be unjust. While keeping
one finger upon Acquisitiveness, to put a second on one of
these, and at once see her sorrowfully and anxiously make
restitution, giving as her reason that it was unkind, un-
just, or sinful to steal, accordingly as one coronal organ or
another was touched over; and to see her cunningly and


by Dr. Elliotson. 465


anxiously stealing again as soon as none of them was touched
over, and kear her stoutly justify theft if accused of it, and
then again be brought to penitence and condemnation of it
as unjust, unkind, sinful, in succession and varied succession
—was a scene I am in vain attempting to describe. The ex-
quisiteness of all this was heightened by my acting at the
same time upon Mary Ann, whose cerebral organs display
the same capabilities and send forth the same manifestations.
I would seat them side by side, and excite the organ of Pro-
perty in both. They both became thorough thieves; plotted
together how they could in concert best filch. The sight of
their twisting fingers, their whispering consultation, their
anxious, cunning, and rapacious mouths and breathing, their
joy at the probability of success attending their stratagem—
was indeed a spectacle. Then I would touch Benevolence,
or Veneration, or Justice in one, and she would at once be-
come good and sorrowful, decline the scheme, condemn it as
unkind, unjust, or wicked, while the other would persist and
laugh at these considerations, impenetrable to them, as
firmly bent upon her depraved views as the other was certain
of their depravity and as firmly determined to act in opposi-
tion to them. And then I could at once change their charac-
ters, and make the thief the good character, and her who had
been so seriously enforcing what was right become the thief.

The same alternate variation of character in reference to
Pride could be induced. I sometimes made one haughty
and the other humble: then reversed their characters, and she
who had reproved the other for pride, now justified her own
pride, and was rebuked with all humility by her who just
before was haughty.

If I touched over Friendship, she sorrowfully restored my
articles, but the reason given was that she would not steal
from me. There was no reason of gencral benevolence. If
Pride and Property were touched over together, she justified
stealing ; but would “steal nothing which was not worth
stealing.” If I touched over Cautiousness, she also desisted
from her theft, but not at all sorrowfully ; and the reason
alleged always was, “lest she should be detected.” She was
naturally cautious, equally prudent as good, and a manifestation
of the mesmeric excitement of the organ was therefore not sa-
tisfactory, unless in antagonism to another excited organ. If I
touched overCautiousness before she began to steal, she shewed
the desire, but hesitated, shook her head and refrained.

The facts in this patient and Mary Ann respecting the
organ of Justice are the first which satisfied me of Dr. Spurz-
heim’s correctness in assigning the situation of this organ.

KK 2


466 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


I had always been in uncertainty with regard to it. For in the
heads of all the unjust criminals I had examined, there was a
deficiency not only at this spot, but along the coronal surface
forwards from it, so that the head was keel-shaped; and in
truly just persons the rest of the coronal surface forwards
from it was equally developed as at this spot. I could therefore
not come to any conclusion respecting it, and said in my
Physiology, p. 380, “ It is possible that Dr. Spurzheim disco-
vered the organs of three faculties, which Gall believed to
exist,—Time, Order, and Conscientiousness.” I must differ
from Gall, both by reasoning and observation of head, who
regards benevolence as only a higher degree of justice; and
therefore hypothetically assigns to both the same organ. At
the same time I must differ from Dr. Spurzheim in regard-
ing conscientiousness and justice as the same. For conscien-
tiousness may relate to matters in which justice is uot con-
cerned. The social organs of Love of Offspring, Friendship,
Benevolence, Veneration, when they have been disregarded
in those who have them large, feel reproaches of con-
science, no less than these are felt when justice has been dis-
regarded by those who have its organs large. Conscientious-
ness relates no more to justice than to friendship, veneration,
&c. The proper term, I conceive, is Justice, honesty, fairness,
and surely this must depend upon a particular sense or faculty.

When under the excitement of other unsocial, selfish
organs than Love of Property, as the Disposition to Violence
and Self-esteem, contact over Benevolence, Veneration, or
Justice counteracted her fury and haughtiness, and she con-
demned these feelings as unkind, sinful or unjust, exactly
as the organs were respectively touched over.

From the excellence of her character, the artificial ex-
citement of one of these coronal, high moral, organs was
found by Dr. Engledue to counteract the combined artificial
excitement of two and even three unsocial organs. In less
happily organized and educated persons, such results might
probably not have taken place. It might have counteracted
but two, but one, or there might have been a necessity to
excite two coronal organs to restrain even one, or to excite
even three to restrain even one, or counteraction might have
been impossible in a very bad case, but to this I cannot speak.

The modification of the excitement of the organ of Music
was very pretty. If she was humming or singing a lively
tune or song, and I placed another finger on Veneration, she
changed it instantly to a sacred melody: if I removed this to
Violence or Pride, she changed the sacred melody instantly
to a fierce or martial air: if I now removed it to Wit, she


by Dr. Elliotson. 467


changed to a right merry tune: and I made her go back-
wards and forwards in all sorts of successions. If she was
playing at the piano, she was made to change her playing
just as I had made her change her humming or singing: and
her thumping of the keys under the excitement of the organ
of Violence to a martial air was unmerciful. If the experi-
ment happened to be made on a Sunday, I could not by
touching over Wit, while touching over Music, excite her to
hum a merry tune: she smiled, but locked her jaw. Yet I
could excite her to an impetuous tune by touching over the
organ of Violence or Pride, and make her violent or proud.
This was in exact accordance with the world at large; who
would not break the sabbath by reading any other than a re-
ligious book or playing or listening to any other than sacred
music, yet will tell fibs, be proud and selfish, and get into a
passion, as readily as on other days.

I one day excited the organ of Violence powerfully, and
at the same time that of the Love of Offspring ; and her vio-
lence was directed against a baby—she would “ mix arsenic
with its bread and butter, and see how it would lick it
down.” How frequently did I, from looking another way,
still thinking of the result, or from looking towards other
persons and conversing with them, and she perhaps having
moved her head, place my finger, or after placing it right
slip it, upon a different organ from that which I intended;
and the effect I desired and expected came not, but another
which I did not desire: and then I found my error, or it was
pointed out by Dr. Engledue who was watching us, and rec-
tified the position of my finger, and the proper effect came.
The point of my finger having, without my knowledge, slip-
ped from Self-esteem to Friendship; from Love of Property
to Alimentiveness, &c., &c., &c.

This case afforded no support to the assertions of one in
the mesmeric state, that certain portions of the cerebellum
are for common sensation, sense of temperature, muscular
strength, muscular action, &c., &c.

At page 73 I said, that the subject of these cerebellar
organs required much more investigation. Over whatever
part of the cerebellum I laid the point of my finger, uni-
versal sensibility of her surface returned as long as my finger
was there,—she became sensible of mechanical injury and of
temperature; and no effect in regard to her muscles took
place over whatever part of the cerebellum I placed my finger.
These experiments were repeated with the same results
till I was tired ; and I have lately tried in vain to prove the
alleged cerebellar organs upon others whose various cerebral


468 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


organs can be affected. The cerebellum has been considered
by some physiologists to be particularly concerned with sen-
sation and by others with motion: and Gall did not wish to
deny that it might have other functions than those which he
discovered.* Mr. Gardiner thought that a mesmeric patient
had discovered to him organs in the fore-part of the side of
the head, relating to the five senses, &c. 1 made some expe-
riments at his request upon Rosina. At first a shadow of
probability was given to the opinion, but perseverance in
patient investigation proved the whole to be groundless. 1
have never yet known a discovery in science made by a
sleepwaker. Gall remarks that, “unfortunately scientific
discoveries still have to be made by the long and laborious
method of experience; notwithstanding the magnetized see
all their internal structure in the clearest manner, and mag-
netsm has been practised so long.” +


Nearly a year ago, I said, (p. 74,) “The facts of the
separate action of the two halves of the brain, will, I am
persuaded, be found common.” ‘The present patient exhi-
bited these striking facts. If I placed my finger on the Pride
of the right side, and another on the Attachment of the left,
she scornfully and invincibly repelled my hand which endea-
voured to touch her right hand, and seized and squeezed it
firmly with her left: and the reverse occurred as soon as |
reversed the application of my fingers over her cerebral
organs. The description of such phenomena was given in the
second volume, at p. 225, &c.; and in the present, at p. 74.

Usually the excitement of the organ of one side was com-
municated to that on the other side; and breathing on one
reduced the excitement of both, if the finger was removed
from both. The excitement of the organ of one side might
of course be prevented from extending to the other, if, while
the finger was upon it, the other were breathed upon. For
instance, if I touched over one organ of Imitation, she usually
imitated me wherever I stood ; but if I breathed upon the other,
she would imitate me only when I stood on the same side with
the former, taking no notice when I stood on the same side
with the latter. When one Imitation only was touched over,
and the other not breathed upon, she sometimes imitated
noises only made by a person standing on that side of her. The
effect was always stronger, if both organs of a faculty were
touched over: and once or twice there was so little suscepti-
bility, that no effect came till both were touched over. If,


* Fonctions du Cerveau, t. iii., p. 385, &c.
+ Anatomie et Physiologie du Systeme Nerveux, vol. 135, &c., &c.


by Dr. Elliotson. 469


for instance, I touched over only one organ of Love of Pro-
perty, she often did not attempt to steal, but would talk of
nothing but acquiring property, and justified theft by all sorts
of arguments.

Her left cerebral organs were more susceptible than the
right. In Rosina the right were the more susceptible.*

It is nearly seven years ago since I found that it was pos-
sible to mesmerise only one half of the brain.t Subsequently
I had a patient—the youth alluded to on former occasionst—
whom I could send to sleep in one half of his brain only, by
putting my hand upon one temple and pointing and looking
at the eye of the same side only. This eye would close, and
he could not open it by any effort, while the other remained
open; and the arm and leg of that side felt benumbed and
heavy, the same side of his head felt benumbed, and his fa-
culties were somewhat less active. One day, after Miss C. had
been awakened to go home, Dr. Engledue made some passes
down only one side of her face. She fell into a half-
waking cross state, stood still, staring, moving her parasol
about, and refusing to leave the house, though it was the
proper time. It was necessary to mesmerise the other also,
and produce full sleep-waking, before she could be awakened
into her ordinary state. On another day, Dr. Engledue made
passes down before one side of her face, and I down the
other. She went to sleep; but could not be awakened by
either of us alone,—each had to wake the side he had sent to
sleep. If only one made downward passes in the sleep so in-
duced, he brought her into relation with himself only, annulled
the joint effect, and could wake her. If we tried to wake, each
the side which the other had sent to sleep, the half-waking
cross state was induced: and one of us had to mesmerise her
again to sleep and then awake her afresh ; she could not be
awakened by each trying to awake the side that he had mes-
merised. When both mesmerised one side, neither alone
could wake her on this side, nor both together on the other
side. If either alone now made downward passes, he got her
into relation with himself, and could wake her.

Occasionally she fell into a dreamy state, and mistook
the time, place and persons; just as Miss Abbott at first
sometimes (p. 64) and Rosina$ always did. But she was
always brought out of it into her ordinary sleep-waking im-
mediately by my breathing on any part of her, as her hand
or face. I succeeded if I breathed on covered parts, for the

* Vol. IL, p. 228. + Vol. I., p. 327-8.


t Vol. IL, p. 53, 215. Vol. IIL, p. 53.
§ Vol. IL, p. 219.


470 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


breath penetrated, but not immediately; one breathing on
the bare hand succeeded, but two were required through her
stocking. It was not unusual for her to mistake me or any
one she heard for her sister Fanny or brother Thomas, and
she would even fancy, when we were silent, that she heard them
talking to her, and would hold a conversation with the one or
the other,—being in what may be called a waking dream in the
sleep-waking state. And how exactly analogous is this to that
form of insanity in which the patient wide awake, having his
cerebral organs excited from within, mistakes all around him !
Soon after discontinuing to breathe on or touch her, she would
sometimes relapse, and, on my addressing her as if I were
her brother or sister, mistake me again ; and, if Dr. Engledue
also spoke to her, discover no difference in our voices, but
mistake both for her brother or sister (see p. 64). Touch-
ing had no such effect as breathing; unless I touched over
Gall’s organ of the Sense of Persons, a designation which
Dr. Spurzheim changed to Form, and then she recovered
from her mistake and recognized those she heard. Dr.
Engledue discovered this, but intended to touch Dr. Spurz-
heim’s organ of Individuality, and thought he had. But
we found it was the organ of the Sense of Persons, and
touching over any part of this, but touching over this only,
produced the result ; and the result was constant and instan-
taneous. Downward passes before her face also recovered her
from this dreamy state.


She had too much integrity to desire gratification by
deceiving me, and candidly replied to my enquiry respecting
her knowledge of cerebral organology, that she knew the
situation of four organs—Benevolence, Veneration, Tune
and Language; but was unacquainted with those of Colour,
Imitation, Self-esteem, Friendship, &. The latter she be-
lieved was at the back of the head, but did not know where,
and supposed it and Amativeness were the same: the situa-
tion of Tune and Number she confounded.


The oftener I reflect upon it, the more splendid appears to
me the discovery made in England accidentally by Mr. Mans-
field, in the University of Cambridge, in 1841, that the dis-
tinct cerebral organs, the knowledge of which distinctness we
owe to the mighty genius and immense labours of Gall, can be
excited by locally applied mesmeric means. Dr. Collyer had
also, about two years before, in 1839, accidentally stumbled
upon the same fact, but had not followed it up; and indeed
doubted and positively denied the fact, and still denied it


by Dr. Elliotson. 471


nearly two years subsequently to its having been observed,
though others in America prosecuted the subject after Dr.
Collyer’s observation. Mr. Mansfield followed up his disco-
very, and immediately announced it to his friends.*

In 1839 I discovered, and not accidentally, but after re-
flection, that half the brain might be mesmerised ;+ but I
went no farther, and never thought of ascertaining whether I
could mesmerise distinct cerebral organs, as well as half the
mass of brain. After others had made this discovery, I dis-
covered that I could mesmerise one organ only of each pair
if I chose.t

The mechanism of human nature is thus laid open to our
view by the joint knowledge of cerebral physiology and mes-
merism, and the medical profession know it not !

How amusing is it to watch the conduct of a man with a
large or a temporarily excited organ of Love of Property or of
Self-esteem or Destructiveness, and see that he is the sport of
an excited condition of a certain portion of brain, just as
really as when we place our fingers upon the organ of Property
or Pride in the sleep-waker. To see him blind to considera-
tions of friendship, justice, philosophical truth, and common
sense: justifying himself to himself, and absolutely denying
all he would insist upon when the case is not his own, but
another’s.


Great light is thrown upon insanity by the fact of the in-
tense excitement of a propensity giving rise to a delusion—as
when, by our exciting Alimentiveness, Miss C. fancied she was
eating something nice ; or, by exciting Love of Offspring, she
fancied she was nursing her brother’s baby. In our ordinary
waking state, the occurrence of a strong desire gives rise to
no delusion, nor did it in her. But in ordinary sleep, the
occurrence of any desire often gives rise to a delusion—a
dream: nay, an impression upon any external sense, as a
noise, or the contact of anything disagreeable, or an uneasy
position, will occasion a delusion—a dream: and insanity is
often so much a dreamy state, that many mad people remind
their medical attendants of dreamers.§ For dreaming is
somewhat allied to insanity ; and, when we do not drop off to
sleep or wake from sleep suddenly, but pass gradually from
either state into the other, we often experience a short de-
lirium, being partly awake, though we call it dreaming.
Sleep-waking, however rational, still is different from the


* Vol. L., p. 236.
+ Vol. I., p. 327. ¢ Vol. II., p. 225. § Dr. Davey.


472 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


ordinary waking state of the brain, as shewn in perhaps
every case by a higher degree, however low, of freedom of
manner. The very mixture that it is of sleep with waking
shews its alliance, however distant in most cases, to insanity.
No one then can wonder that in this condition of the faculties
delusions so ofter occur.* In persons disposed to insanity, a
strong passion will alone induce delusion: great pride, for
instance, making a poor woman fancy herself the queen or
the Virgin Mary. The wonderful experiments detailed in the
former part of this paper in the last number throw also great
light upon insanity, by proving the existence in the brain of
an idea or impression leading to irresistible acts or opinions,
without the patient even suspecting the presence or previous
occurrence of the impression. Without knowing that we had
made the impression in the sleep-waking, and calculated
upon the result in the waking state, there could be no means
of our learning the fact of unconscious impressions and ideas
working in the brain to fancies and to acts. Such experi-
ments must rivet every philosophical person and set him
upon meditation.


I tried during the greater part of October and November
to bring my two present patients, mentioned in the last num-
ber, to dream a particular thing at night ;—something I had
fixed upon with them in their sleep-waking. With one I
succeeded twice only, and then the effect was not complete
and was mixed up with other fancies: with the other I suc-
ceeded frequently, but far less fully than in the trials to pro-
duce effects in the waking state. Dr. Engledue has succeeded
with a patient he has at this moment; but he fixed on very
extraordinary subjects, which would be more likely to produce
adeep impression. Hearing this, I have tried again ; and been
perhaps a little more successful, but still much less successful
than with the experiments for the waking state.

Her abstraction was often so great, whether she was
perfectly still or talking, that persons might enter the room,
and even speak, unnoticed. I have often entered the room,
not at all cautiously, when she and other mesmeric patients
were chattering what they had rather I had not heard, some
innocent nonsense about other people, and they have gone on
evidently ignorant of my presence; and subsequently it was
proved that they were ignorant of it.


* I have repeatedly pointed out, that, as the proportion of sleep varies
from almost no sleepiness to deep coma; so the insane features vary from the
faintest obvious peculiarity to perfect delusion and irresistibleness.


by Dr. Elliotson. 473


From some untoward circumstance—pain, fright, excess
of mesmerised water applied externally, mesmerised gold,
some indisposition, &c., &c., and occasionally from some un-
perceived cause,—mesmeric patients do not wake up properly
with the usual amount of means, or for a time with any
amount, but remain only half awake, more or less delirious,
recognizing others imperfectly or not at all, very cross and
even malicious, very desponding or silly, &c., &e. The Okeys
often went into this state from evident causes ; and no person
of the very weakest powers of observation could mistake their
various states for imposture ; indeed every class of phenomena
which occurred in them, has been presented to me so repeat-
edly in others, that I am constantly reminded of them. This
state occasionally took place in the present patient. On the
6th of May, I could not wake her, so drowsy was she, and she
answered questions faintly. This probably arose from there
having been several persons all the morning in the little room :
for very susceptible persons feel the influence of all around
them. I have had several patients who went to sleep without
any mesmeric process if several others were near them and all
was quiet :* some, as Rosina, it was very difficult to wake if


* One day Elizabeth Okey was shewn to Lord Brougham and Mr. Sheil
and a few others. She was placed opposite and near them. Lord Brougham
begged me to do nothing. All were near her, and staring at her. Soon she
looked heavy, and fell senseless in deep coma. Lord Brougham winked at
Mr. Sheil, and Mr. Sheil returned the wink, and both were satisfied of im-
posture. I begged them to regard this as nothing ; as my object was not to
convince them by sleep, however induced, but by other phenomena, I sent her
sister, who was not so susceptible, to sleep by a few passes. Presently, as
usual, they both suddenly went out of the coma, and were in their merry,
wild, ecstatic delirium; and I shewed various beautiful experiments in
traction behind their backs, involuntary imitation, rigidity, catalepsy, &c. :
Lord Brougham at length, excited by what he saw, suddenly jumped up
and exclaimed, ‘‘ Oh, I see, these two poor children have water in the head,
they’ve got water in the head ;” and left the place, saying he had an engage-
ment in the House of Lords. Earl Stanhope was all astonishment at Lord
Brougham, and said quietly to me, “‘ Some persons would not believe though
one rose from the dead.” Mr. Sheil remained a long while, and was shewn
endless experiments, the convincing nature of which Sir William Molesworth
urged upon him; but in vain. Long afterwards Lord Brougham sat quietly
in my drawing-room for hours while I shewed him other cases, and among
the rest the two wonderful instances of rigidity detailed in the second
volume ; and was beyond measure astonished, and was convinced of the
truth. The Duke of Marlborough one day requested me to allow him to
take Mr, Sheil to see Miss Meihuish’s case, which had made a great impres-
sion upon him, as it had upon so many. After Mr. Sheil had witnessed her
state, he took me aside, and honestly said, “‘ When I saw mesmerism be-
fore, it was the first time, and I could not get over my doubts; but it is my
duty to declare to you that I have no longer an iota of doubt remaining of
the truth of mesmerism.”

When Elizabeth Okey was at the house of Mr. Wakley, she was highly
Susceptible: and one of his sons and one of his reporters stood close on each
side of her, while he himself stood close before her, rubbing lead upon her


474 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


others were near them, and her I was obliged always to remove
to a part of the room away from every body,* if I wished her
to wake soon after my experiments had been made upon her,—
and the more ‘that were made the better Rosina always was.
Miss C. had arrived as usual at ten, and I was obliged to leave
her and her aunt between one and two o’clock. Dr. Engledue
attempted to wake her at a quarter past six, but she went
into a modification of the state which I have just described.
She wandered about with her eyes open, perfectly lost, and
could not be roused. This all arose from one attempting to
wake her who had not sent her tosleep ; for I had sent her to
sleep in the morning. I returned home at about seven, made
a few passes before her, so as to send her to sleep and bring
her under my influence, and then woke her into her natural
state with perfect ease. On another occasion Dr. Engledue
had sent her to sleep by one pass after she had awakened
spontaneously in my absence. I had not sent her to sleep in
the morning by less than several; and it was usual for a
second sleep to be induced by fewer passes than the first.
I did not know that he had sent her to sleep, and I attempted
to wake her, but brought on the half-waking delirious state, and
had to send her to sleep again, and wake her again, twice, before
I could wake her into the natural state. When patients wake
imperfectly and in this derangement, the proper plan is to send
them to sleep again, and then wake them. Occasionally it is
difficult for a time to send them asleep, and we have to wait
before the attempt can be renewed successfully. Sometimes
they are half awakened again and again, and it is necessary
to send them to sleep frequently, or allow them to sleep a
long while, before waking measures wake them into their
natural state. After this long sleep of eight hours, she slept
better at night than usual :—a common fact, but very convinc-
ing of the truth and composing powers of mesmerism. The
diminution of excitability by the mesmeric sleep appears to
hand. From this proximity she fell asleep in ten minutes. He then turned
round triumphantly and said, “‘ You perceive that I have rubbed her hand
with mesmerised lead, which you say has no effect upon her, and yet she has
fallen asleep,—it is all imposture !” His object was to prove that if she was
not allowed to distinguish between lead and nickel by her sight, the effects
of nickel would ensue when lead was used. But nickel never did induce
mere sleep ; its effects were the deepest insensibility, frightful spasms, bend-
ing backwards (opisthotonos), lock jaw, suffusion of the face, &c. &c.,
not one of which took place ; and yet he pretended she had fancied it was
nickel and had acted accordingly.

Daily and daily have we proofs of all the truths that occurred in these
sisters. And yet the medical profession, on the authority of a man ignorant
of the subject and in no estimation for anything in medical science, cruelly


denounce them as impostors
* Vol. II., p. 236.


by Dr. Elliotson. 475


render subsequent natural sleep more easy, and she was al-
ways the better the longer her mesmeric sleep, as well as the
more she chattered. The same occurrence took place the next
day spontaneously ; and in all probability from the disturbance
it had produced in her the day before. She passed spontane-
ously from her sleep into this state, and I had to make passes
for five minutes before her eyes closed, and even then the
state continued, and she protested, as they generally do in
this condition, that she was not asleep; but by continuing
passes I soon sent her into her ordinary mesmeric sleep, and
in two hours attempted to wake her and succeeded. In
her mesmeric sleep she remembered all that had transpired
in the delirious state. Frequently there is no remembrance
of it.

On another occasion, some time after I had sent her to
sleep, she awoke spontaneously, and Dr. Engledue sent her
to sleep again, and she passed into a deep coma, from which
neither he nor I could wake her. At five in the afternoon I
returned, and again tried in vain, as I found he had been
doing. About six o’clock she became restless, spoke, said she
wished to be awakened, told Dr. Engledue that she had a
headache, which would be removed by passes made over her
head with both hands, then breathing on her eyelids and
around her head, and then blowing in her face. All this did
remove her headache, but produced the half-waking delirious
state; so that she said she was awake and must go home, put
her shawl over her cap, omitting to put on her bonnet, and re-
membered both writing a letter to her father in the mesmeric
state, and its contents, though in her ordinary waking condi-
tion she is ignorant of the whole. I now made downward
passes before her, and at once sent her to sleep ; and immedi-
ately woke her by blowing in her face,—the whole not occupy-
ing a minute.

One day I made her mesmerise herself with my hand.
This brought on the same half-waking cross state ; from which
I could extricate her only by making downward passes before
her, and bringing her into a mesmeric state in relation with
myself.

If, after one of us had sent her to sleep, the other half
awoke her into this state, and this other called to her, she
went to him; but the moment the first called her, she left
the other and went to the first: shewing the greater attrac-
tion to the party whose mesmeric influence had been most
exerted. But if the other now made passes and sent her off,
and the first half woke her and called her, she went to him,
but left him as soon as the other called.


476 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


The disturbance of this state was one day such, that she
told me afterwards she had seen cach of us green. I recollect
in a case of pain of the head in a young lady, objects fre-
quently looked of a blue color. In this state Miss C. would
not allow any other than the one who had sent her to sleep
or half-wakened her to touch her; and on being fully awak-
ened one day, was astonished at hearing a lady say, “ Why
she let’s me touch her.” In her half-wakened state she had
not permitted it, but was ignorant of this when awake. Just
so was she astonished, like the patient at Nottingham who
stared when awakened after the amputation of his leg, if she
was awakened in one room into which she had been led in
her sleep from another. In the simple dreamy state (p. 474),
she would take the hand of any one whom she mistook for the
person she was dreaming of, and who was always one she
was fond of,—one of her brothers, or a female friend.


The power of memory is so various in different patients, and
in the same patient at different periods, that they will some-
times remember all the previous occurrences of the same state,
sometimes forget certain ones, sometimes remember nothing
of one variety of state in another, sometimes certain things.
We see this difference on a large scale, in the fact that while
the majority in their waking state remember nothing of the
sleep-waking, others remember all, and others more or less.
An unjust suspicion of deceit may sometimes arise from these
variations, and from the fact illustrated by the experiments, des-
cribed in the last number, of promises made in the sleep-waking
and performed in the waking state, while the party protests
with truth that he has no idea of having made the promise.
A striking but well-known fact is that of a sudden shock
destroying the memory of things that occurred immediately
before it. I recollect being sent for into Hertfordshire to a
lady whose horses had run away with her, and after running
some distance had thrown her out of the carriage and stunned
her. When she recovered, she had no recollection of the
horses running away, nor of the circumstances that occurred
for a short time before they ran away. I have seen persons
frightened into a fit, and on recovering have no knowledge of
the circumstances which had frightened them. Miss Collins
was terrified one day in her sleepwaking by an epileptic
pitching forwards with his head on the floor, as was his habit
when seized. She was frightened out of her mesmeric state
into her ordinary state. I mesmerised her as soon as I heard
the fall in another room, and sent her off: and, not having
spoken to her, awoke her. She was ignorant of all the


by Dr. Elliotson. 477


matter, though she had seen the boy on the ground in his
fit. The next day I sent her into the sleep-waking as usual,
and in this state she recollected it all; the memory of events
of her waking state being stronger in the mesmeric than in
the common state,—a fact in harmony with the heightening
of various sensorial powers in mesmeric sleep-waking.*

One day, as usual, she did not hear M. Ann when awake,
but did as soon as I sent M. A. into sleep-waking. This was
done in perfect silence, so that I was unable to understand
how she learnt I had mesmerised M. A. I asked how she
came to know it. She told me she had not learnt it—was ig-
norant when M. A. had been awake and when in sleep-waking.
I have no doubt this was true; and yet I have no doubt that
something had been heard by her, by which she learnt that
M. A. had gone off and that she had forgotten it; and in-
deed that this was both heard and still known by her brain
unconsciously. The impression that M. A. was asleep was an
unconscious one. She did not know the fact that I had already
sent off M. A.: and though, from various circumstances, such
as the knowledge that the patients were always sent into
sleep-waking by me, &c., &c., she usually knew this perfectly
well, the fact was only by experience known to her that she
heard the other patients only when they were asleep. She
was not conscious of her inability to hear them only in their
sleep-waking, and could not comprehend it. Yet I am certain
that the fact resulted from a mere impression (p. 360), but an
unconscious one (p. 362). The ignorance of present circum-
stances in sleep-waking is often extraordinary. My patient
Rosina,t who was always in a dreamy state, frequently denied
that her arms were rigid, or being drawn, while this was the
case, and would declare they were lying in her lap. Her aunt,
who is never in a dreamy state, feels not, when her legs and
arms are rigid, that she has legs or arms, unless force is used
to them or she desires to move them. Miss C. occasionally was
not aware she was singing: and sometimes, when another or-
gan was excited, she perfectly remembered, sometimes per-


fectly forgot, the ideas of the excitement of an organ excited
just before.


Mr. Thompson made some trials upon Miss C. with his
will, on May 3, without apprising her, or any possibility of
her suspecting his intention; he staying at Nerot’s Hotel,
she being with her aunt at Fludyer Strect, Westminster. At
ten o’clock in the evening, he willed as powerfully as he could


* See an instance as to judgment of time at p. 65.
+ Vol. IL, p.


478 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


that she should go to sleep. She had been writing a letter,
and at that very time she became so drowsy that she begged
her aunt to seal it for her, and hurried off to bed, and ina
minute was snoring loudly. On the 4th he did the same, but
told her in her sleep-waking what he should do, though of this
she was perfectly ignorant when awake. At the very time,
she all at once grew so sleepy that she hurried off to bed
without curling her hair, as was her habit. She had been
writing, and, ten minutes before the time fixed, she was rest-
less and began to take her coffee: but soon she grew com-
posed and sleepy, and was satisfied with but one cup instead
of taking two or three, which she generally did, so overpowered
was she with sleep. On each occasion, she could not help
thinking of Mr. Thompson at the time she became drowsy,
as she mentioned not only to Mr. Thompson, but, I learnt,
also to M. A., when both were afterwards in the sleep-waking
state at my house. Other curious experiments were given at
pp. 322-3.


April 19. She attempted to mesmerise her aunt on account
of head-ache, but, instead of succeeding, she fell asleep her-
self, and had an attraction to her aunt, and allowed this lady
to excite her cerebral organs. She often subsequently at-
tempted to mesmerise her aunt, yet the same effect never
recurred but once. Nor was her aunt ever able to send her off
but once, though her father and others of her family can: yet
she is very fond of her aunt. She and her aunt made mutuai
trials daily for a length of time (see p. 49, &c.). The suc-
cessful attempt of her aunt caused head-ache, confusion, gid-
diness, and various uncomfortable feelings in her head. These
effects lasted till I mesmerised her the next day; and the
attempt was never renewed.


Excepting the occasional occurrence of the dreamy state,
there was great uniformity in her susceptibilities and pheno-
mena. Once only or twice could I not excite her cerebral
organs mesmerically ; and at one period her jaw often spon-
taneously grew rigid in her sleep-waking state, and I had to
relax it that she might converse, and, if I had awakened her
without relaxing it, she would have been in this state after
her awaking. But no rigid closure of the eyes ever appeared
to occur: at least her eyes invariably opened on her waking.
With some, always, frequently, or occasionally, the eyes or
jaw, or both, remain closed after waking: and remain so for
minutes, hours, or days, unless breathed or touched upon,
or pointed at, or unless transverse passes with contact are


by Dr. Elliotson. 479


made upon them, or a cold substance applied, or something
else done for their relaxation (see p. 56, &c.).


I mentioned at p. 346, that I at first awoke her by rubbing
outwards on her eye-brows (transverse passes with contact),
and blowing in her face. After a few days I failed, and she
told me that I should never be able to wake her by the trans-
verse passes only; nor could I. For such was her sleepiness
that the contact of the passes deepened the sleep more than
the transverse motion tended to dissipate it—a fact which I
have frequently noticed, and then transverse passes at a little
distance or blowing has answered. She desired me only to
blow in her face. I breathed on her eyes and then blew.
This at once succeeded. Breathing upon patients wakes
some, at least breathing upon particular spots, and deepens
the sleep of others. I lately mesmerised a lady who wakes if
I place my hand upon her head, exactly at Veneration; yet
two others at this presept time always go from their ordi-
nary sleep-waking into a very deep state by my doing this
same thing ; and the tendency of contact anywhere, especially
with the head or eyelids, is indeed generally to deepen or
prolong sleep. The wakening effect of blowing is generally
perhaps produced by its sensible impression, just as rigidity
often yields to the contact of a cold substance (p. 56). After
some days I blew without first breathing on her eyes, and
could not wake her. I had understood from her that I need
only blow. Whether she had really meant that I should
breathe and then blow: or whether the accidental circum-
stance of my having up to this time breathed before I blew,
had already produced a habit.: or whether the power of blow-
ing had worn out, I cannot tell. But she now desired me to
breathe upon her eyes first, and then blow; and this at once
succeeded. This method however soon wore out; and she
desired me on the 17th of April to breathe and then blow
into her ears. For a time blowing into her ears awoke her
rapidly and to a certainty. In two or three days this method
also wore out: and she now directed me to breathe and blow
upon her eyes: and this mere blowing upon the eyes suc-
ceeded always thenceforwards. At first I failed, but she said
I did not blow hard enough ; and so it proved.

I do not conceive that the prediction of the success of a
method of waking is usually a sort of clairvoyance: but be-
lieve it arises from the effect of will or fancy. She had
brought a sleep-waking friend to my house who could be
awakened only by blowing into her ears, and this probably
suggested the idea to her. Many of the modes of waking

VOL, III. LL


480 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


are obviously arbitrary. Gall mentions a boy subject to con-
vulsive fits and sleep-waking, who, though not mesmerised,
predicted that the plan to bring him to himself was to take
him into the garden: “ and this invariably happens.”* Such
results appear to me similar to those important and beautiful
experiments of making an impression in the sleep-waking
state which shall tell unconsciously upon the patient in the
waking state (p. 362, &c.).


To shew the effect of impression I may mention that I
have a sleep-waker who, though unable to open her eyes or
walk, hears and speaks. I readily wake her by transverse
passes even at the distance of two yards. But in making
them I generally made a slight noise by drawing the fingers
of one hand on the outside of the fingers of the other. Such
is the force of association that if I now make the passes with-
out the noise, I do not wake her; and if I make the same
noise by rubbing the palms of my hands together behind me
under my coat, she instantly wakes. After a little while,
however, she discovered this, and felt drowsy when so wakened.


Miss C. manifested not the faintest sign of clairvoyance of the
lowest degree—that of predicting how long she should sleep on
any occasion. She could not even distinguish my touch from
that of others. She could not predict the course of her com-
plaint, or of the phenomena: and did not pretend to see with
her eyes closed, or distant things, or to know the past or future,
more than in her common state. She had no kind of com-
munity of sensation nor cerebral sympathy. It was a simple,
though beautiful case, of ordinary and intelligible phenomena,
and of cure of disease, such as it would have been wise in
Dr. Forbes to request to witness, instead of running about
the town after extraordinary wonders exhibited for money or
shew by persons not medical nor half so long or laboriously
engaged in the investigation as myself, who live within a few
yards of him and was shewing it every morning for four
months to any friend who was curious. She pretended to no
clairvoyance, and would not hear of it being possible that she
ever could be endued with any degree of it.

I one day made passes oa looked at her through a win-
dow, she and I standing on either side close to it; but no
effect was produced. There was no result if she wore my
black-glass spectacles; nor any if I nearly closed my eyes,
though I still looked at her. Once I looked at her in a looking-
glass and made passes at her reflection in it; but she did not drop


* Fonctions du Cerveau, t. ii., p. 511.


by Dr. Elliotson. 481


alseep before I had made six passes. In another experiment, in
which I did not look at her at the time, I made twenty passes
in vain. In a third experiment I tried again, not looking at
her, and she went off at once. I felt satisfied, however, that
this arose from her father looking directly at her at the same
time ; and this proved correct, for, as on different repetitions of
this experiment, I could not wake her, and he always could ;
and my attempt at waking her sent her into the half-waking
cross state. I was her habitual mesmeriser, and sent her
off daily with one pass; her father had scarcely ever mesmer-
ised her, but the power of his eyes looking directly at her
was greater than that of my mesmeric passes directed to her
reflection.

For want of leisure I did not prosecute these experi-
ments,-nor indeed any as I wished. But I have sent other
patients to sleep through glass, and by passes before their re-
flection in a mirror, looking or not looking at their reflection
—though the effect was always slower than if the operations
were direct and no glass employed.


On the 22nd of April, I first found that I could produce
local mesmeric effects in her ordinary state after waking her, or
before I sent her off,—that I could close her jaw by downward
passes with contact at its extremities, and stiffen her arms
by fully extending them for a few moments. I afterwards
found that I could excite the cerebral organs in her ordinary
state by touching over them, or even placing her own fingers
or anything else upon the head over their situation. While
she was conversing pleasantly with me, I put my finger upon
Pride. Her countenance instantly scowled, and she replied
snappishly, conducting herself in a manner she never would
voluntarily—in the ordinary play of her brain—in the ordi-
nary excitability of all its organs. The effect was not strong
in her ordinary state; she evidently had great power to re-
strain herself ; but still the effects were decided and instantane-
ous. In the mesmeric state, there is much less power of general
self-restraint ; and expressions of pain are therefore far greater.


Whatever the knowledge of the susceptible organs she had
acquired in her mesmeric state, she was destitute of it in her
waking state. There could be no suggestion in her waking
state as to those organs of the situation of which she still
remained ignorant in her waking state. Yet I will not deny,
after the experiments detailed in the last number, that her
brain might have wnconscious knowledge, and be unconsciously
influenced by suggestion.

LL2


482 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


Mr. H. 8S. Thompson informs me that he has locally
affected the cerebral organs by his finger in a person who had
never been mesmerised, as well as produced effects by his
mere will. We can relieve pain by local mesmerisation with-
out attempting to produce the mesmeric state: and it is de-
serving of enquiry how far we can produce insensibility and
rigidity locally without general mesmerisation. The local
mesmeric effect on the cerebral organs in the ordinary state
is but an example of local mesmerism.*


* Dr. Buchanan of America declares he can affect the cerebral organs
in persons who had never been mesmerised, and has published a pam-
phiet on the subject, a copy of which he politely sent me: and I take
this public opportunity of thanking him, as well as of acknowledging a
kind letter from him and one from Dr. Caldwell. The work is entitled,
Sketches of Dr. Buchanan’s Discoveries in Neuroloy. Louisville, 1842. The
following are the two letters :—


** Dr. John Elliotson. Louisville, May 10, 1843.

* Sir.—The moral courage and energy with which you have maintained
in London the cause of Truth, have inspired me with the desire to render
my feeble tribute of respect to so eminent an example of qualities unfortu-
nately too rare among the distinguished of the medical profession. My in-
clination to address you has been encreased by the manner in which your
name has been mentioned to me by your friend, T. C. Grattan, and by
Professor Caldwell.

**T take the pen now to give you some sketch or hint of what I have been
doing, and to communicate to one, who I trust would shrink from no truth
from any source, some of those things which a prudent man would not com-
municate to the public. In profound science—in discovery—there must be
exoteric and esoteric knowledge.

** Last January I forwarded you from New York, by the house of Wiley
and Putman, a copy of a pamphlet published in this city, and a copy of the
Democratic Review (the most influential and respectable monthly ia our
country), containing a friendly and liberal essay upon the science of neuro-
logy. From Boston I forwarded you, by Mr. Grattan, a copy of my diagram
illustrative of the phrenological portion of neurology. These I hope you
have received.

** I deeply regret that I have not been able to devote my time and energies
exclusively to the cultivation of the science, which I might have brought by
this time to a much more perfect state than that in which itis. The science
of mind, I have asserted, is strictly a mathematical science; but I have
made little progress in giving it the exactness and developing the facts by
which this may be proved.

** As to the discovery that the brain may be excited and its functions
ascertained by touching the different organs of the head with the human
fingers, I presume you have by this time seen enough of the phenomena, and
in your experiments made discoveries enough, to shew you how vast a field
lies unexplored. The most successful method which I have used for disco-
very, is not to touch the organs of my subject, but to make him place his
fingers upon the various parts of my head, from which I wish him to derive
an influence’ Each organ radiates its own distinct and peculiar nervaura,
which when received by another person stimulates in him the corresponding
function, The impressible person may thus be compelled to act out the
character of any organ which you wish to investigate. In some of the im-
pressibles the influence transmitted through either hand will affect only one
half of the system, and it will be necessary to bring both of their hands into
contact with your head that they may not experience a one-sided effect.


by Dr. Elliotson. 483


I cannot terminate this account without expressing the
delight which every circumstance of the case gave me. The


This would not be very pleasant ; but I have frequently distorted my subjects
in that manner, making them feel contradictory passions in the two hemi-
spheres, and giving a double expression to the countenance. The most
unnatural and terrible experiments may be made in reference to the relations
of the hemispheres. It is even practicable to split the man in two—to destroy
all co-operation between the two sides of the body, by passing the hands
along the median line of the head, so as to form an influence between the
hemispheres. The results of this experiment are so frightful that I never
dared to continue it, but have always speedily arrested it by touching the
organ of Self-possession upon the side of the head (marked upon my
diagram, Self-possession ).

‘The physiological functions of impressible persons may be as effectu-
ally controlled by touching others’ heads, as by having any excitement at-
tempted upon theirown. Just before I left Boston, I relieved the wife of
Dr. T. (while labouring under profuse menstrual complaints), by placing
her fingers upon the upper part of the region of Cautiousness, where lie the
organs restraining the sexual functions. Having a good stock of health
myself, I have rendered much more pleasant and effectual service to the
impressible in this manner than by touching their heads.

“The impressible constitution not only feels the influence of the human
brain, but feels the iufluence of any medical article with which it is brought
into contact. Thus small quantities of medicine placed in the hand of a
susceptible subject, will affect him as powerfully as if it had been taken
into the stomach. The results are developed almost instantaneously. In
this manner I have found it practicable to ascertain the exact physiological
tendency of any medicine uncomplicated with any morbid influences, by
trying it upon healthy subjects, and to discover in what manner each mental
or physiological function is affected by any medicine or article of diet.

“It is not even necessary that the medicine should in all cases be in con-
tact with the hand? The influence of the medicine which can pass through
the arm to the body, can also pass through intervening substances to the
arm. Incredible as it may seem, I can assure you that I have had several
subjects who could feel distinct medicinal impressions from substances which

-were contained in envelopes of paper, in boxes, or in phials. Persons of
this delicate structure of course feel the efficacy of the homoeopathic infini-
tisimal doses, and the prevalence of impressibility in various degrees accounts
for the success of Hahnemann’s doses. One of the homoeopathic globules
held in the hand would affect Mr. I. so sensibly, that he could describe a
long list of symptoms produced in himself similar to those related by the
homoeopathy, when he knew nothing of the medicine or its effects. Medi-
cinal influences, however, are not transmitted with speed and efficiency,
unless the medical ageney is transmitted into the system by a stream of the
nervaura, Electricity and Galvanism have been proved capable of transmit-
ting the medicinal influence of any substance through which they are passed.
I have proved that the nervaura has the same power. When we place our
fingers in contact with the medicine which is touched by the subject, a
stream of nervous fluid is passing from our hand through the medicine to
him. This nervaura makes him feel promptly effects which would otherwise
hardly be produced.

“The facts which I have just stated have inspired me with a determina-
tion to make a critical review of the materia medica, and investigate the pro-
perties of medicinal and alimentary substances in reference to the human
organization. I hope thus to lay down the true laws, not only of therapeutics,
but of dietetics, derived from the relations between the various species of
food and the various mental and physiological organs of the brain.

“The impressible constitution is an inexhaustible wonder: it does not
require the presence of any appreciable quantity of matter to affect it! The
nervaura of the human brain and body will produce as great effects as ponde-


484 Cure of a Contracted Foot, &c., with Mesmerism,


cure was most satisfactory: the good sense, perfect integ-
rity, and undeviating reciprocity of kind feeling of the


rable medicines. The nervaura may be transmitted through any gocd con-
ductor, and produce its effects as well as when the subject is brought into
nearer contact. Thus by placing a pencil-case upon the cerebral organs, I
have been able to affect the subject who touched its other extremity, and
have sometimes made the experiment more striking by previously blindfold-
ing the subject. Even articles which have been placed in contact with the
human head will retain enough of the nervaura to give a strong impression
to the subject.*

** But what is most wonderful of all—a fact which should never be
stated but to those who are prepared ‘to believe all things possible’—the
paper upon which we write receives and retains a sufficient amount of the
influence of our minds and bodies, to impart to another a correct conception
of them, and of the sentiments expressed in our writing. I have made my
subjects describe the impressions received in this manner, and I would men-
tion the result of one of my experiments made last winter in my chamber with
Mr. Inman, brother of Henry Inman, the distingnished American artist, to
whose politeness I am indebted for the delivery of these lines. I placed in
Mr. I.’s hands four letters unopened—all from men of marked character—
one of whom was Professor Caldwell. Holding each between his hands,
without even seeing the superscription, he gave his impressions in reference
to the men from the effect they produced upon him. It is no exaggeration
to say, that I could not myself have given a more correct description. (I
beg you will bear in mind that my operations are always eonducted in the
natural state,—no mesmeric preparation or somnolence is permitted ).

“The question has probably occurred to your mind, how far the mesmeric
sympathy between the operator and subject interferes with the results in the
cerebral excitements which I practice. I do not doubt that those who pro-
ceed according to formule of mesmerism alone, may be deceived from that
cause. I believe the experimenters in England, as well as the United
States, have operated almost solely in that condition of the system with
which mesmerism had made them familiar, and have not adopted any simpler
plan. I have the best evidence that my mental condition or design does not
control the results in my subject, as I have necessarily often mistaken the
positions of organs, and found it entirely impossible to develop their func-
tions until I touched the exact points of their location. I always find the
organs lying in fixed and certain positions, and their functions equally
certain, Like the keys of a musical instrument, they respond only when
touched; and if we have a good instrument, we elicit a full and distinct
note (invariably the same) at every point we touch.

“The impressible constitution, which I have sometimes called my
psychometer, gives me the means of making an unlimited diagnosis of all
others. It feels and manifests every physiological action, morbid or healthy,
and every mental action resulting from the influence of any part of the
brain with which it may be brought into contact. By this sympathetic diag-
nosis, I have found it practicable to explore the functions of the living
brain—to trace the boundaries of convolutions by the aura which they emit—to
discover the degree of natural or artificial activity in the organs, and to as-
certain the states of health and disease throughout the system. Have you


* “The nervaura of each organ radiates and passes through the atmo-
sphere, but with less facility than through good conductors, as flesh and
metal. There are very few non-conductors of the nervaura. Hair, bone,
feathers, bees’-wax, and a few other substances, have the best claims to
that title. Glass is a pretty good conductor. All forms of cerebral action,
whether thought or feeling, admit of radiation and conduction from the brain.
I have no doubt that impressible constitutions may be found capable of
catching and describing these radiations. My experiments, however, have
been chiefly by conduction.


by Dr. Elliotson. 485


patient, her father and aunt, were a daily gratification to me.
I cannot imagine a family more truly respectable, more happy
in themselves, more an example of what every family should
be, than their’s: and my ability to dissipate a cloud which
was darkening it will ever be remembered by me with thank-
fulness.


fallen upon those things—and if so, how far have you carried them? The
cultivators of science are few and far between. In our own country, Lilas
Jones, Esq., of New York, (author of a very respectable volume upon
phrenology, &c.,) has taken a most active part in the philosophical cultiva-
tion of neurology. Dr.S. Fonz, author of ‘ Climatology,’ &c., has taken a
lively interest in the subject. Professor Caldwell, as usual, has been a
bold and fearless advocate of truth. In Great Britain I fear you have the
same complaint to make. Scientific men dread new truths, The Edinburgh
men I fear are cold-blooded conservatives. It will give me much pleasure
at any time to hear from you, or to receive any document showing how the
cause of truth is going on, or what is your individual progress. If I can
reciprocate the favour in any way, command me as you please. Receive the
assurance of my highest respect, with the hope that you may live to be as
justly appreciated and admired by all your contemporaries as by

** Your humble servant,

* Jos. R. BUCHANAN.”


* Louisville, May 12th, 1843.

“My dear Sir.—By the politeness of my young but distinguished friend,
Dr. Buchanan, I am permitted to add a brief postscript to his letter to you.
Of this I avail myself the more promptly, and with the higher pleasure,
because it affords me an opportunity to offer you an assurance of the lively
and grateful remembrance I cherish of the many favours and courtesies I
received from you in London. It is also peculiarly gratifying to me to be
able to assure you of the entire confidence you may place in the Doctor’s
statements (strange and startling as they may appear to you) respecting his
experiments in neurology. I have not myself either witnessed or performed
all those experiments. But from those which I have witnessed, and from
what I know of Dr. Buchanan’s character, I entertain no shadow of doubt
in relation to the others.

“ We live in most eventful times. I firmly believe, and have long be-
lieved, that we already perceive the dawn of a new epoch in anthropology,
which, through discoveries in relation to the nervous system (the brain of
course included), is destined to throw into ‘ shadows, clouds, and darkness’
all our previous knowledge in that important branch of science.

Soon after my late return to the United States, I engaged in a series
of experiments in mesmerism, which resulted in such brilliant and triumph-
ant success, that I recorded them, accompanied by other kindred matter, in
a small book, or large pamphlet, of more than 150 pages. Of this produc-
tion I forwarded to you a copy, by favour of Mr. Dickens. Pray did you
receive it?

“‘ With the most distinguished regard, I have the honour to be,

** My dear Sir,
“ Yours very faithfully,
* Cu, CALDWELL.”


( 486 )


V. Cures of Debility, Hysteria, Exhaustion of Intellectual Power,
&c., with Mesmerism. By Mr. T. CHanvuer.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—My cases in mesmerism since the last report, though
not numerous, are, I think, very good. I beg to offer them
to your notice, if you think them worthy of insertion.


Miss H. K., et. 23, complexion fair, temperament lympha-
tic, has suffered for above four years from severe head-aches
with dimness of vision, pain at the epigastrium and in the
back, with a sense of oppression at the chest, loss of appetite,
and frequent attacks of dyspepsia. Latterly there has been se-
vere menorrhagia, and her appearance has become rather chlo-
rotic. On two former occasions these symptoms gave way to
steel. This time (May, 1845) she had the same remedy for a
month without any effect. I therefore proposed mesmerism, and
on June 13th commenced. In ten minutes the eyelids began to
quiver in that peculiar way which mesmerism produces, and
in twenty minutes they closed, though only for a short time,
shutting and opening at intervals for half an hour. When I
roused her, she said she had not forgotten herself, but could
not possibly keep her eyes open.

I may remark, that the eyes followed the hand at the very
first pass—shewing her to be a very susceptible patient.

14th. The eyelids began to quiver in three minutes, and
immediately commenced shutting and opening. She did not
become unconscious, but had not power to speak.

16th. Third time. Says she is decidedly better. Asleep
in three minutes. After a time the eyelids ceased to quiver,
but did not remain permanently closed, nor did she become
unconscious, although I produced catalepsy.

17th. Still improving: says she feels quite well: the head-
ache and pains in the back have quite left her. Phenomena
as yesterday.

23rd. She is regaining health and strength rapidly: her
friends begin to observe the improvement in her appearance.
The sleep now becomes rather more profound, though not
permanent. There is traction in a slight degree, and she is
conscious that the hand moves, and complains of a severe
pricking sensation. This I have found in all cases where
there has been sufficient consciousness left to describe it.
There was a pain in the back to-day, which she said she could
feel me removing. I was pressing on the part with the points
of my fingers.
I am now mesmerising her only every second day.


Cures of Debility, Hysteria, &c., with Mesmerism. 487


29th. Her health appears to be quite restored: she says
she feels better than she has been for years. The phenomena
remain the same, with one exception. I have before stated
that she is cataleptic. On putting her hands in any position
and then awaking her, the hands remain fixed in spite of her
attempts to move them, although wide awake. Transverse
passes or blowing relieve them immediately. . If she blows on
them herself they go down. If I put up her hand and make
passes along the arm with my hand, it produces no effect ;
but one pass before the face immediately fixes it. Or if I put
the head to one side, and make a pass before the face, the
head becomes fixed, though she remains awake. It is very
. curious to hear her talking quite cheerfully, and yet not to be

able to move. It does not occasion her any pain, even if I
place her in a constrained position.*

July 20th. She continues quite well. I mesmerise her
now’ about twice a week, and she does not miss it on the in-
tervening days, which was the case some time ago. When I
speak to her in my usual voice, she always answers pettishly,
like a person very drowsy who is annoyed at being disturbed ;
but if I whisper ever so low, even from the further side of
the room, she answers pleasantly and converses with me read-
ily: but she will not answer any other person. ‘This appears
to be another confirmation of the whispering phenomenon.

She is now so very susceptible, that one pass, or even a
slow bow, or four times closing my eyes before her, sends her
to sleep.

There are two or three phrenological phenomena in this
case. The head always rises on touching Veneration. Self-
esteem always produces a choking sensation so marked, that
she frequently declares I am holding her throat. And more
curious still, when I touch Destructiveness, she always begins
laughing, and cannot resist the impulse. She is perfectly in-
sensible to pain, and allows a piece of string to pass up the
nose, into the ear, or be drawn across the ball of the eye,
without moving a muscle.

I have been enabled to make many converts by means of
this case,—the patient being a young lady of high respecta-


bility, a native of the parish, and consequently very well
known.


My cases, reported in the last number of The Zoist, all
remain quite well. Holdsworth has had another attack simi-
* My patient Holdsworth shews similar phenomena, and goes even a


step further: she can fix her own arm or even a single finger by making a
pass with her other hand.


488 Cures of Debility, Hysteria, &c., with Mesmerism,


lar to the first: it was produced by fright. She was quite
relieved by being mesmerised three times within twenty-four
hours. When I first saw her, though she was apparently
quite insensible, she came immediately under the influence
of mesmerism ; and in a few minutes I awoke her, and found
she had regained her natural consciousness.

Smith has become so very susceptible, that she goes to
sleep instantly by a nod or even my closing one of my eyes,
though I may not have seen her for a week.


I will briefly mention a case that occurred some time ago,
but which has never been published, as it shews how the sus-
ceptibility sometimes alters in the same individual under dif-
ferent circumstances.

Maria Hinchliffe, eet. 19, of fair complexion and tolerably
healthy appearance, had been suffering for some weeks from
hysteria, attended by frequent attacks of catalepsy. She
would sometimes remain for many hours in one paroxysm—
without moving a limb or even a muscle. She came quickly
under the influence of mesmerism, and soon became very
susceptible ; shewing, amongst other very curious phenomena,
a state of perfect second consciousness, being quite lost to her
own identity, and forgetting when in the mesmeric state the
name of everything and every body; and on being awoke,
declaring that she had not been asleep above a few seconds,
every succeeding mesmerisation being joined to the foregoing
one.

She recovered rapidly, and after a month I only mesmer-
ised her once or twice a week. After about two months, by
some accident I neglected seeing her for a fortnight, when
I found she had lost all her susceptibility. I could not
produce any effect even in half an hour, although the
time previous she went to sleep with only one pass. She
was married and left town, and remained quite well after-
wards,


Mr. F. ext. 28, of nervous temperament, has been suffer-
ing for some years from an over-worked brain. He had been
reading for college until about three years ago, when he was
obliged to relinquish his studies in consequence of the great
nervous excitement produced. He has since that time been
travelling and reposing from study, but still he feels the least
extra mental exertion too much for him; his ideas become
confused when he attempts to apply himself to anything atten-
tively ; his bodily health is also somewhat impaired, and he
suffers from frequent attacks of dyspepsia.


by Mr. Chandler. 489


Aug. 8th, 1845. I mesmerised him for the first time with
slight effect ; his eyelids closed and opened several times, and
he afterwards expressed himself quieted.

9th. Effect much stronger. He slept, though without
losing consciousness, for eight or ten minutes, three separate
times, breathing heavily, &c.

1lth. Much the same ; effect increasing.

12th. Slept nearly half an hour at once.

13th. Says he feels better and has more command over
his mind ; he can direct it better. Effect much the same.

18th. Is suffering from dyspeptic symptoms, and is conse-
quently more irritable than usual, and is less under the influ-
ence of mesmerism this last day or two. I have given him a
little gentian and potash and a few alterative pills.

20th. Dyspepsia very much relieved and he appears alto-
gether calmer; he slept to-day after a very few passes and
remained very sound for forty minutes. This is the quietest
and best nap he has had.

22nd, 23rd, and 25th. Sleep more and more profound.
Caught himself dreaming several times, yet it did not appear
to him like natural sleep. Says he is always much calmer
after the mesmerism than he has been all the day, (I always
see him in the fevening,) and he fancies he can now apply
himself to study for a much longer time without feeling
mental fatigue or excitement.

31st. Says he can direct his mind much better, and feels
decidedly more able to apply himself.

Sept. 14th. He has been mesmerised about four times a
weeks since last report, and is rapidly improving. Says he
always enjoys the mesmerism, and looks forward to it asa
luxury.

I have tried traction of the hands the last three or four
times, and though they have not moved, there has been each
time—particularly when I commenced—slight twitching of
the fingers ; and to-day after he awoke, he observed unasked
that he had experienced a sensation like slight galvanic shocks
passing through his hands, and which was most perceptible
at the palms. Finding this on several occasions, I continued
darting my fingers towards his head, and he told me it gave
him a sensation as though I were shaking his head. On one
occasion he said, “If you do anything to my head, please to
do it a little more gently, as it appears to agitate my brain ;
it feels as though the brain were a bladder of fluid, and that
you were pressing upon it—so marked is the effect.” When


the dartings were made more gently the sensation was agree-
able to him.


————


490 More painless Amputations and other


Oct. 17th. He has been mesmerised every second or third
day since last report. All his friends compliment him on his
improved appearance, and he says he feels so well that he has
determined on going to Cambridge next week for the purpose
of resuming his studies.

Mesmerism has triumphed in this case over physic and
physicians; for my patient had been under various means of
treatment for three years previous to my seeing him, and in
little more than two months by means of mesmerism he is
enabled to resume his studies.


I have several cases in hand, but think they will be better
worth reporting in your next number.
I remain, Sir,
Yours obediently,
58, Paradise St., Rotherhithe, THomas CHANDLER.
Nov. 25th, 1845. .


VI. More painless Amputations and other Surgical Operations
in the Mesmeric State. Communicated by Dr. Ex:xiorson.


** Quackery. The Mesmerisers.—lf Dr. Elliotson (who had done so much to raise the
reputation of University College) felt himself required to resign his office, why are Dr. Wilsou
and Dr. Ashburner allowed to retain their appointments at the Middlesex Hospital? They
are as much practisers of that absurd delusion as the former. Is it fair to the governors?
Is it fair to the patients? Is it fair, or decently honest to the papils? What would be
thought of any body of governors retaining a chaplain to a hospital alter he had become an
infidel or an atheist ?”—Lancet, Dec. 6, 1845.


Bap news from France! worse news from India! !—to those
who have assured their patients, and to those who have pro-
claimed to the world, that mesmerism is useless and a gross
imposition and delusion.


I lately received the following printed account from
France.


Amputation (at Cherbourg, October 2, 1845) of the Leg of a
young person seventeen years of age, in mesmeric sleep, who
did not experience the slightest pain.


Miss Mary D’Albanel, seventeen years of age, had la-
boured, for many years, under disease of the right foot occa-
sioned by a sprain. For above three years amputation had
been pronounced inevitable. But, notwithstanding the pro-
gress of the disease, the patient could never be brought to
consent to an operation which the most courageous man never


Surgical Operations in the Mesmeric State. 491


contemplates without dread. At length it was determined to
have recourse to mesmerism, in order to render her insensible
of pain, and in order to perform the operation, the necessity
for which was every day becoming more imminent, without
her knowledge. She was mesmerised by M. Durand, who had
no doubt of success; and the result proved the accuracy of
his judgment.

The first effect of mesmerism was the restoration of Miss
D’ Albanel’s appetite and sleep, of which she had very long been
deprived. The degree of her msensibility having been fre-
quently examined, was at length found to be such as was
necessary, and she consented, during her sleep-waking, to
submit to the operation, or rather she earnestly entreated to
have it performed. The amputation was fixed for the follow-
ing Thursday, the 2nd of October, at half-past twelve.

On the day fixed, at eleven o’clock, Miss D’Albanel was
sent to sleep in less than three minutes, and then placed upon
a table. Preparations were immediately made in her presence;
and, as soon as M. Durand was satisfied that the insensibility
was deep and positive, he informed the surgeons that they
might begin the operation with perfect certainty. Then, in
the midst of a solemn silence, and while all the assistants
were fixing an attentive and scrutinizing eye upon the peace-
ful countenance of the patient, Dr. Loysel made a large cir-
cular incision with his knife, which, penetrating deeply into
the flesh as far as the bones, laid bare the greater part of the
tibia and fibula. The blood flowed abundantly. The two
flaps were cut and dissected, the periosteum cut, the bones
sawn ; the ligature of the arteries, the cleansing and putting
up of the wound, the application of bandages and lint,—all
was done without the patient giving the slightest symptom of
pain. Her countenance continued calm and undisturbed ; her
hands remained constantly free, and she several times smiled
and conversed with her mesmeriser, even during the most pain-
ful stages of the operation, which, including the putting up,
lasted above half an hour. The insensibility was complete ;
the patient had no knowledge of what was doing; the pulse
underwent no change in either strength or frequency.

Miss D’Albanel was immediately carried to bed, and al-
lowed to remain still for a short time. In a quarter of an
hour she was awakened, as on former days, by the mere will
of her mesmeriser, in three or four seconds, and at the dis-
tance of two metres. She opened her eyes suddenly, smiled
to those around her, and thus remained .above ten minutes
without perceiving what had taken place, and free from all
suffering: then she said, without too strong an emotion,


|
|


492 More painless Amputations and other


“ Ah, I perceive it is over; what a blessing,—oh thanks !
thanks! gentlemen.”

Being requested to mention what she had felt or expe-
rienced during her sleep, she replied ; “I know of nothing :
I have felt no pain; I recollect nothing.”

She was then asked, “ How, then, did you know immedi-
ately that the operation had been performed?” “ Without
that elevation which is above my knee,” (the cradle to elevate
the bed-clothes from the leg,) she replied, “ I should not have
perceived it so soon ; for I have no pain at this moment.”

She was very calm the rest of the day, and slept quietly
the greater part of the night. It was the same the following
days. On Monday, October 6th, the first bandages were
removed at two o’clock, and the wound dressed during mes-
meric sleep. This dressing, which is generally very painful,
gave her no sensation: on being awakened, she had no know-
ledge of what had been done. From the moment of the
operation (ten days had now elapsed) she constantly preserved
a remarkable serenity and cheerfulness. She had not one bad
symptom: not even the nervous excitement which is so com-
mon after painful operations. The wound is now nearly
gradually healed, and there is every reason to hope for a
speedy cure.

It is thus completely proved by experience that mesmerism,
producing the most absolute insensibility in the organs, may
be of valuable assistance and render great service in surgical
operations, and in amputations which are always so painful,
by sparing the unfortunate patient both terror and anguish.
And after an operation, the agony of which excites an irrita-
tion which is sometimes very dangerous, how happy are we in
being able, through the means of mesmeric sleep, to prevent
nervous accidents, lock jaw (letanus), for example, which
often destroys life, and to restore the vital powers which such a
shock has exhausted. This is always the result when sleep-
waking is effected, and was very striking in the case of am-
putation which we have just witnessed at Cherbourg.

What happy, what blessed results, then! The terrors
which usually precede amputation, the agony which accom-
panies it, the cruel recollections which follow it, are all de-
stroyed and annihilated by mesmerism.

What an astounding phenomenon, and how deserving of
rivetting the attention of the learned! Unluckily for the
science, mesmerism, this unknown but real power, this myste-
rious and imponderable agent, escapes observation ; and the
men who have devoted themselves with the most ardour to the
study of this most interesting branch of anthropology, have


Surgical Operations in the Mesmeric State. 493


hitherto been unable to discover the causes of so prodigious a
change, of so deep an alteration of the laws of life.
Cherbourg, Oct. 11th, 1845.


P.S. Yesterday, Sunday, the tenth day after the opera-
tion, the patient got up, and sat at the window from twelve
till five o’clock. To-day, Monday, Oct. 13th, she left her
room and took a turn in a neighbouring garden, and sat there
afterwards for above two hours. She is now perfectly well
and goes out every day.

Cherbourg, Oct. 13th, 1845.


The fourteenth day of the operation, the wound was com-
pletely healed, and all dressing left off.

This amputation, performed under such extraordinary cir-
cumstances, and the rapid cure which ensued, have produced
a strong sensation here.


Cherbourg, Oct. 30th, 1845.


(edd yi hen


The operation performed by Dr. Loysel, does the greatest
honour to this young surgeon, and to Dr. Gibon, who assisted
him with the obliging concurrence of M. Arsene Delente.”


494 More painless Amputations and other


With the printed account came the following private
letter :—


“ Sir,—In the two-fold interest of science and humanity,
of which you are one of the most noble supporters, and to
which you have devoted your whole life, I have the honour to
send you three copies of the account of an amputation of the
leg lately performed at Cherbourg, in circumstances and with
success altogether remarkable, upon a young lady, seventeen
years of age, in the mesmeric state. This operation with
those which have taken place in your country, always at the
head of useful innovations, and which is of such importance
to medical science, is exciting the very highest sympathy in
our city, and producing a great sensation at Paris in the
learned world. It is the first mesmeric amputation of a limb
that has been performed in France. A fact worthy of remark
is, that this young person was very insusceptible. The sleep-
waking state did not appear till she had been frequently mes-
merised: and I could not induce perfect insensibility, such as
I considered indispensable, till I had mesmerised her a hun-
dred and sixty-two times. Great patience and indefatigable
perseverance were necessary, and you may conceive that,
moreover, I had to struggle with more than one kind of pre-
judice and obstacle ; but I was firmly convinced that I
should succeed ; hope and charity gave me courage. My ex-
pectation was not disappointment: thank God, all was com-
pleted.

“Tf, Sir, as I doubt not, you are interested in this official
communication, and judge it, as well as my letter, worthy of
being translated into English and inserted in the very inte-
resting journal, The Zoist, in which you are one of the most
enlightened writers, I shall request you kindly to receive other
accounts, which I will transmit relative to some successful
mesmeric cures of mine, and of fresh operations which will
be performed shortly by the same means,—two amputations
of the leg and the removal of a cancerous breast.

“A very remarkable and consolatory circumstance in the
present case was, that the two surgeons who assisted were but
a short time before shockingly incredulous. But both, being
men of feeling, talent, and foresight, at length did homage
to truth ; and, after having witnessed numerous very interest-
ing physical and psychological phenomena, which I produced
expressly for them, they bent before the undeniable testimony
of fact, which is stronger than all reasoning. Their well-
grounded conviction of the reality and importance of mes-
meric science, will prove a happy circumstance to all of us


Surgical Operations in the Mesmeric State. 495


here, and to you likewise. It is another triumph of good
sense and experience over prejudice and preconception.

“Persons who, like you, Sir, are practising mesmerism
with such praiseworthy perseverance and disinterestedness,
ought to take courage more and more. I say it with deep con-
viction, the day of ridicule and spite is past. Our age is one
of cool reason; observing, analyzing, and disposed to eclec-
tism, it no longer affirms or denies; it doubts. This is the
most favourable state for the examination of the important
question which agitates and excites all minds at present.
Men at length comprehend that it is neither rational nor phi-
losophic to condemn a priori whatever human reason cannot
at the first glance embrace in all its details—whatever resists
the first intuition of intelligence. In truth, all is mystery
around us; without speaking of the phenomena of gravita-
tion, light, and electro-magnetism, the faintest act of human
will is sufficient to confound the proud pretensions of those
who still desire to measure the greatness of the wonders of
creation by the standard of their own intelligence, and to
blast with powerless anathemas the truths which they cannot
understand. Contemptuous silence, prejudice, and obstinacy
are now useless before the material facts which any person
may produce and renew in some measure at will; and what-
ever, in short, be the situation or grandeur of individuals,
they must submit to the admirable and eternal order esta-
blished by the Sovereign of all things. The earth, therefore,
still turns in spite of the chains with which the Inquisition
dared to load the unfortunate Galileo: and the blood still cir-
culates in spite of the implacable enemies of Harvey. Lord
Bacon has said with reason, ‘Time is a great innovator.’
The father of experiment and philosophic method might have
added, When men deny a fact of nature, it is certain that
sooner or later she will conquer.

“ Accept, Sir, I beg, my expressions of the esteem, re-
spect, and admiration with which your distinguished talents
and ardent philanthropy inspire me.

“Your very obedient and devoted servant,
“LL. Duranp,
Professor of Philosophy in the College at Cherbourg,
Officer of the Royal University of Paris.
“Cherbourg, Nov. 8, 1845.


“PS. Be so kind, Sir, in acknowledging this packet, as
to inform me where I can procure at Paris your different
works, entitled, Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations with-

VOL, IIT. MM


496 More painless Amputations and other


out Pain, &e.; Cerebral Physiology ; Human Physiology ; as
well as the collection of The Zoist, one number of which I
have read with the deepest interest, that was given me four
months ago at Cherbourg by the Duke of Marlborough, who
prides himself upon being one of your friends.”


Read this, Dr. Chambers, at this moment president of the
Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, who still go about
daily denouncing mesmerism as humbug and its abetters
as impostors. Read this, Sir Benjamin Brodie, Dr. Marshall
Hall, Dr. George Gregory, Dr. Copland, Mr. Liston, Mr.
Bransby Cooper, and you other members of the Society.
Compare this case with that which was read to you in Novem-
ber, 1842—three years ago. That you contemptuously pro-
nounced a piece of imposition. Poor Dr. James Johnson de-
clared he would not have believed the facts had he witnessed
them, and has quitted this earthly scene, and so has the
good president, Dr. Williams. Is this, and the four other
painless amputations and numerous other operations recorded
in The Zoist, also imposition? In your irrational feeling
against the mighty truths of mesmerism, you “ entirely passed
over,” as I pointed out to you at the meeting, “the comfort-
able nights, the return of the appetite, and the improved ap-
pearance of the poor man by mesmerism.” Were these im-
position? Yet you find in the recent case in France, “the
first effects of mesmerism upon Miss D’Albanel were the
restoration of appetite and sleep, of which she had been long
deprived.”

You cried out against the poor man, because, while his
left leg was being taken off without his feeling, he did not sud-
denly move his right. Miss D’Albanel was equally ignorant
of physiology, and did not move her other leg. Nor did the
poor woman, whose arm was amputated without her knowledge
at Torquay, move her other arm (p. 207) :—“her other arm
remained on the arm of the chair without restraint, and it
did not move :” “the incision for the circular operation was
made without producing the slightest movement in the arm,
countenance, or body ; the whole was in a perfectly passive
state, exactly as in a dead subject.” Indeed, there is no
mention of any such movement of the opposite limb in any,
but one, of the seven amputations which have now been re-
corded. In one, the opposite extremity moved: but this
must have been an accidental occurrence, as it has happened
in no other cases. A further proof that this is not necessary
is the fact, that, when I had cut off the heads of some frogs,


Surgical Operations in the Mesmeric State. 497


and then pricked the toes of one foot, the corresponding foot
contracted, but the other leg was perfectly still, except once
or twice, in twenty trials.

You all seemed totally unaware of the difference between
fortitude and insensibility. You adduced instances of won-
derful fortitude under operations, and then considered insen-
sibility, where no fortitude was depicted or boasted of, to be
fortitude. The French patient shewed no fortitude: “her
face was calm and passive ; her hands relaxed, and she often
conversed and smiled with her surgeon during the most pain-
ful steps of the operation.”

If this will not content you and your great ally, Mr.
Wakley—yes, I repeat it, your ally—read for the sake of
humanity the followimg narratives from Asia.


The following account I have extracted from the number
for last June (Vol. iii., No. vi.) of the India Journal of Me-
dical and Physical Science, edited by C. Finch, Esq., M.D.,
and published in Calcutta. The number was kindly forwarded
to me by Dr. Ashburner.

In the last number of The Zoist, I presented the English
public, under the head of “ Surgical operations without pain
in the mesmeric state,” with an extract from a July number
of the newspaper called the Bengal Hurkaru, headed “ Dr.
Esdaile’s mesmeric feats,’ among which was an operation
without pain in the mesmeric coma. What the operation was
I knew not, but presume it was one of those related in the
present account, and indeed that upon Buxoo Khidmutgar.

I extract the whole communication, and not merely those
parts which relate to the operations. For the whole is re-
markable on account of its admission into a colonial medical
journal, while all the medical journals at home are too dis-
honest to act so wisely, with the exception of one or two,
which admit no more than they cannot well avoid, and after
admitting that little endeavour to wash their fair and deli-
cate hands of the subject. It is written with great spirit,
and contains many just remarks. Dr. Esdaile relates cight
cases of operations. 1, 2. The extension of a contracted knee
and elbow. 3. Anincision intoatumor. 4. The paring away
of an ulcer on the heel. 5, 6. The removal of two tumors.
7, 8. Two amputations. Six of these operations (in which
number were both the amputations) were performed without
any sensation : in two the insensibility was imperfect from too
little time having been bestowed upon the mesmeric process.
The example of M. Durand’s perseverance should be fol-
lowed by all mesmerisers.

MM 2


498 More painless Amputations and other


I have substituted a few Latin terms.


“ Mesmeric Facts, reported by James Esdaile, M.D., Civil
Assistant Surgeon, Hooghly.


“ Srr,—Since it appears that nothing short of seeing with
your own eyes will convince you of the physical effects of
mesmerism even, I will be happy to afford you ocular demon-
stration. But this is a bad precedent, and I only make you
this offer, because, as the editor of a medical journal, you
have it probably in your power to advance or retard the recep-
tion of an important truth among medical men, in whose
hands the investigation of this matter should be exclusively
lodged for the satisfaction and safety of the public, for it is
subject to enormous abuse in the keeping of the ignorant
and knavish.

“You are aware that few can be privileged to the extent
of St. Thomas in the solution of their doubts, and that the
horizon of human knowledge would be very circumscribed,
if we only believed in the evidence of our own senses. There
are recognized laws of evidence for testing the credibility of
human testimony upon whatever subject it may be given, and
however new or strange the proposition may be to us, we
shall, by a careful and dispassionate examination of the proofs,
be able to determine what we may safely believe; on what
points we should suspend our judgment, and how much we
ought to reject. In spiritual matters, we may have been
told, ‘ Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed.’ This blessing also follows the ready but discrimi-
nating reception of truth in philosophy, morals, and secular
affairs. Mental satisfaction, honour, and profit, if cared for,
reward the first discoverers of the secrets of nature ; riches
await the men of clear sense who know how to turn the new
truths to practical purposes; and in medicine, the early ap-
plication of new and powerful remedies removes much human
suffering that would probably have been otherwise hopeless.
It is a curious psychological phenomenon, that a hard dis-
belief in mesmerism seems to be in proportion to the extra-
ordinary facilities afforded to every one to satisfy himself by
the evidence of his own senses. There is no ‘hocus pocus’
or attempt at concealment practised by many mesmerisers,
whose word has never been doubted in the course of their
lives, and who are well known to be neither fools nor knaves.
They say to us, ‘do thus,’ and you will probably become as
wise as ourselves ; or if you cannot or will not be at the ne-
cessary trouble, ‘come and see.’ But people, in general,


Surgical Operations in the Mesmeric State. 499


prefer to dictate laws to nature from their easy chairs, and
amuse themselves at the followers of nature chasing the shapes
of their own imaginations.

“Let us leave these infallible philosophers to their digni-
fied repose, and I hope it will not disturb them, if I hint,
that those who never doubt, will little learn.

“But I beg to warn all those who have not a practical
knowledge of the subject, that it is much easier to ‘see,’
than ‘to do;’ nature will not ‘ unsought be won,’ and only
yields her secret treasures to those who court her with earnest-
ness, sincerity, and resolution.

“ ¢QLabore et Sudore,’ ought to be the mesmerist’s motto
till he has produced the desired results by his personal efforts,
and thereby given himself and others confidence. After this,
all is easy, for any number of proper assistants may be taught
to act under our superintendence, and this they do with good
will and effect, having once seen the wonderful results that
may be produced; any one of which will amply compensate
for a hundred failures.

“The most formidable, because reasonable, argument,
against the existence of mesmerism as a natural power, is
perhaps the Report of the French Commission in 1779, of
which Franklin was president.*

“The verdict of the ‘Savans’ was perfectly just, and a
legitimate deduction from the evidence before them; but yet
(such is human fallibility) in this case ‘Summum jus,’ was
also ‘ Summa injuria’—truth was sacrificed to falsehood, as I
think will clearly appear from a short analysis of their pro-
ceedings, This will probably not be time wasted, as I have
heard intelligent gentlemen say, that the verdict of the
French philosophers still decided their opinions. They had a
series of ‘ Axioms of Mesmerism’ presented to them, whose
truth they were to examine, and the efficacy of certain pro-
cesses was to be proved to their satisfaction by experiment.

“The mesmerist’s object seems to have been to try to con-
vince the commission that he had a secret worth knowing,
and yet continue to keep it to himself by hiding its extreme
simplicity under a load of complicated machinery and various
kinds of mummery.


“Deslon, the pupil of Mesmer,t propounded his Laws of


_ * 1784, Franklin was not, I believe, president. He gave himself very
little trouble about the matter.—J. E.

+ ‘“* The supporters of the ‘ diabolical theory’ will be glad to learn, that
a‘ Father Hebl’* was actually the first discoverer of the new power. The
Santee of the orthography of his name, was a poor ‘ruse’ of the arch

eceiver,


* I have always seen his name spelt Hell. Hell in German signifies


500 More painless Amputations and other


Animal Magnetism, after this fashion :—

“1. ‘Animal magnetism is an universal fluid, constitut-
ing an absolute plenum in nature, and the medium of all
mutual influence between the celestial bodies, and betwixt
the earth and animal bodies.’

“This is only a gigantic assertion.

“2. ‘It is the most subtile fluid in nature; capable of
flux and of reflux, and of receiving, propagating, and con-
tinuing all kinds of motion.’

The two first clauses are probable enough, and in the last
he had perhaps a glimpse of motion by electro-magnetism ;
but to call this, or any other combination of inorganic powers,
and mesmerism, identical, even at the present day, is taking
everything for granted.

“3. ‘The animal body is subjected to the influences of
this fluid by means of the nerves, which are immediately
affected by it.’

“ Very possibly, we see no other way at present.

“4, ‘The human body has poles, and other properties,
analogous to the magnet.’

“The first proposition has never been proved ; the second,
only true as far as likeness goes.

“5. ©The action and virtue of animal magnetism may be
communicated from one body to another, whether animate or
inanimate.’

“True, as regards the relations between animate bodies,
and these can also impregnate inanimate substances we sre
told by the best authorities.

“6. ‘It operates at a great distance without the interven-
tion of any body.’

“True.

“7, “It is increased and reflected by mirrors ; communi-
cated, propagated, and increased by sound; and may be ac-
cumulated, concentrated, and transported.’

“ Sound may possibly assist to lull the brain, but quiet is
far more essential; the other assertions are borne out by
modern experiments.

“8. ‘Notwithstanding the universality of this fluid, all
animal bodies are not equally affected by it; on the other
hand, there are some, though but few in number, the pre-
sence of which destroys all the effects of animal magnetism.’

“The first part correct ; the last, probably so.

“9. ‘By means of this fluid, nervous diseases are cured
immediately, and others mediately ; and its virtues, in short,
extend to the universal cure and preservation of mankind.’


clear. So that in the German lessons we have the sentence, — himmel
(heaven or sky) ist hell,—J. E,


Surgical Operations in the Mesmeric State. 501


“True to so great an extent, that we do not know how
far it may go. Is it surprising that the commission dismissed
contemptuously such a jumble of mere assertion and non-
sense, seasoned with a grain of truth? Like a Bengal wit-
ness, the mesmerist smothered his true tale in a score of
circumstantial lies, till no one knew what to believe. Then
again, he ruined himself and his cause, by loading the
simple truth with a parcel of trumpery machinery, through
which he hoped the power of nature would nevertheless
.penetrate.

“ But nature, like an overloaded camel, turned upon her
driver, and threw him and his paraphernalia of magnetic
platforms, conducting rods and ropes, pianos and magnetized
trees, into the dirt, and truth retired in disgust to the bottom
of her well, there to remain, till more honest men should
draw her forth, again to surprise and benefit the world.

“ As far as my observation goes, all that is necessary for
success, if the parties are in the relation of agent and sub-
ject, is passive obedience in the patient, and a sustained atten-
tion on the part of the operator; and the more the bodies of
both are in a state of nature, so much the better for the suc-
cess of a natural process.

“The successes I am now about to record, are mainly to
be attributed, I believe, to my patients being the simple
children of nature; neither thinking, questioning, nor re-
monstrating, but passively submitting to my pleasure, with-
out in the smallest degree knowing my intentions. If the
proud sons of civilization will condescend to return for a
moment to the feet of their mother Nature, they will also
benefit by her bounties.

“ Children and idiots are nearly the only persons who have
resisted me and my assistants, probably from their great
mobility of mind and body.


“ A Journal of Practical Mesmerism.

“ Having satisfied myself of the existence of the mesmeric
power by the experiments reported in your last number, I
have lost no time in applying it to practical purposes. The
effects are nearly as various as the different individuals acted
upon, but divide themselves into three prominent conditions :
simple somnolence, semi-insensibility, and total insensibility
orcoma. Of these I will give a sufficient number, collected
during the last month, to prove how common all these states


are, and that all are eminently useful in combating different
diseases,


502 More painless Amputations and other


“ Simple Somnolence.

“ April 7th.—Janokee Sing, a chuprassie, aged 30, a
hardy-looking man. Totum scrotum cum preputio are slough-
ing from the application of some acid leaves. Pain most
intense. I foolishly wasted myself in trying to mesmerise
him for an hour, but with no effect.

“ April 15th.—Totum scrotum has sloughed off; has had
no sleep since he came to hospital. The compounder, a
healthy, intelligent Hindoo, succeeded in putting him to
sleep to-day, in half an hour. He awoke when called upon
or pinched, but instantly fell asleep again.

“ April 16th.—Slept from 11 a.m. yesterday till 5 p.m.;
took his dinner at 6 o’clock, immediately after went to bed,
and slept till 7 o’clock this morning, the only rest he has had
since he was burned.

“ April 19th.—Mesmerised daily since the 16th, with the
same results ; every time it becomes easier, and a few minutes
now suffice to overcome him. Nothing else worth remarking.


“ April 20th.—Kowsoolla, aged 40, a peasant woman.
Had her breast and an axillary gland extirpated, three weeks
ago, for cancer. There is only a skin wound now. I sub-
dued her in ten minutes to-day for the first time. She awoke
when called upon, but in a second fell asleep again ; the limbs
are quite loose, but when I fix them for a minute in any
position, they remain in it, and require to be dragged into a
new attitude. The muscles yield precisely like lead, without
a vestige of re-action when the bending force is removed.

“ April 25th.—She can now be mesmerised in a minute,
nothing new elicited.


“ April 20th.— When at the hospital to-day, the Mussulman
compounder came and said, that he had put a woman to sleep
in the female ward, and that he could not awake her. Went
to see ; found it true, and took the opportunity to inform every
one about the hospital, that if any one dared to attempt this
again, without my orders, he should be instantly dismissed,
and hanged into the bargain, if the patient never awoke
again. I hope this will check experimental mesmerism.


“ May 3rd.—Bissumber Chowdry; urina non reddita for
three days. The vesica is prominent at the navel; no catheter
can be introduced ; a quantity of pus came away with the in-
strument. Ordered to lie in the easiest posture, and to be put
to sleep, if possible. Slept for several hours, and urinam
abunde reddidit when awoke.


Surgical Operations in the Mesmeric State. 503
“ May 11th.—There has been no return of the stoppage.


“May 4th.—A prisoner, convalescent from cholera, has

been tormented with incessant hiccough for 24 hours.
Opii. gr. ij. Conf. Arom. gr. x. ;

If this does not check it, a blister to be applied over the
diaphragm.

“ May 5th.—No better. To be mesmerised.

“ Returned after three hours, and found him asleep:
awoke him; has no hiccough.

“ May 11th.—The hiccough has not returned.


* Semi-insensibility.

“ April 20th.—Jeelal, my Dhobie, aged 35, has been
eighteen months ill, first with dysentery, afterwards with
rheumatic fever, in consequence of which his left knee is
bent at a right angle upon the thigh. I considered him to
be a hopeless cripple.

“T mesmerised him to-day in a quarter of an hour. At
first he supported his knee with both hands, but soon allowed
me to remove them and suspend them in the air. The leg
was then gradually extended, and straightened to a consider-
able extent, without awaking him.

“ April 21st.—Process repeated to-day, and more force
used, which awoke him ; the leg still farther improved.

“ April 22nd.—The pulley was used to-day, and very con-
siderable power applied before he awoke. The muscular con-
traction of the extensor and flexor muscles of the thigh is
now nearly overcome, and the remaining stiffness of the
knee seems to be from the tendons and ligaments about the
joint, and will probably yield to mechanical extension by
exercise.

“May 11th—He can now walk without a stick, but the
fibrous contractions give way slowly. I am convinced that
direct force might have torn the muscles of the thigh, but
could not have relaxed them.


“ April 23rd.—Ramchunder Sircar. Saw him for the first
time to-day, at 11 o’clock, a.m. He has got elephantiasis
scroti. The tumor is twice the size of a man’s head.

“T put him to sleep, and made his arms cataleptic in
three quarters of an hour.

“ Pricking and inhaling ammonia, disturbed but did not
awake him; I therefore proceeded to operate, but he awoke
after I had slit up the praputium. Itherefore desisted, and
will try to educate him into insensibility.


504 More painless Amputations and other


“ April 27th.—Has been easily mesmerised daily since the
23rd. Is not insensible to pain, but it does not awake him,
and I could not afford to spend more time upon him, and
therefore re-commenced the operation. I pulled him by the
legs to the edge of the table, and allowed the tumor to hang
down unsupported; then bent his knees, and put his feet in
the attitude for lithotomy, and in this painful position he
remained for half an hour without moving.

“His legs and arms were then properly disposed of, in
case he should awake, and the tumor quickly removed. The
first incisions did not awake him, but he was soon thoroughly
roused. This imperfect insensibility was a great comfort to
the patient, and gave great facilities to the operator.

“Testiculus unus adhered to the fundus of the tumor,
and was sacrificed.

“The mode of operating was that described in this Journal
for Sept. 1844, and though different from that adopted by
several practised operators, I have seen no reason to change
it. It is very simple and expeditious, and the wound is some-
times healed in one week instead of six.


“May 12th.— Buxoo Khidmutgar. Fistula infra colis
glandem intra urethram desinens ; the glans colis is sloughing,
and requires to be amputated. I desired him to be mes-
merised, and returned in an hour. Found him asleep, and
while looking at him, he awoke with a start, but immediately
went to sleep again, and in five minutes after J cut off tie
glans colis without giving him any pain. He awoke a moment
after, but said it was from fear, not pain.*


“ Total Insensibility or Coma.

“May 13th.—Madub Kaurd, my first patient, reported
on last month. This man can now be catalepsed in less than
a minute, and the effects are passing strange.

“Tf I point my fingers at him for a few seconds, his eye-
lids begin to droop, and if standing, his arms fall by their
mere weight to his side; his whole body begins to tremble,
shewing the loss of command over the muscular system, and
if not supported, he would fall down in a heap. But support
him for a minute, and he becomes as rigid as a statue, and if


* This fact in another quarter of the globe is worthy of remark. The
pulse may be heightened under a perfectly painless operation, as I noticed
in a case of my own recorded in Vol. II., p. 109. The patient whose leg
was the first amputated in the mesmeric state, is described by Messrs.
Topham and Ward to have moaned in his sleep though he felt nothing; I
have no doubt that he feared, and dreamt through fear.—J. E.


Surgical Operations in the Mesmeric State. 505


the centre of gravity is well poised, he will remain in any
posture he is put in longer than I have waited to see; but if
there is any deflection from the perpendicular, he would, it
is evident to all, knock his brains out against the floor.
However inconvenient or grotesque the position may be in
which he is put, he remains passively in it till the muscles
yield gradually like wax, if there is any incumbent pressure.
When that is removed, they cease to yield, and remain ‘in
situ.’ He is quite easy and comfortable with his heels behind
his neck, and if his forehead is applied at an acute angle
against the wall, he remains like a wooden prop longer than
I have ascertained.

“On awaking, which is usually in three or four hours, he
always says that his head ‘turns,’ and that he feels drunk ;
a sensation he is familiar with from the privileges of his caste.


“ April 20th.—11 o’clock a.m. Kangalee, a peasant, aged
20; weak, and ill nourished. He had a fever four years ago,
after which sores broke out in different parts of his body, and
have left large cicatrices like burns.

“ There is one around the left elbow joint, which has per-
manently contracted to this extent for seven months. He
was catalepsed in twenty minutes; a bottle was then placed
under his elbow for a fulcrum, and the arm gradually ex-
tended by depressing the hand. He moved uneasily, and the
muscles contracted occasionally, but soon melted under my
hand, and I left him with his arm perfectly straight, and ex-
tended in the air, and still asleep. Two o’clock p.m., he
awoke half an hour ago. Sees his arm is straight ; knows
not how it was done; has no pain; can move it freely.

“ May 2nd.—He pulls the punkah daily with the left arm
for exercise. No return of the contraction.*


* Surgeons ought to consider this at any rate an important cure, however
insignificant or undesirable a thing they, with Dr. Copland, may regard the
prevention of pain in surgical operations. The noble spirit which (as all
future generations will with amazement read) led the Medical and Chirur-
gical Society of London, containing the heads of London surgeons, to set their
faces with such scorn against the invaluable fact of an amputation without
pain that they madly would not allow a trace of the account to remain upon
their minutes, while as professing Christians they might have been supposed
by silly philanthropists to. be likely to catch at the faintest chance of miti-
gating human suffering, renders it impossible for me to think of calling the
attention of operating surgeons to the painless character of the operation,
But this contraction of joints from scars is treated by a most painful cutting
operation, which too often fails of its object, discrediting surgery; and [
assure the London hospital surgeons that it is only on the latter account, and


to lessen their trouble, that I take the liberty of calling their attention to
the case.—J. E.


506 More painless Amputations and other


“ May 5th.—Ramtoonu Buttachargie, a Brahmin, aged
40. Saw him for the first time at 11 o’clock a.m. to-day.
There is a prodigious fungus hzematodes protruding from the
left elbow joint. A swelling took place at the joint when he
was five years old, and has gone on increasing gradually, but
the skin remained entire till an incision was made by a native
doctor, twelve days ago, when the bloody mass started through
the integuments. It exactly resembles the contents of a
large old aneurysm, the structure of the fungus having been
disorganized by the actual cautery applied all over it to stop
the bleeding; it is a frightful mass. I desired him to be
carefully mesmerised, and went to Chinsurah to consult with
Dr. Elton, in charge of the troops there.

“We returned together to the hospital at one o’clock, and
found him in a profound slumber, and decided to take off the
arm instantly. It was removed without his moving or com-
plaining, and Dr. Elton assured me that his countenance re-
mained perfectly tranquil. He awoke immediately after the
limb was off, and declared again and again, that he was aware
of nothing being done to him till he awoke and saw his arm was
off, and he then saw Dr. Elton for the first time.*

* May 13th.—Is doing well.


“May 11th.—Meeroolla, a jail burkundanze, aged 28,
strong and healthy-looking, begged me to take off a fatty
tumor of his right mamma to-day, as he was ashamed of it.
I desired him to lie down, and let me carefully examine it,
and commenced mesmerising him. In ten minutes ke was
fast asleep; in five minutes more, J transfixed the tumor
with a hook, drew it up from off the muscles, and cut it
quickly out without disturbing him, and he did not awake
till half an hour afterwards. He declares, that he felt no
pain till he awoke, and remembers nothing after my hand
was placed on his stomach, which was in about five minutes
from the commencement.


“ May 11th.—Podoo, a young Hindoo woman, has a
swelling over the false ribs of the right side requiring to be
opened.

“TI desired the compounder to mesmerise her, while I


* It is really lamentable to think that this Asiatic practised imposition
as boldly as the French female in Europe. The olive-skinned of India,
however, was convicted through the self-same piece of ignorance. He too
was unaware that he ought to have moved his right elbow-joint if he felt
nothing while his left was cutting off ; and so did not stir it. ‘The dark races
are just as wicked and just as ignorant of physiology as the white.—J. E.


Surgical Operations in the Mesmeric State. 507


was engaged with the last patient. She was ready before
] was.

“ A deep incision, an inch long, was made into the tumor,
without awaking her, and I left her sleeping.


“ May 14th.—Madub, a healthy looking cooley, aged 30.
Saw him for the first time to-day, at 11 o’clock, a.m. He
has got a sore on the heel of two years standing; the skin is
half an inch thick, and separated from the subjacent parts all
round, and requires to be removed. To be mesmerised in
my absence. I went on to Chinsurah, where I had the
pleasure of being introduced to the Rev. Mr. Banerjie, who
is there on a visit. He begged me to gratify him by per-
mitting him to see a person under the mesmeric influence.
I replied, that I disapproved of experimenting with so for-
midable a power to gratify mere curiosity, but I had left a
man under the process, and that if he would be good enough
to go to the hospital, on chance, he might possibly be satisfied.

“T returned to the hospital after an hour, and there found
the Rev. Mr. Fisher, the Rev. Mr. Banerjie, and Mr. Money,
the collector, and my patient who was fast asleep. I imme-
diately commenced dissecting the thickened cartilaginous
skin from the plantar fascia, which was very difficult from its
thickness and hardness, being almost like a horse’s hoof, and
the operation must have been very painful under ordinary
circumstances. The man however was completely insensible
to pain, and remained asleep for a quarter of an hour after I
had finished. Mr. Banerjie then questioned him in Bengalee
regarding his feelings, and he protested that he felt nothing
till he awoke. Most of the patients mentioned in this report
being in hospital, Mr. Banerjie examined them in Bengalee,
and I believe, that in no particular they gave a different ac-
count of their feelings from what I have described.

“In no instance have I got any irregular or wonderful
mental manifestation ; as long as the patients could speak,
they did not exhibit any alteration in their ordinary language
or ideas.

“ As to ‘ physique,’ men are nearly the same all the world
over, and an universal law of vitality reduces all to the level
of animals, and the cooly may therefore be able to mesmerise
the philosopher.

“ But the difference in ‘ morale,’ not only between races,
but in individuals, is so immense as to amount to a total
want of sympathy or even mutual repulsion, and my patients
and I, have perhaps too few ideas in common to admit of
mental sympathy between us. But I am getting into the


508 More painless Amputations, &c.


region of theory, and facts are my present business. If
more are needed, they will probably be forthcoming till your
readers cry, ‘hold! enough!’ For I will not allow this great
and beneficent spirit to remain idle.


“T am,
“ Your obedient servant,
“James Espaite, M.D.
“ Hooghly, 14th May, 1845.”


It appears that Dr. Esdaile has since this account per-
formed another painless operation. In the Calcutta news-
paper called the Englishman, of Nov. 8, we read, “ Dr. Esdaile
has removed a tumor weighing 80 lbs. without the patient’s
knowledge! He has found it vain to argue with people who
would not believe the evidence of their senses, and says he
will, therefore, “supply facts, till the answer to all objectors
will be, it is no ‘use talking, the thing is so, and is daily
taking place,—if life and death are true, so is mesmerism.’ ”

Mr. Tomes, whose removal of teeth in the mesmeric
state induced by Dr. Ashburner is recorded in vol. ii., p. 107,
lately to my knowledge refused to remove a lady’s teeth in
the mesmeric state till a promise was given that his name
should never be divulged: a dentist in a cathedral town,
where the idea of satanic agency flourishes, refused to extract
a tooth till the sleep-waker was awakened; and the sleep-
waker was positively awakened that he might pull out the
tooth !—another dentist declined in the same circumstances
so long that the sleep-waker, when he consented, refused in
disgust to allow him to go near her, and Mr. H. 8S. Thompson,
a private gentleman, operated himself. Mr. Thompson writes
thus to me: “I took the pliers and extracted the two stumps
myself, the patient smiling the whole time, and never shewing
that she felt even any unpleasant sensation, and, on being
asked, said that she felt exceedingly comfortable ; and, when
awake, she did not know at first that the operation was
over, or who was the operator : she never even felt the mouth
tender afterwards.”


Let the medical profession be assured that the fulness of
time is at hand, when the voice of ail ranks of society will
compel them to desist from their discreditable course, and act
as if they were men of intelligence and humanity.

Joun EL .iorson.


( 509 )
VII. Cure of Fits with Mesmerism. By Mr. Vivian.


Josep Suarter had been living in my service as hind or
farm bailiff for several years, during which time he had been
afflicted with fits closely resembling epilepsy, occurring at
first very rarely, but becoming more frequent and severe,
until he became quite disabled, and compelled to relinquish
his occupation. He had during the last two years been re-
peatedly under the surgeon’s hands, who procured temporary
relief by the usual depleting remedies, and a large issue kept
continually open on the back of the neck. His case was con-
sidered to be spinal or cerebral irritation, which deranged the
whole system, causing the most intense burning pains in the
stomach and chest, and neuralgia, to such an extent that he
could scarcely endure the pressure of his clothes. The fits
were preceded by an aggravation of these symptoms, and
came upon him suddenly with all the appearances of epilepsy,
recurring at shorter intervals, and with greater severity, until
he was for several days wholly confined to his bed, requiring
several persons to control his struggles.

On the day on which I first tried mesmerism his spasms
had recurred almost every hour. During a short interval of
consciousness I prevailed upon him to fix his eyes, and made
the usual passes over the head and chest. In about two
minutes he was in a deep sleep; the usual period passed with-
out the slightest spasm, and he lay in so deep a trance that
his wife -became alarmed, and begged me to awaken him.
A few upward passes completely restored consciousness. He
had several hours natural sleep during the night, which he
passed, as also the next day, without a spasm, and improving
in every respect. At night I mesmerised him again,—he
scarcely raised his eyes when he fell asleep, and lay in a deep
trance for several hours. I continued the passes, and tried
repeatedly to produce some phrenological manifestations, or
somnambulism, but in vain. I then held one hand upon his,
and placed the other upon the summit of the head, Firmness.
In about ten minutes a tremulous action commenced, and his
brow suddenly streamed with perspiration; he moved and
spoke, answering questions, as if awake; it was however pure
somnambulism. In removing my hand he sunk motionless.
Wishing to try another evidence, I went into the next room
and obtained a glass of water, which I drank standing behind
the curtains, holding his hand in the bed; he swallowed at
the same moment with myself. I asked him what he was
doing ; he said, “Only drinking water.” I then put some
salt into my mouth, which I had secreted unknown to any


510 Cure of Fits with Mesmerism,


one, and said, “It is strange tasted water.” “You have
given me salts,” he replied. “No, but it isn’t the medicine;
it is salt-water!” He shrunk when I was pricked with a pin,
&e., even when another person intervened! I relaxed his
hand and he sunk into deep sleep. He awoke naturally soon
after, and as he was much better, and his wife strongly ob-
jected to another siesta as a dark thing that next time might
do harm, I did not again repeat it. He slept soundly next
night, and in a few days was well enough to travel outside
the coach to Exeter for change of air to complete his cure.
His neuralgia and other symptoms wore rapidly off; within a
few weeks he was in robust health, and continued so for
about three months.

Circumstances of a peculiarly exciting nature then so
completely overcame him, that he fell suddenly to the ground
convulsed as frightfully as during the worst attacks,—the fit
recurring every two minutes, leaving him totally unconscious
during the intervals,—he was carried into the farm and laid
upon some straw. I commenced the passes without his being
in the slightest degree conscious. He lay motionless. A
slight tremor only occurred at the usual intervals, which soon
subsided, and he slept for nearly three hours, when I awak-
ened him by the upward passes. He complained of head-
ache, having lain low upon the floor. I placed him in a chair,
and a few passes threw him again into a deep sleep for two
hours. He then walked home quite well! I mesmerised
him at night, and he has since remained in perfect health.

The manifestation of sympathy of taste, &c., were wit-
nessed by a physician and several other friends. The cure
was effected in spite of the issue having been closed, and all
his former medicines discontinued, in order to give a trial to
homeopathy under an able physician, who candidly admits
that latterly his medicines had proved ineffectual, and he ap-
prehended the worst results. No force of imagination can
have worked the cure, as it was in opposition to the strongest
incredulity and prejudice that mesmerism was tried, and in
the second attack the patient was unconscious.

Mesmerism has been subjected here to a long and severe
investigation, especially by members of the medical profes-
sion, who, like myself, confidently anticipated its exposure.
With scarcely an exception, all are now convinced of its
reality. Amongst the more striking cases, was the amputa-
tion of an arm without pain, a report of which by Dr. Phillips
appeared in your last number. I can most fully confirm his
statements, having been present during the whole of the ope-
ration. Of phreno-magnetism we have had some most extra-


by Mr. Vivian. 511


ordinary cases, in which the character of the parties leave no
room for suspicion; and the precautions which have been
observed in the experiments, appear to preclude the possibi-
lity of accounting for the phenomena upon any other principle
than that of direct nervous influence by contact upon the
cerebral organs. At the same time, the numerous instances
in which the manipulation of the organs has been disturbed
by a leading question, or any other influence upon the mind
of the somnambulists, without their retaining the slightest
consciousness of the circumstance on awakening, calls for the
greatest caution in making the trial. Few persons are now
wholly ignorant of phrenology, and the touch of the organs
is sufficient to suggest the corresponding train of thought:
the prevailing impression, however, of those who have given
the question the most attention is, that in its leading features
phreno-magnetism is true.

Of clairvoyance we have had no well-attested instances.

In making this contribution to The Zoist, with the sincere
acknowledgment that is due to its Editors for their undaunted
advocacy of what appears to them to be truth, I must be al-
lowed to express my dissent from the theories which it occa-
sionally advocates. The accumulation of well-attested facts
is all that can yet be attempted: speculative philosophy is
ever prone to run counter to revealed religion, whilst induc-
tive science as surely serves to illustrate and confirm its
truth.

Epwarp VIVIAN.
Woodfield, Torquay,
Dec., 1845.


While expressing our thanks to Mr. Vivian for his valu-
able case, and our perfect willingness for every correspondent
to write, if he chooses, under protest against whatever may
appear in our journal, we must be pardoned for asserting that
we advocate no “theories,” or, as we conceive is meant,
hypotheses. A distinguishing feature in The Zoist is the
absence of speculation, and the observation and inculcation
of fact only. Our opponents are the speculators ; while we
never venture beyond obvious facts. We are not aware that
we ever wrote anything contradictory to “revealed religion ;”
for the advocacy of materialism is not contrary to “ revealed
religion,” as is evident to all who read the Bible like such
thinking men as Bishops Watson, Law, Taylor, Sherlock, &c.
As to philosophical necessity, many pious Christians infer it
from numerous texts. But we have never given an opinion

VOL. III. NN


512 Inflammation cured with Mesmerism.


upon religion, nor ever will give an opinion upon it—upon
supernatural matters. Our work is, like the Royal Society, as
each new fellow is told by the president, “for improving natural
knowledge,”—not supernatural; and is for Christians of all
kinds, and for Jews, Turks, Infidels and Heretics of every shade;
and for improving it by natural means, by human brain-work,
not by supernatural aid : and we shall always investigate nature
without considering whether any sect in supernaturalism holds
our views or not on the natural subjects within our scope.
Astronomers have insisted that the earth goes round the sun ;
geologists that the world must have existed hundreds of
thousands of years; geographers that the earth is round and
we have antipodes, in opposition to the religious world; and
have beaten. Potatoes are eaten because pleasant and nutri-
tious, although condemned by certain supernaturalists because
they are not mentioned in Scripture.—Zoist.


VIII. Instances of the power of Mesmerism over Inflammatory
Diseases, even in brutes; Scrofula, and threatening Con-
sumption : and its comfort in Incurable Diseases. By Miss
Wallace, Dr. Elliotson, Mr. H. S. Thompson, Mr. Decimus
Hands, &c. Communicated by Dr. Exxiotson.


“Homeopathy has found a convert in one of the medical professors of the University of
Edinburgh, and Dr. Henderson will in future be to that lillipatian art what Dr. Eltiotson is
to the HUMBUG MesmeERisM.”—Lancet, Sept. 27, 1845.

“ Mesmerism was for a time the ‘ be all and end all’ of the admirable gobe-mouches who
compose the thing we call British Society. But, unfortunately, it has of late shrank to the
dimensions of a new physiological dogma, curious, but of rare curative application. Hydro-

athy, that was believed, with its wet sheet, to be as effective in ending disease as the shroud
t typified, has been—we much fear—found ont an impostor, ‘keeping the word of promise
to the ear, avd breaking it to the hope.’ The galvanic ring, that was to marry people to per-
petual youth, and did typify a union with perennial verdure, has had a matrimonial fatality
of ill success.”—Mepicat Times, Sept. 1845.

“ Quacks and charlatans still abound, and in the disguise of homeopathista and mesmeri-
sers, have even intruded on the legitimate boundaries of science. But be not deceived by
these specious appearances. Men of this stamp start for a time into notoriety; but track their
course, and you will find that sooner or later their career is checked. Knowledge has taken
no root in them, When difficulties occur (and occur they will to all in the course of time),
they wither, like the corn that was sown on dry ground, On the other hand, the man of
education continues his even course, overcomes the difficulty, and gathers experience from it.
With experience comes self-confidence. Self-confidence brings in its train the good opinion
of the world. Character, wealth, honours, follow.—Dr. Georce Grecory’s Teale
Lecture at St. Thomas’s Hospital this winter, in the chair originally filled and established by
Dr. Elliotson.”—Mepicat Times, Oct. 4, 1845.


Ir is a great mistake to suppose that mesmerism is of use in
only what we term nervous diseases. All vital states, opera-
tions, and structures, are subject to its influence as well as
the portions of the body called nervous ; and we are at pre-
sent utterly unable to affirm what benefit mesmerism may not
effect in disease.

Many examples of the cure of inflammation have been
detailed in The Zoist.* The following case is another. On


* Vol. II., p. 83, 84, 86, 125, 126, 239, 257, 382, 385.
Vol. III., p. 24, 101, 326.


Inflammation cured with Mesmerism. 513


the 18th of last July, Mr. Fradelle, of No. 9, Percy Street,
brought his son to me, twelve years of age, who had been ill
a fortnight. He had great pain and tenderness, with a hard
circumscribed swelling and induration, without redness, of the
right side below the ribs. It was a deep local inflammation
of the covering of the abdomen, and had been induced by a
blow in jumping. He was of course very feverish. Leeches,
&c., were employed; and he was soon much better. But
from moving about too much he became worse than ever, and
leeches were again applied on the 29th. His debility was
such that I could apply but a very small number, and but
once. I endeavoured to affect his gums with mercury, and
gave it very freely; but at length it excited his bowels,
scarcely affecting his mouth. The pain became intense,
and the swelling and induration spread to a fearful extent,
upwards, downwards, even to the bend of the thighs, and
across towards the opposite side. The agony was great, and
almost insupportable on the least motion of his legs or body.
His pulse was 140 ; his debility extreme; and he wasted till
his bones projected. He was delirious. To procure rest, I
had for some time requested his parents to mesmerise him,
and this was done twice a day, with the effect of tranquillizing
him, and occasionally inducing common sleep. I expected
that a large abscess would take place, and every day felt for
matter, but could find no fluctuation. Things grew worse,
and no farther ordinary treatment appeared now possible than
to support him with milk and vegetable substances, keep the
part constantly poulticed, and soothe him. Things still grew
worse daily,—exhaustion, emaciation, pain, fever, and the
extent and intensity of the swelling and induration. He had
a cough, and this increased his agony. I now suggested
local mesmerism,—long passes over the part,—as the general
produced no diminution of the disease: and, lest he should
catch cold, this was performed over the poultice. No benefit
resulted. I begged that it might be performed on the bare
parts. This was done; at first without contact; and, as he
became able to bear it, with slight contact; and gradually
more and more, till passes with firm contact were made. He
soon could bear the pressure of the whole palm, and this
soothed; and whenever the hand was withdrawn sharply, he
experienced a sensation as of sparks drawn from his side.
When awakened by the severity of pain, local mesmerism
always relieved him.

From the first day that local mesmerism over the BARED
part was employed, he being then at the very worst, he began to
mend; his improvement was rapid, no matter a all

NN


514 Inflammation cured with Mesmerism.


was dispersing, and in three weeks from the first day he was
well, and has been well to this hour. No medicines were
given all this time: besides mesmerism, nothing was employed
but a poultice.


The title of the operator in the next case I am not at
liberty to disclose; but, were it mentioned, an impression
would be universally made from the Queen’s Palace to
Apothecaries’ Hall.


“A poor woman in our village, who had had a tooth
broken in her jaw by an unskilful dentist, came up to me
the other day almost frantic with pam. The — » pass-
ing through the Hall, saw her and magnetized her. In six
minutes the pain vanished, and with it the inflamed, tight,
and red appearance of the cheek. She had had this pain
three days, and expressed herself frightened at its leaving her
so suddenly. It has not since returned.”


Mr. D. Hands has favoured me with the following com-
munication :—


“My dear Dr. Elliotson.—I hasten to fulfil my promise
of narrating a few facts concerning the sanativeness of my
mesmeric touch.

“ About a year ago, Mrs. Brogden, of 10, Sussex Gardens,
came to my house to witness my mesmeric experiments, the
facts of which were very astounding; but, possessing a mind
superior to that of the generality of soi disant enquirers, she
feared not to speak boldly of what she had witnessed, though
many thought the wonders she recounted to be impossible, or
at least much exaggerated.

“One day, soon after her visit, I called upon her with my
young friend Mr. Elliot, and found her sitting with her son
Alexander, now a clerical student at King’s College. We
soon entered into conversation on the subject of mesmerism,
when I observed Mr. Alexander smiling incredulously: on
my questioning him, he declared that he could not give cre-
dence to all the marvellous relations he had heard, and that
persons had tried ineffectually to produce any effect upon
him. Observing that he held his head very stiffly, I asked
him the reason; he said that he was suffering from a large
boil on his neck. I then remembered having cured the eye
of a young lady (the daughter of the Rev. G. Sandby), and I
asked him to let me feel the boil: he removed his neckcloth,
and I placed my fingers on it ;—in five minutes his head was


Inflammation cured with Mesmerism. 515


quite at liberty. He turned round, and, looking in the pier-
glass, he exclaimed, ‘ This is proof positive.’

“T saw him the next day and touched the boil again. He
had not felt any pain or inconvenience from it since the time
that I had touched it on the previous day, nor did it return
afterwards.


“ About two months after this, on January 6th, 1845, the
father of this young gentleman, Mr. Brogden, sent for me to
attend him professionally. I found him suffering from vesi-
cated erysipelas, spreading from the roots of the hair down
the forehead, covering the eyes, nose, and cheeks. I placed
my fingers gently on the parts, when the swelling immedi-
ately gave way, and he who had been previously incredulous,
now exclaimed in astonishment, ‘ It’s going, it’s going ;’ and
in less than ten minutes it was all gone.

“T saw him the next morning, when I found that the
swelling had collected into nodules here and there, but they
all disappeared instantly from beneath my touch. On the
third day he went down stairs into the dining-room to tea
with me, and sitting near the fire, he said the heat was bring-
ing the swelling back again. I just set a screen between him
and the fire, and placed my fingers on the affected part, as I
had done before: from that time he experienced no further
inconvenience from it. I had likewise applied mesmerised
water as a lotion, but found that it was unnecessary.


“On the 14th of April, 1845, I was called to attend
Mdlle. Alexandrine, residing at 30, George Street, Hanover
Square. I found this likewise to be a case of erysipelas,
covering all the face and one side of the head and neck, down
to the shoulder. She had been in a delicate state of health
for some months previously ; and when I entered the room, I
found her crying from pain. Some little time had elapsed
between her having sent for me and my visit, owing to
unavoidable engagements, and consequently there had been
an increase of pain.

“T immediately laid my finger gently on the affected
parts. At first she shrunk from the touch, the parts being
so exquisitely sensitive; but in less than a minute I could
press it hard, and in less than five minutes the pain and ten-
sion were quite gone.

“T left her free from pain; but, on visiting her the next
morning, I found that the swelling and pain had returned :
they however quickly subsided on my recurring to the same
treatment as on the previous day.


516 Inflammation cured with Mesmerism.


“T continued the application of pressure with my fingers
as often as the swelling returned, until the cure was com-
pleted, which was within the week.


“On the 30th of May, I was again sent for by Mdlle.
Alexandrine: she was then suffering from a large carbuncle
forming on the back of the neck. Had I not proved mes-
merism to have been successful in such cases, I should have
made a crucial incision ; but now, placing my fingers around
the base of the swelling, and using gentle pressure, I found
it subside; and the sensation I experienced then and in all
similar cases, is like the gentle melting of snow on the appli-
cation of heat. A few days subsequently a small core, about
the size of a large pea or a horse-bean, came out, and no
further trouble was experienced.


“January 24th, 1845. I was attending Mrs. Soundby,
13, Brown Street, Edgware Road, when her husband asked
me to look at his hand, which had been slightly burnt some
time before, but of which he had taken no notice, and now,
instead of healing, it had become a troublesome sore. I
touched it, and kept my fingers upon it for half a minute.
When I went home I sent him some ointment, but before he
received it his hand had become quite easy, and therefore he
never used the ointment. He was not aware of my reason
for touching his hand, but he expressed his astonishment that
it should be well so soon after my having seen it.


“Some time since I was mesmerising the son of my es-
teemed friend, the Rev. J. Dixon, D.D., who was in rather
delicate health. One morning I found him with his hand
covered with flour, having burnt it rather severely by falling
with his hands on the bars of the grate. I proceeded to mes-
merise him as usual, without any reference to the burn. He
did not lose consciousness, although he closed his eyes. After
a few minutes I awoke him, and then perceived that he was
much less careful about his hand. I asked him how it was,
and he replied that the pain was quite gone.


“ A week afterwards I was again at Dr. Dixon’s, and was
asked to look at Miss Dixon, who had a swelling on the side
of her face. I found it to be a large gum-boil, and said that
I would open it on the following morning: but her brother
said, ‘Could you not mesmerise it away? I replied, ‘I will
try,’ and then proceeded to apply my fingers to the swelling,
in the usual manner and with the same success.


Inflammation cured with Mesmerism. 517


“Nov. 22nd. Mr. Alexander Brogden called upon me,
accompanied by a friend and fellow-student, Mr. Brookes, of
63, Queen’s Road, Bayswater, who had a large axillary ab-
scess forming, which was very painful. I bid him take off
his clothes, which he did very carefully and with much pain.
I pressed my fingers on the swelling, and brought it down
the inside of the arm as far as the elbow, supposing that the
absorbents would carry it away: the pain was relieved, and
he could use his arm quite well and with ease. However, I
think it was an error to bring the swelling downwards, for
when he came on the next day it was spread over a large sur-
face; but this disappeared on the application of pressure as
before. On Monday, the 24th, he came again, and I had
recourse to the same measures, and apparently, and likewise
to his feelings, succeeded in relieving him, and, as we thought,
effecting the cure. But on Tuesday, being the fourth day of
my attendance, I found that maturation had been accom-
plished in the gland, and I opened it and gave vent to a small
quantity of matter: I then desired him to go to bed, and
remain there until I saw him; but on my calling on the next
day, he was out, and I have not seen nor heard of him since.


“ Dec. 22nd. About ten days since I received a visit from
Mr. Sommers, of 10 James Street, Oxford Street; he was much
alarmed, having a large furunculus pressing on the trachea
and cesophagus, rendering breathing and swallowing difficult.
I placed my fingers in the customary manner around it, and
used gentle pressure which made him complain at first, but
it quickly became easy, the swelling subsided and he returned
home free from pain, and feeling quite comfortable. He had
previously applied a pitch-plaster, which I told him to take
off, but the removal of it caused the swelling and soreness to
return ; he therefore called upon me again the next morning,
when I again made use of the same means and succeeded in
dispersing the swelling &c., which have not since returned.


“These are a few of the cases in which I have succeeded in
effecting cures by means of mesmerism. I could furnish more
if they should be thought of sufficient interest for publication.

“And now, dear Dr. Elliotson, allow me to avail myself of
this occasion to give expression to my grateful feelings for all
the many kindnesses I have received from you, and to acknow-
ledge the great advantages I have derived from your instruc-
tion and example.

“Tt was after hearing a lecture from you at the North Lon-


518 Scrofula cured with Mesmerism.


don Hospital, that I determined to follow your example in
practising mesmerism.

“ T have cured numbers of persons of different ailments, all
of whom have reason to be grateful that ever you had the
courage to avow and carry out into practice your convictions
on the subject of mesmerism. I am constantly amazed and
delighted at the grand and blessed effects of its great power,
and I wish that I could make all the world as grateful as I
feel. Time will bring light, and conviction must follow.

“ But some will not believe because they cannot understand
what they possess not ; their little minds are too full of preju-
dice to admit light and truth, and they go to the investigation
with a predetermination that they will not be convinced. So
has it been in all generations: if this needed proof we should
only have to turn to History’s page and there find recorded
all the malevolence which attacked a Faust, Galileo, Colum-
bus, Jenner. But allthose names are now remembered with
reverence, while the wasps that stung those noble benefactors
are as if they had never existed. And so, dear Dr. Elliotson,
will those who have maligned and opposed you, be compelled
to admit to their own shame and confusion, that you have
brought real blessings upon mankind, and your memory will
be grateful.

“ It is with gratified feelings that I subscribe myself,

“ Your very grateful, humble servant,
22, Thayer Street, “ Decimus Hanps.
“ Manchester Square.”


Miss Wallace has favoured me with the following :—


“ Laurel Lodge, Cheltenham,
“ Dec. 23, 1845.

“Dear Sir—lIn support of the great truth you have so
ably advocated and finally established, permit me to offer you
for insertion in The Zoist a few cures lately effected by me,
through the medium of mesmerism—that most blessed ‘ gift
of God’ to man.

“To persons unacquainted with this wonder-working
power, the two cases of scrofula must appear so marvellous,
that I could not expect them to obtain credit, had I not ena-
bled any one to satisfy themselves of their truth by furnishing
the names and address of all the parties referred to.

“The Marquise St. Milan Tecman, and Mr. Hicks,
are performing most astonishing cures here, in cases pro-
nounced incurable by the medical profession.


Scrofula cured with Mesmerism. 519


“T earnestly hope that you may be spared to see the
professor’s chair at University College filled by a mesmerist,
and your prediction accomplished,—That the time would
come, when no surgical operation would be performed with-
out previously attempting to produce mesmeric insensibility.

“T remain, &c.,
*Exviza WALLACE.


“ Anne Holland, aged 17, was afflicted with scrofulous
ulcers in the throat.

“ About nine months ago these were healed, and the com-
plaint shortly after attacked the elbow-joint, and for six or
seven months she had little use of her arm, and suffered
severely from pain, swelling, and inflammation.

“On the 18th of November, she brought me a note from
her mistress, Mrs. Rodway, of Gloucester Place, requesting
me to mesmerise her. The poor girl wore her arm in a sling,
and assured me the pain was so violent, that it had prevented
her sleeping for the last three nights.

“ After the application of local mesmerism for about
fifteen minutes, she declared, with considerable alarm, that
her whole arm was ‘ guite dead ;? and, although she felt the
touch, she felt no pain from the prick of a pin in the arm, but
could not bear it on the hand.

“Tn half an hour the swelling was nearly gone, the pain
had entirely subsided, and, after I had restored sensibility
and taken away the rigidity that had ensued, the perfect use
of her arm was restored.

'“T did not see her again until the 20th, when she told
me she had slept well, and had no return of pain, but for
about half an hour that same evening. On examining her
arm, I found the swelling entirely gone, but could not pro-
duce any rigidity, and she only felt a slight degree of numb-
ness from the shoulder down the arm.

“ Anne came again on the 24th, when she told me her
arm was as well as it ever had been in her life.

“ On the 26th I saw Mrs. Rodway for the first time, who
confirmed all Anne’s statements, assuring me that for six or
seven months past her sufferings had been most acute, and
that her arm was nearly powerless, she being obliged con-
stantly to hold it close to her side in a horizontal position ;
adding, that her sudden cure excited the greatest astonish-
ment in all acquainted with her previous sufferings.


“ Mary Adams Rodway, 2, Gloucester Place,
“ Ann Holland.


520 Inflammation of the Lungs


“ Second case of Scrofula.

“ James Edwards, aged 11, was sent to me, on the 8th
of December, by Mrs. Georges, Confectioner.—His mother
showed me a sore in the neck, which she told me had been
open about six months, and had resisted all the remedies
applied at the Hospital to heal it.

“The complaint had also appeared in the nose and lips,
which were much swollen and occasionally very red.—I mes-
merised the child without any visible effect, and gave him
mesmerised water to drink and bathe the sore.

“When he returned the next day, it looked better, and
discharged less.—The third day it was entirely healed, but
the nose was a good deal swelled. I directed bathing with
mesmerised water, and in two days scarcely any swelling
remained.

(Signed) C. George,
T. Edwards and S. Edwards.


* Allow me to add a case of head-ache, &c.

“Sara Edwards, aged 8, had tape-worm for five years,
and suffered from constant, violent head-aches and pains in
the stomach. The head-ache I removed in a few minutes on
the 10th December, and from that day she has had no head-
ache, and the pains in the stomach are much relieved :—in-
deed, for four days past she has never complained at all, and
has now a good appetite: ‘though for the last two years she
has not eat enough to support a bird,’ her mother says.

“ Signed by the father and mother of the patient,

“ John and Sarah Edwards.
“ December 23rd, 1845.”


The following account I have received from Mr. H. S.
Thompson :—


“My dear Elliotson.—I sen@~you Colonel Croft’s case,
and none of the parties object to their names being attached
to it if you should think it worth printing.

“Tt was on Saturday January 11th, I found my friend,
Colonel Croft, seriously ill, with the following symptoms.
Acute pain in the right side, great difficulty of breathing,
short dry cough with no expectoration, foul dry tongue, violent
pain in the head, and symptoms of delirium. Pulse not ex-
traordinarily high or full. The medical man in the village
in which he resides was attending him, but thinking the case
very serious, I urged the family to call in Dr. Simpson, of
whom I knew they had a high opinion. This was done, but


cured with Mesmerism. 521


Dr. Simpson was not able to attend until the following day,
Sunday. On the Saturday I mesmerised him by his own
desire. »He said that he felt much better afterwards, and that
he was quite relieved from the pain in his side and head.
His respiration I also thought slightly improved, but it was
still distressing.

“On Sunday I saw him a few hours after Dr. Simpson.
I was told that he had pronounced the case a very serious
one, and that he thought that if expectoration did not occur
shortly that he would not recover. I found all the symptoms
with the exception of the pain in his side much aggravated.
Great pain in the head, at times quite delirious, the tongue
very foul, dry, and dark-coloured, and the breathing much
more laboured; his skin dry, cough short, hard, and with
no expectoration. I placed one hand upon his head, and
made passes over him with the other, and within a quarter of
an hour from the time I commenced mesmerising, he broke
out in a profuse perspiration, and said that his head felt quite
relieved. I mesmerised him for an hour, which removed the
pain in his side, and he was not delirious for some hours
afterwards. Two or three times during the night he was
uneasy and restless and complained of great pain in his head.
I was able always to relieve him of this, and to soothe and
tranquillize him in a few minutes. Tuesday, the following
morning, Dr. Simpson pronounced him so much better that
he began to hope for a favourable issue, if only expectoration
could be induced. I was obliged to go home after breakfast,
and did not return till the evening, and found that he had
become restless and uneasy, the symptoms all worse, no ex-
pectoration had taken place, and the Doctor declared his re-
covery to be very doubtful. I remained with him during the
night and mesmerised him occasionally. His night was more
composed than could be expected, and I thought he was no
worse at all when I left him at 4 o’clock in the morning. I
was informed that he became restless, his breathing very
laboured, and he was delirious and moaned in a distressed
manner afterwards. Whilst I was at breakfast at 9 o’clock,
I was sent for as he was supposed to be dying. I found him
in a state of syncope, and quite insensible to what was going
on around him. I placed my hand on his head, and making
passes over him he soon revived, and continuing the mes-
merism for some time his recollection appeared completely
restored. He complained of violent pain in his right side.
After mesmerising the right side for some time, the pain
removed to the other. I got a gentleman who was present to
mesmerise the left side, as I felt somewhat exhausted ; in an


522 Inflammation in Horses


hour he was perfectly free from pain. Dr. Simpson was not
able to attend on Wednesday in the morning, and left word
if there was any change for the worse that Dr. Goldie was to
be called in. That gentleman was sent for accordingly, and
arrived about two hours afterwards. He considered the case
so hopeless that he said there was no use whatever in attempt-
ing to make any change in the treatment. However the
patient gradually rallied. He was informed of his danger ;
it did not appear in the least to alarm him, and he requested
his man of business to be sent for; and I feel certain that
mesmerising him made him go through the necessary exer-
tions much better than he otherwise could have done ; indeed
he was quite incapable of attending to any business until I
had mesmerised him. Dr. Simpson arrived in the evening
and pronounced him better than on the previous evening.
He had an easier night, slight expectoration came on, and on
Thursday he was decidedly improved. From this time until
the following Thursday there was a gradual change for the
better, though with many intermissions ; and on that day he
was pronounced out of any immediate danger. I remained
with him during the whole time, mesmerising him whenever
he was uneasy or uncomfortable, or in any pain; he always
expressed himself as relieved at the time and seemed better.
Dr. Simpson of course sanctioned my mesmerising him. But
as there were no means for his recovery secundum artem left
untried,* it is not for me to say that he received more than
temporary relief from mesmerism, and I merely relate what
exactly occurred, and which I noted down at the time.

“The patient was perfectly unconscious afterwards of all
that had happened from the Saturday, when I first saw him,
to the Thursday, the week following, and has no recollection
whatever of his ten day’s illness. He has had most excellent
health since, and seems as hale and strong as ever, though
70 years of age.”


“‘ Last winter I tried the power of mesmerism in inflam-
mation on two horses.

“The first had got cast in the stall, and had severely in-
jured his eye. There was great inflammation, the eye-lids were
closed and very much swollen, and the eye seemed seriously
injured ; the cornea quite opaque. I mesmerised the eye by


* I would here observe that the medicine prescribed was most regularly
administered, excepting on the Tuesday night and on Wednesday until the
evening, during which times, a period of nearly 24 hours, the patient, being
at the worst, was unable to take any medicine. But he was constantly mes-
merised, and seemed gradually to rally as the process was carried on.


cured with Mesmerism. 523


passes over it for half an hour, when the animal opened
the eye and the inflammation was considerably abated. The
first ten minutes the horse did not seem to experience any
sensation ; afterwards, however, it was evident that it did so,
as it slightly twitched its head away every time I passed my
hand over the eye, although I did not touch it, but made the
passes at a few inches distance. The operation was repeated
by my groom that day, and twice the following day, when all
swelling had subsided, and there was no signs of inflamma-
tion, merely a white streak across the cornea, evidently from
the severity of the blow, and which was some months before
it was quite obliterated. No other means were used at all
for its recovery.

“The second was a horse who had a severe cut on the
back sinew of the fore-leg. There was great inflammation
in the leg, and the horse, from pain, had not placed his foot
firmly on the ground from a few hours after the accident.
On the third day, I made passes down the leg at the distance
of about an inch from the leg, continued the process for little
more than half an hour, when the leg was considerably cooler,
and the horse placed the foot flat and firmly on the ground.

“T have tried no other experiments of this kind on
brutes.”


The following also was kindly sent me :—


“ Fairfield, near York,
“26th Nov., 1845.

“ Dear Elliotson.—You asked me to describe those cases
with consumptive symptoms which have come under my notice.
The following, with the exception of one, have been mentioned
in The Zoist before, and therefore I shall but briefly notice
them. The first was the case of the boy, John Bradley, who
was suffering from a diseased knee. His pulse was 130;
hectic, a short cough, much emaciated, and his lungs were
declared to be diseased by his medical attendant some weeks
before I commenced mesmerising him. All these symptoms
were removed after the third time of mesmerising him; nor
had he any return of them, though twice, since his case was
mentioned in The Zoist, he has had the misfortune to injure
his knee accidentally, which brought great inflammation,
pain, swelling, and in one instance, suppuration and discharge ;
all of which I was again able to remove by mesmerism alone :
and there cannot be apparently a more healthy boy, although
his knee will always be deformed, and he must be lame; still


524 Consumption relieved with Mesmerism.


it is firm and hard, and there are no ulcerations, and he daily
gets more use of his limb.

“This patient was never but once in a mesmeric sleep,
and no visible effect ever produced by the passes, yet I have
not met with one instance where pain was so readily and
instantly removed.

“The boy has always expressed himself as feeling the
effect strongly. The feelings he described were those of a
warm glow all over, and as if I touched him gently when
passing my hands over him; that of pressure if I advanced
them towards him, and a pulling or drawing sensation when
I drew them from him. The operation, if continued long
enough, gave the feeling of great heat, and produced per-
spiration.


“In the case of Anne Beane, before mentioned, the
symptoms were as follows. Great debility, emaciation, ex-
treme nervousness, profuse night perspiration, spitting of blood,
a pain in the chest and left side, and a very rapid pulse. She
was very readily mesmerised, and experienced great relief
from mesmerising the chest and back. The pain was quite
removed the first time. She had a return of pain some hours
afterwards, but slighter. In four days all these symptoms
were nearly removed; and she rapidly began to gain strength.
She has left her situation a short time since, but for a year
and a half she had no relapse, and I believe continues quite
well.


“The third case that I have met with was a young lady,
the daughter of a friend of mine.

“ She was in the last stage of a consumption, unable to
walk, or scarcely move ; from weakness. The effect of mes-
merism for the first fortnight was astonishing. She improved
rapidly in strength, and was free from pain. She had suf-
fered much before I saw her; and the expectoration, which
was profuse, nearly ceased: her nights were quiet, and I
almost began to indulge a hope.

“ She, however, had a severe attack of pain and coughing
one night, and the expectoration became as profuse as before;
but I was enabled to keep her free from pain, generally in
good spirits, and without that sense of extreme weakness
(which she had suffered so much from before) to the /ast ; and
she died, without a struggle, six weeks after I commenced
mesmerising her.

“ I found, that if I omitted mesmerising her for a day, the
cough was troublesome, and the pain would return.


Consumption relieved with Mesmerism. 525


“Tn all these cases that I have mentioned, I found great
effect produced on the circulation.
“In the two last cases, the pulse of the patients in a
mesmeric sleep felt at least 20 beats in a minute.
«Ever yours, most truly,
“ Henry S. Tuompson.”


In connection with Mr. H. 8. Thompson’s cure of inflam-
mation of the lungs, I must send you an extract from a note
which I received from Mr. Case, of Fareham, two months ago:


“T have had a severe case of bronchitis in an infant seven
months old, where the difficulty of breathing continued after
the employment of blisters, Jeeches, &c., in which I used
mesmerism ; and it appeared to me that in less than five
minutes after commencing its use, that the breathing was
much better, and after a time the child was in a quiet natural
sleep. This followed immediately after the use of leeches ;
and, though I believe mesmerism to have been of the highest
service, yet I would not put it forth as a case for sceptics.”


Relief in hopeless states.

A large part of medical practice with drugs, and regimen,
and mechanical means, consists of attempts not to cure, but
lessen human suffering without any hope of cure, and to
smooth the way to death; and with all their efforts, what are
not the sufferings of those on whom these attempts are made !
Let not the medical man despise mesmerism because many
cases resist mesmerism; they ought to rejoice if they can
assuage by so easy and innocent a method—neither painful,
harrassing, nor nauseous, as too many of the established
means are.

The last of Mr. Thompson’s cases comes under this head,
and the next is a parallel to it.


“ Norwich, Jan. 28th, 1845.

“ Dear Sir.—I am requested by Mr. Gilbert, a patient now
under my care, to consult you as to any mode of treatment
you might be able to advise in, I fear, a totally hopeless case
of pulmonary phthisis, and, I may add, in its last stage.
But as you are fully aware of the peculiar longings such pa-
tients occasionally manifest when any ray of hope has been
extinguished in the medical attendant, you will be able to
understand that this letter is written, not so much with any
expectation on my part or that of his friends that anything
can, under the circumstances, be done to save his life, but
rather with a view to calm the last few days of his existence.


526 Consumption relieved with Mesmerism.


Indeed, the patient above named has expressed a wish to see
you personally ; but, knowing the value of your time, and
the not-over-abundant means of his relatives, however agree-
able to myself a personal consultation would be, such an idea
is superfluous. The symptoms are as follow. Cough with
muco-purulent expectoration, hectic sweats, great emaciation,
extreme debility, and increasing irritability of the intestinal
canal. The stethoscope furnishes the usual characteristic
signs; cavernous ronchus with pectoriloquy, and the peculiar
gurgling sound indicative of tubercle in a softened state;
percussion dull upon the supra-clavicular regions, especially
on the left side, and the usual fluttering on this part of the
chest. It would be useless going further into detail in the
above case. I can only add, that any suggestions you may
be able to offer will receive every attention from
* Your’s faithfully,
“To Dr. Elliotson. “ Grorce CHATER.”


I replied that the case must of course end fatally, and
that I could suggest nothing more than the gentleman had
done, unless there was no objection to try mesmerism. I
subsequently received the second letter.


“ Dear Sir,—I am sorry to say my patient, Mr. Gilbert, is
no more ; he expired on the 3rd of the month, fully confirm-
ing my previous diagnosis. As you did me the favour to say
you should be willing to hear of the progress of the case in
the course of a fortnight, I take this opportunity of not only
informing you of the unsuccessful issue of the above case,
but will venture an opinion upon the course of treatment you
were so kind as to suggest. Under the hands of an expe-
rienced mesmeriser (Mr. Dodman) of this city, and under my
own inspection, I must say he was much soothed and tran-
quillized, and had intervals of quiet refreshing slumbers, such
as for some weeks he had not known. He expressed himself
much pleased with the process, and longed for the time of its
repetition; and although I could plainly see as a remedial
means it was of no avail, still from what I have witnessed in
the above case, I shall certainly bring mesmerism to bear
upon cases of a similar nature. You will understand this is
saying somewhat for an unbeliever heretofore in the process
or art of the so-called science. I imagine I can trace the
principle upon which it acts, and therefore feel more confi-
dence in not only recommending the process, but if need was
in attempting it myself.

“ Feeling under obligation for your suggestions, and a


Hydrophobia relieved with Mesmerism. 527


duty to use all means to relieve the sufferings of others as
far as in me pertains, mesmerism among others, with many
thanks,
“T remain,
“ Faithfully yours,
“ Norwich, Fed. 6, 1845. “ Grorce CHaTer.”


I recorded in Vol. I., p. 194, an instance of decided tem-
porary relief in a case of hydrophobia, in 1837, in which
unfortunately mesmerism was not begun till the disease was
far advanced, and opium largely given. A second case was
read last April to the Manchester Medical Society, in which
the patient appeared tranquillized by mesmerism. In this
case also mesmerism was not employed alone, nor till the
third day of the disease. Yet Mr. Gardom, who mesmerised
him, informs me that the poor creature was benefitted. He
writes to me thus :—


“The best proof of all others that he really did derive
some measure of comfort, is in the fact of his having ex-
pressed to my pupil, during the last night of his existence,
when all other means were found to be unavailing, his wish
that I might be sent for to operate upon him again. This is not
mentioned in the paper, because I was not aware of the cir-
cumstance when I drew up the report.

“The medical men were afraid I should produce spasms
by making passes—so dreadfully sensitive was he to the least
breath of air. We were all struck with the improvement
after the first operation, and we were all surprised on the
night of Monday to find him so little changed for the worse
since the morning.”


The late Viscountess Canterbury lately sunk under a
most devastating disease of her liver. Dr. Bernard, of Clifton,
wrote to me on the 22nd of September, at the desire of her
family, stating that there was “a tumor in the right hypo-
chandrium, stretching down to the right iliac region, tender
in some parts, irregular and stony on its surface to the finger,
nodules of schirrous hardness,’ —“ much emaciation and
debility.” Did ever medical man cure such a case? Did
ever medical man arrest the progress of such acase? Did
ever medical man even greatly alleviate the sufferings in such
acase? After death the appearance of the liver was fright-
ful: and I understand that some popular physicians and sur-
geons of London were proved to have formed an erroneous
VOL. III. 00


528 Disease of the liver relieved with Mesmerism.


opinion of the seat of disease, as Dr. Bernard was convinced
from the first.

“ Lady Canterbury yielded to the desire of her family to
try mesmerism, when every other remedy had failed to afford
relief :” and when I was consulted, I expressly mentioned,
and the family expected, that alleviation of suffering was all
that could be hoped for. Great alleviation of suffering was
procured. ‘ She experienced relief from pain and was inva-
riably soothed by mesmerism,” and constantly asked for it ;
and was mesmerised not only regularly by Dr. Storer, of
Bath, but several times in the day and night by those around
her. This I learnt from the Countess of Blessington, and
the passages in inverted commas are from a letter from this
lady tome. Dr. Storer writes to me, “that as a palliative,
and without any medicine, mesmerism produced great relief
from pain and refreshing sleep. Of the benefits received, her
ladyship and family expressed to me, on three different occa-
sions, their full convictions ; and, judging from the effects,
also regretted that mesmerism had not been adopted at an
earlier period.” Yet some medical men, and others deriving
their knowledge from them, “ without knowing anything of
the facts, have been industrious in raising and spreading a
report that mesmerism had entirely failed, if it had not even
done worse, in this case’”


If every patient, whatever his disease, were mesmerised
for the purpose of tranquillity, not only would suffering be
diminished, but cures by all appropriate remedies be rendered
far more easy.


I cannot conclude without adding, that I hear, on good
authority, that some medical men in Dublin are propagating
a report that mesmerism has left insanity as its consequence,
and that the medical profession of London have found this to be
the fact. Why, the medical profession of London never con-
descend to employ mesmerism. I have had ample experience
for nine years, and never met with such an occurrence. All
my patients are in perfect health, or none the worse for mes-
merism; which is more than can be said of all patients
treated by bleeding, physic, and surgical operations. At the
same time, as terror in health induces various diseases—mad-
ness, even death—so it may in the mesmeric state, if patients
are treated ill by those who are ignorant of mesmerism. Of
the bad effects of the ignorant interfering with mesmeric pa-
tients, I will send you two examples for your next number.—
Is it true or not that a dozen medical men in one of our three


Phreno-mesmerism and Clairvoyance. 529


capitals, ignorant of mesmerism, did play fools’ tricks, or did
wantonly cross-mesmerise a young woman and drive her
mad? Ihave sent you splendid cures of insanity (Vol. I.,
p- 16), and will send you another by Mr. H. 8. Thompson
for your next number.
I remain, &c.,
Joun EL.iotson.


IX. Phreno-mesmerism and Clairvoyance.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir.—Your journal does not I am aware encourage
public lecturing on mesmerism, still your pages are open to a
record of facts wherever they may occur. In private practice,
however interesting our cases may be, they cannot be wit-
nessed except by a very small number; I am therefore of
opinion that when really genuine and beautiful cases are
presented to the public, some record of them ought to be
preserved. With this view I send you some particulars of
two cases which have lately fallen under my notice at Bath
and Bristol. They were brought forward by Mr. Lundie,
who has devoted much time to the practical demonstration of
mesmerism.

Besides the public lectures, I have had with some friends
several private opportunities of testing these cases, and those
present with myself have been thoroughly satisfied with their
integrity, and the satisfactory results as regards mesmerism
and clairvoyance.

The first case was that of Thomas Laycock, about 14
years of age, an uneducated Yorkshire youth, but possessing
good natural abilities, as might be predicated from his phre-
nological development. When in the mesmeric sleep, he
quickly passes through the intermediate to the higher stages:
so sensitive is he of Phreno-mesmerism that all the larger
organs may be excited without contact, and the smaller, such
as the perceptive, respond in the most distinct and perfect
manner, even when operated upon by strangers.

Whilst demonstrating clairvoyance, his eyelids have been
covered with large pieces of cotton wool, and then securely
bound by three and four handkerchiefs, two placed obliquely
over each eye, and the others transversely round the head ;
besides these precautions, pieces of lint and cotton, were
during the experiments inserted in any places where there
was an assumed probability of the patient seeing.

002


530 Phreno-mesmerism and Clairvoyance.


He has then read perfectly and distinctly from different
books, papers, circulars, and cards, sent up or brought indiscri-
minately from the audience, and if a paper or book contained
German or Greek characters, he would immediately exclaim,
“ Oh what curious letters, if they are so at all.” This youth
is extremely susceptible of music during the mesmeric state,
and under its influence and with the excitation of the corres-
ponding organs, he will give illustrations of the comic, serio-
comic, and extatic which our best living actors would be
proud to equal, so naturally and beautifully were manifested
the different powers of the brain. No particular order was
followed in exciting the organs. Any one had the liberty of
writing the name of them on paper, and through the chair-
man, it was handed to the lecturer, and sometimes to a stran-
ger.
I will also mention that this youth seems decidedly to pos-
sess the power of predicating disease and its seat. I saw him
tested in three different cases, all unknown to him, and
though his descriptions were uncouth from want of a know-
ledge of medicine, they were nevertheless substantially correct.


The second case is that of Richard Ware, aged 17, the
son of a respectable tradesman in Bristol. This youth mani-
fests also all the higher conditions, the chief difference appear-
ing in the way that they are elicited. He is so extremely sensi-
tive in the mesmeric state, that no cotton, wool, or bandages
can be applied without at once exciting all the phrenologicai
organs, with which they come in contact. The fingers are
generally placed over the eyelids, to confine them, at other
times, narrow slips of adhesive plaster are applied so as to
cover every possible crevice. In this state he will describe
any thing passing before him, and though very illiterate,
will read any legible writing or printing. He is very fond of
cards (the other youth detests the sight of them), and at a game
of All-Fours, or Beggar-my-Neighbour, under the excitement
of Hope and Acquisitiveness, he will not fail to continue
playing until he has gained something: he will try and cheat
you, but you cannot deceive him: if you change or take away
a card on the sly he immediately detects it, and becomes very
excited.

Another interesting point in his case is the extreme rigid-
ity that can be induced by passes, either in the sleeping or
waking state. To such an extent may the rigidity in his legs
be produced, that seated in a chair, or even on the sharp ridge
of the back of one, with proper opposing force applied to the
body or shoulders, he will bear the greatest weights, and


Phreno-mesmerism and Clairvoyance. 531


remain in this state for one, two, or three hours. There is
not the slightest perceptible effort or resistance made in any
way during the experiments ; on the contrary, the youth when
awake will engage in any passing conversation, whistle, sing,
or do any thing that his other members will allow ; he declares
himself unconscious of the weight applied, though he may
see before him the object.

In relating what I have often seen in these cases, I wish
to confine myself to the prominent points,—the minutize
would fill pages: and as a satisfaction to any of your readers,
I will mention, Iam not in the least taken by surprise by
these results, having paid much attention to the subject, and
also witnessed similar illustrations in a great variety of cases.
My only surprise is, that men who have not fairly investigated
the subject should have the assurance to deny and condemn
the labours of those who have; and even among those who
have openly opposed mesmerism, how little of fact and argu-
ment has been brought against it! Let me here notice in
particular one illustration. Mr. Estlin, a surgeon at Bristol,
has twice issued a little pamphlet against mesmerism ; yet I
defy any one, after the most attentive perusal, to say that he
has destroyed a single fact or principle. His statements are
mere assertions on the authority of others; his opposition is
grounded on “ifs, buts, and suppositions ;” and in his sum-
mary, he is compelled to admit more in its favour than he
himself intended, or is aware of: and, although not a case is
introduced on his own authority, still Mr. Estlin refuses the
opportunities offered to him by others to enable him to judge
fairly and dispassionately for himself. When these cases were
demonstrated within a few doors of his own house,* he was


*To J. Estlin, Esq., Park Street.

Sir,—As you are, by your own shewing, the champion of Anti-mesmerism,
and as your name is very prominent as the leader of the medical opposition
to mesmerism in this city, | hope you will feel it your duty to accept the
challenge now offered to the profession.

If mesmerism be the nonentity, and the effects of fraud and collusion,
which you have twice so represented in your little tracts on this subject, I
think from your presumed ability to detect and expose, the profession, if not
the public, may fairly call upon you to assist them in these inquiries.
Without giving an opinion myself, Iam determined, from the fairness of the
challenge offered, to go and judge for myself. This will also be done by many
others; and I cannot but think, that after what has been published by
yourself, and apparently acquiesced in by a portion of the profession, that
if you do not accept the challenge now given, the public may, and will, be
inclined to doubt both the honesty and sincerity of the opposition hitherto
maintained. In case you may not have seen the advertisements or the bills
containing the challenge, I beg to enclose you a printed circular.

Lam, Sir, yours obediently,
A Bristol Practitioner.

P.S. These lectures were generally well attended, and afforded the


532 Satanic Agency.


publicly challenged, and privately invited, to come forward
and disprove them if he could. What was Mr. Estlin’s conduct ?
(perhaps prudential)—his absence. It is true, some medical
men came and were convinced; others were determined to
oppose; and amongst the most prominent points of their
opposition, were the following :—

The youth, Laycock, read distinctly when the eyelids
were perfectly closed, wadded, and covered by four handker-
chiefs ; and because the fifth and sixth handkerchief was not
put on, they affirmed there was no proof of his being able to
see through the six if applied.

Another medical man affirmed that one case was an imposi-
tion, because the youth swallowed during the sleep!!!

A third, who had made himself very prominent in the
matter, was called upon to test the state of rigidity. His
reply was, “That it was unnecessary; that there had been
imposition practised in some cases; and that therefore, the
present experiments were of that character.”

Suffice it to say, that common sense and justice com-
pletely negatived these ultra-ridiculous objections, and that
the facts of mesmerism and clairvoyance were not and could
not be destroyed by the ignorance and prejudices of a would-
be-privileged order.

I am, Sir,
Yours obediently,
Henry Srorer, M.D.
27, Brook Street, Bath.


X. Satanic Agency.


One of the most lamentable things for a well-informed
person to witness is the gross, the savage, ignorance of an
immense mass of the community; much of this mass consider-
ing themselves well-informed ladies and gentlemen, much of
it going regularly to receive instruction at places of worship
from those whom they in their ignorance consider truly edu-
cated men, and yet believing that the phenomena of the nerv-
ous system produced by moving the hand before the face result
from imaginary beings called evil spirits. The day will come,
when, if a bishop does not feel justified in forbidding any of the
apostolic succession from preaching such disgusting rubbish,


utmost satisfaction, except to a few captious medical men and others, whose
objections are noticed in the accompanying paper. The Bristol papers gave
interesting and impartial reports.


Satanic Agency. 533


the voice of the people will shame into silence those who make
the attempt. At present the case is so far otherwise, that we
read this paragraph in The Examiner of the 26th of last July:


**On Sunday last the installation took place in Chester Cathedral
of the Rev. Hugh M’Neile into the canonry, the Archdeacon of
Chester officiating. —Liverpool Standard.”


We read also the following :—


“Tue Rev. H. M’Netve v. Toray Asstinence.—A short
time since a gentleman, much interested in the cause of total absti-
nence, waited upon the rev. gentleman at his own house, and pre-
sented his card, requesting permission to distribute some temperance
tracts amongst the teachers and scholars of St. Jude’s school. He
was received very coldly, and was told that what he (the rev. gent.)
considered proceeded from Satan, he would not let those over whom
he had authority be contaminated with.—Liverpool Mercury.”


His predecessors in ignorance called potatoes the food
invented by the devil, because the name is not mentioned in
Scripture ; and the man who introduced potatoes into France
was hung up on a lantern, during the Revolution, for trying
to make the people eat roots. When we need the ravings
of the charitable M’Neile, Charlotte Elizabeth Tunna, and
their like, against us mesmerists, we fancy that we shall soon
hear the shouting, the exclamations of the chorus of Christian
guards in the Walpurgisnacht :—


“Help, my comrades! see a legion
Yonder comes from Satan’s region!
See yon group of witches gliding

To and fro, in flames advancing;
Some on wolves and dragons riding,
See, ah! see them hither prancing!
What a clattering troop of evil!
Let us, let us quickly fly them!
Imp and devil
Lead the revel;
See them caper,
Wrapt in clouds of lurid vapour !”


It is with great pleasure that we turn from such persons
to a passage in “‘ A lecture on the Nature of Miracles, delivered
to the Members of the Church of England Association, at the
Literary and Philosophical Institution, on Thursday Evening,
Nov. 20th, 1845. By the Rev. F. Cuosz, A.M.

“Now he might be asked what he thought of the astonishing
phenomena of mesmerism. Were they miraculous or were they not?
This seemed at first sight a very hard question to answer; but if he
approach that mysterious subject well armed with all the truths
which he had endeavoured to bring before them, he thought an easy


534 Satanic Agency.


solution might be given to the question. He met it with a direct
negative. However extraordinary the various phenomena might be,
—and upon the merits of particular experiments he offered no opinion
—he affirmed, and he had not heard of any sane person connected
with that mysterious science who contradicted his assertion—that
there were no supernatural causes hitherto developed: —that whatever
they were, they were physical or metaphysical—they were some of
nature’s secrets, whose laws and principles were not yet fully revealed
or discovered. He had no hesitation in saying thus far—he spoke
not of any particular exhibitions,—but he spoke of the mesmeric
power in the abstract—and he felt constrained to acknowledge that
there were some facts in the science of mesmerism which he was
bound to believe, upon the same kind of testimony as that on which
he believed the miracles of the scriptures themselves; namely upon
the credible testimony of those whose word, and understanding, and
principles, he could not suspect. He was one of those, who were
utterly fearless as to the result of faithful inquiry into the secrets of
nature; he knew indeed that while truth was in the course of dis-
covery, the most crude and foolish theories would be started; and
much mischief might be occasioned, yet eventually truth must come
out of nature’s ample bosom; and ere long it would be proved whe-
ther there was not some subtle principle or principles to be discovered ;
whether there was not some mysterious power or agency whereby
mind and matter were connected as by a subtle thread, and whether
that delicate and invisible thread, which bound the soul and body of
man, might not bind the souls and bodies of many men together in
the same mysterious manner. Let them only keep it well in mind
that the phenomena of mesmerism were not miraculous, that there
was no Divine interference; but that they are purely physical disco-
veries of hidden and unexplored properties of nature. Let them keep
to that, and then—why they had better be minding their own busi-
ness than speculate on things they did not understand! (Laughter.)
Let us leave them to the learned before we took upon ourselves to act
and appear in the experimental drama. And here he would venture
to say a few words, if he might be allowed, to his fair friends. He
would recommend the ladies to leave mesmerism alone, for it appeared
that their nature was peculiarly sensitive to the mysterious power of
mesmerism. He would therefore recommend them to wait awhile,
until the stronger heads of the nobler part of mankind (he hoped
they would forgive him) had searched a little more deeply into the
matter; and when the doctors and philosophers had brought before
us something like a classification of the phenomena, and had ap-
proached a little more towards the structure of a system, then it
might become more popular. But at present he was sure that he
knew enough of this subject most seriously to assure them that mes-
merism was not a thing to be trifled with, eitherphysically, mentally, or
spiritually! a wild and injudicious pursuit of this subject might ter-
minate, as it had already done in one instance, in insanity! He said
not this in condemnation of mesmerism, he knew it was, only an
abuse of it. But he did warn them against trifling with it, playing


Health of Mrs. Hare and Miss Martineau. 535


with a power,like a child playing with some unknown and dangerous
weapon, he knew not what the effects might be. He took that op-
portunity to deliver his opinion on that debateable topic, only adding
one word more; as he felt persuaded that there was nothing miracu-
lous in mesmerism, so he was certain that there was no interference
of the evil spirit in mesmerism. Satan had nothing more to do with
mesmerism than he had to do with us in everything else. Never would
he grant this vantage ground to the prince of darkness, or suppose
that he exercised mesmeric power. True, we could not explain the
phenomena—nor see the beneficial object of them—but therefore
to conclude that they are diabolical, appeared to him to be the most
inconclusive argument that he had ever met with.

** Finally—his subject that evening had particularly appealed to
their understanding, to their reasoning powers, and to their general
information ; but let him as their minister, be permitted to remind
them that the strongest convictions of the understanding might exist
without a spark of spiritual feeling; let him assure them that mental,
moral and spiritual miracles were of a higher nature than those of
which he had been called to speak! He desired, day by day, to see
the blessed exhibition of that great moral miracle, a converted heart
—and he desired for his hearers and himself that their whole life,
and the whole phenomena of their moral nature, might display one
consistent and continued development of divine grace.”


The last passage does not bear upon mesmerism: but we
insert it for those who fancy that the possession and holding
of opinions is worth as much as charity, humility, and
integrity.

S. I. L. E.


XI. Health of the Hon. Mrs. Hare and Miss Martineau.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—The course of falsehood pursued in regard to every
remarkably successful case of the employment of mesmerism
is still actively followed with reference to Mrs. Hare and
Miss Martineau. As in every other case, where such false-
hood could be traced, the fabrication has been traced home
to a medical man; in Miss M.’s case to a medical man at
Bristol.


I enclose you, with permission, a letter to myself from
Capt. James, and one to Capt. James from Miss Martineau.


“Cheltenham, Dec. 23rd.
“ My dear Doctor,—I have received the following admi-


536 Health of Mrs. Hare and Miss Martineau.


rable and satisfactory letter from Miss Martineau in answer
to certain absurd reports respecting that lady’s health and
altered views of mesmerism. As long as these reports were
confined to a few idle and gossiping people, it appeared to me
unnecessary that they should be seriously noticed; but as I
am now informed that these falsehoods have appeared in
print, perhaps you may agree with me that their refutation
should appear in the pages of the next number of The Zoist.

“ My dear Doctor,

“ Yours faithfully,
“J. James.”
(Copy)

* Ambleside, Dec. 11th, 1845.

“Sir,—I am greatly obliged by your letting me know,
through Mrs, ——, the notions that are abroad on the sub-
ject of my health and my present views of mesmerism. No-
thing can be more absurdly false than they are. I am in
robust health, and have not had one day’s illness since I
avowed my cure by mesmerism. My long daily walks and
the literary labour I undergo without fatigue, have satisfied
all who know me that I am perfectly well. I myself am fully
aware that I am well for the first time in my life, and that I
owe my health wholly and solely to mesmerism. My grati-
tude to those who guided me to this remedy and who admi-
nistered it is, I need not say, as strong as is in the early days
of my recovered case.

“TI practice mesmerism myself with sufficient success to
have established my faith if it had at any moment wavered,
but this has never been the case. One of my late patients
has been my respected servant Jane (from Tynemouth), who
has again been restored from a fearful attack of illness by
mesmerism alone. That my convictions remain what they
were a year ago, is known to all my personal acquaintances,
because they are aware that if I had changed my opinions, I
should have made a recantation as free and full as my avowal.
I trust too that they know, that a fact in natural philosophy,
once ascertained by experiment, can never again be disbe-
lieved. But as there are many persons who know neither of
these things, and who yet may have power to discourage en-
quiries into mesmerism,—an enquiry which I think it my
duty to promote by any means in my power,—I have no ob-
jection to authorize your making any use you may think
proper of this letter.

“Tam, Sir,
“ Sincerely yours,
“ Capt. James. . “Harriet Martineau.”


Dr. Forbes the real impostor. 537


Similar reports have been spread respecting the Hon.
Mrs. Hare, cured by Mr. Kiste (p. 96) : and they have been
traced to a provincial medical man. There was no foundation
for them. Mrs. Hare never had a relapse, and is still in per-
fect health. I received a letter from her some time since, say-
ing, “ Here I am with no symptom of my complaint: left off
opium all but—no exhaustion or proneness to disease ; can
walk six miles, and carry twenty gallon water pots to my
flowers every evening ; am without an atom of complaint.”

Lam, &e.
Joun Exciorson.


XII. Dr. Forbes the rea impostor.


“ Crusades against Mesmerisin we have no objection to; as some people may still require


such assistance (especially so long as public instruction in medical matters, to the extent we
have recommended to Sir James Graham, is wanting); nay, more—if Dr. Forbes have leisure,
we have not the least objection to an attack on Morison’s pills.’—A Reply to Certain Obser-


vations of John Forbes, M.D., Proprietor and Editor of the British and Foreiyn Medical
Review, &c., $c. By Geonce Macitwain. Dec., 1845.*

Tue obstinacy of medical men is almost past belief. Two
months since the following case came under our notice. A
young and delicate female was seized with several anomalous
symptoms of disease, and her two medical attendants, one
her brother-in-law, confessed that they did not understand
her state. They sought the advice of their medical friends,
and another medical relative suggested a trial of mesmerism.
The advice was scouted. Dr. Elliotson was requested to see
her. He informed her medical attendants that he was not
acquainted with any treatment calculated to alleviate her
sufferings, and likewise suggested the trial of mesmerism.
The advice was again scouted. Another opinion was sought,
and another confession of ignorance as regards the nature of
the disease was the result. In the mean time the patient be-
came worse and worse, and the medical attendants, although
they saw her sinking and knew that their medicines were
useless, nevertheless refused to give her the chance of benefit
from the treatment proposed. At the end of a few weeks
she died. No effort was made to ascertain by an inspection
of the body the nature of the disease, and for a very good
reason. Having refused to adopt a certain plan of treatment
suggested by high authority, of course the best plan was to
leave the case in a state of doubt, and we think the attend-
ants were sufficiently acute to suspect that the symptoms
originated from some functional derangement of the nervous
centres, but not involving such changes of structure as to


_ * We make this quotation for the same reason which influenced Dr.
Elliotson to quote that other wise man, Mr. Evans Riadore, at p.339,


538 Dr. Forbes the real impostor.


become cognizable to our ordinary means of investigation.
They therefore neglected the only course left to them for the
purpose of clearing up the mystery, and then in the most
audacious manner stated that the patient died of a disease
that was never mentioned during her life. A post-mortem
diagnosis, if we may be allowed the expression, is not worth
much, and in this instance was most undoubtedly false. We
shall not trust ourselves to reflect on such heartless conduct
—we refer to it for the purpose of recording one of the most
disgusting specimens of medical ignorance and bigotry that
has ever fallen under our notice, albeit, we are daily in the
habit of meeting with lamentable specimens. We have re-
ferred to it also, because individuals of this character, who
pin their faith to their leader, and follow like slaves the
course their master may direct, consider that their responsi-
bility ceases if they have the power to refer to the adverse
opinions of such men as Dr. Forbes. The mischief that this
obstruction has produced is incalculable.

Last month we were startled by reading the following ad-
vertisement in a daily paper. “ Illustrations of Modern Mes-
merism from personal investigation. By John Forbes, M.D.”
We exclaimed, “Then is our old enemy really converted?
Is our opponent after a seven years’ struggle really engaged
in a personal encounter with truth? Has he taken our advice
and adopted the manly and philosophical course of experi-
menting for himself?’ We forthwith obtained a copy of the
work, and to our utter astonishment we discovered that it
was the old trash newly dressed and furnished with the above
seductive title, and consequently that we have still to an-
nounce that the Physician to the Household of Queen
Victoria considers it consistent with the character of a public
journalist to denounce as nonsense what he does not under-
stand—as becoming the dignity of a man and a philosopher
to treat with contempt the opinions and labours of his com-
peers, and for the sake of a little fleeting popularity to become
the leader of the ignorant and unthinking. Dr. Forbes now
fills the situation vacated by the Coroner for Middlesex.
Seven years ago the latter individual informed the profession
that he had exposed “the humbug ;” but Dr. Forbes does
not think the work was well done, and in doing it over again,
adopts the very same course,—a truly absurd and dishonest
one,—viz., selecting for investigation the cases of others,
instead of experimenting for himself on members of his own
household, or on individuals who rank so high in his estima-
tion as to place the question of imposture beyond a doubt.
We have no hesitation in stating that the individual who de-


Dr. Forbes the real impostor. 539


nounces mesmerisers and their patients as impostors, and yet
neglects this very obvious method of inquiry, is dishonest ; and
if this individual publishes his editions of a work casting asper-
sions on his neighbours after he has been requested to adopt such
a simple and easy experiment, we deliberately state that he for-
feits all claim to confidence and respect. Dr. Forbes do you
answer to this definition ?

We feel anxious to keep our readers in possession of Dr.
Forbes’s movements. He has been skirmishing with truth
for some time past, and, like the great political trickster of
the day, he would fain embrace her, if he was quite sure
there would be no risk incurred. We speak advisedly when
we say, that if Dr. Forbes, in his position of editor of the
British and Foreign Medical Review, were to announce his
belief in the truth of mesmerism, he would revolutionize the
bulk of the profession: medical men merely require some
one who has been a violent opponent to announce his belief,
and forthwith they will all appear in the mesmeric ranks,—
they require some one who has behaved as badly as themselves
to keep them company during their transition, and they will
then imagine that they can escape the penalty so justly their
due. For seven years their conduct has been disgraceful.
They have listened to the dictation of Mr. Wakley, who, as
a mere journalist, dared to give an opinion on a subject which
neither his education nor his natural powers warranted him
in doing. Yes, twenty thousand educated men (for there
were but few exceptions) prostrated their intellectual charac-
ter at the shrine of this man,—he was their master,—he told
them that a great natural truth was not a truth, and they
forthwith bowed their heads, leaving the leadership of one
they had hitherto followed, and enlisting themselves under
the banner of a literary trickster. If these circumstances
had not occurred in our own time, we could not have sup-
posed that educated men could so far have forgotten them-
selves. But we are determined that the public shall be made
acquainted with the difficulties the mesmeric pioneers have
had to contend against. We will not permit the men who
stood back, and, with the scowl of contempt or the look of
pity, dared to denounce their brethren, to turn round without
a protest on our part, and an endeavour to point out how
unphilosophical and contemptible their previous conduct has
been. If they have pursued a course unenlightened by in-
tellect, and uncontrolled by a love of truth and justice, they
must be exposed and held up as a terror to future evil-doers.

But let us keep our great culprit in view. When will Dr.
Forbes announce his belief? When he adopts the means


540 Dr. Forbes the real impostor.


calculated to convince him. There was a singular feature in
the conduct of the ancient physicians when Harvey an-
nounced his discovery of the circulation of the blood. It is
stated that no man above the age of forty embraced the new
doctrine. Must we place Dr. Forbes in the same catalogue
with the antiques? Our readers shall answer. Dr. Forbes’s
son is a mesmeriser. He has spoken publicly on the subject
and avowed his belief; nay, more, we are assured that he has
practised it! The son is 25 years of age, the father is up-
wards of 50! Must we then consider the father so prejudiced
as not to investigate for himself—so arrogant as to suppose
that he is aware of all the functions of the human organism
—possessing so little enthusiasm as not to have an ardent
desire to search out to the very utmost the phenomena pre-
sented to him, and more especially when those phenomena
can be presented to him by his own son, produced by his own
son, and their genuine character attested by his own son ?

If Dr Forbes is really anxious to instruct his professional
brethren, why does he not request his son to commence a
course of experiments under his immediate superintendence ?
Surely this would be more philosophical than running about,
with a writing desk under his arm*, from Manchester Square
to the Temple, from an inspection of Adolphe to a sight
of George Goble. Why does he at the eleventh hour, when
thousands are convinced of the truth of mesmerism, run all
over London like a wandering Jew, with a pack at his back,
testing in his peculiar way all kinds of cases, pronouncing ail
to be impostors, and in the reports of each case, proclaiming
to the profession by his style of writing and his observations,
that they may in their discussions on mesmerism, quote it
and adopt it as their motto “ex uno disce omnes?” Does
he suppose that Liebig or Faraday, if they were told that by
mixing certain substances a new and valuable compound would
be formed, would neglect to experiment for themselves, and
run all over Germany or England to see the individual who
professes to do it? Does he suppose that Arago or Herschel,
if they were told that by directing their telescope to a certain
quarter of the heavens a new comet would become visible,
would run about looking through other people’s telescopes
and neglect the use of theirown? Yet, this is just the course
he is pursuing as to mesmerism.


* We once met Dr. Forbes in Manchester Square prepared to test
Adolphe’s powers of clairvoyance. We were much amused at the contents of
a small writing-desk he carried with him. There were envelopes of all
kinds, of all siges, and of all textures—Leech-boxes tied with string and
sealed with wax—pieces of paste-board—pieces of cartridge paper &c., &c.


Dr. Forbes the real impostor. 441


But supposing we admit that he is justified in adopting
his present plan of investigation, we say, that he has never
sought an interview with members of his own profession,—
men of recognized character. Nay, worse than this, he has
been invited and refused the interview. It is now just four
years ago that he was asked to inspect several cases of mes-
merism by a member of his own profession, and one with
whom he was in the habit of associating. He treated the
invitation with scorn; he thought his friend was “ daft.”
Dr. Elliotson lives in the next street to him, has he ever re-
quested an interview? So far from doing this, has he not
twice lent the pages of his journal to prejudiced scribblers,
and permitted two gross and unwarrantable attacks on him to
appear? Did not the last contain an infamous falsehood ?—
but perhaps this ought not to be referred to again, for in the
succeeding number he retracted the statement and apologized.
Was it manly, honest, or philosophical, to place his dictum on
a scientific subject without previous investigation,—to support
the monstrous proceedings at University College,—to desig-
nate the labours of a compeer, “ melancholy explosions,” “ de-
grading and diverting scenes,”—on all occasions and in every
social meeting to systematically denounce men who were work-
ing while he was sneering, and to do all this because the subject
was not fashionable, because the anti-mesmeric cry was in
the ascendant, and because it was a hazardous speculation for
a journalist to attempt to interfere with it? Behold his career
—past, present, and future. Six years ago he said it was all
“humbug”—last April he said it was half true, half false—
since April he has been engaged in a kind of yea-nay inves-
tigation, which will terminate in a slow canny admission of
isolated facts and phenomena, and then will come the crown-
ing article in the British and Foreign Medical Review, reveal-
ing the whole truth, and recommending its practical applica-
tion. Yes, and he will gain his reward; for all those who
have behaved as ill as himself will cry, “O! Forbes is a safe
man—he opposed mesmerism for years—he spent years in in-
vestigation, but now he is convinced, and like an honest man
avows his conviction.” Let it be so. We are only anxious
for the spread of truth—we care not what machinery is put
in motion,—we were nearly saying, we care not what men
are enlisted under our banners, albeit, we would certainly pre-
fer those who could come with clean hands, who could refer to a
life of consistency, and declare when they claimed admission
into our ranks that they did not wait for the popular breath
to bring them, but that they always assisted the progress
of truth and the advancement of science. Unfortunately,


442 Dr. Forbes the real impostor.


Dr. Forbes cannot say this. His anti-mesmeric crusade has
been unphilosophical in the extreme, and we are determined
that so long as we possess a pen and a brain to prompt the
finger’s movements, his career shall be chronicled and his
unfair conduct exposed.

The aspersions that, Dr. Forbes formerly cast upon the
character of Alexis we’ noticed at the time, and we brought
forward facts to prove that his conclusions were completely
and entirely wrong. We have glanced at the reprint of his
former paper, and find that he has not condescended to notice
this, but simply contented himself by repeating his former
assertion that Alexis is an impostor. We might easily call
names. What are we to call an individual who writes on a
subject he does not understand, that he has never investigated?
What designation are we to give the man who refuses to visit
the cases of those on whom he could place confidence, and yet
wilfully contends that he has never seen a case where he has not
detected imposition? This is a grave subject. Dr. Forbes should
remember that he placed himself in the position of a public
journalist, and, as such, that he has given an adverse opinion.
Two classes of observers watch his progress. Thinking men
ask what opportunities he has enjoyed for the formation of a
sound opinion, and on examination they find none; but the
mass see his name on the cover of a journal, and in their ig-
norance presume that he would never commit himself so
much as to assert, without an abundant supply of evidence,
that all mesmeric patients are impostors, and, by a logical
sequence therefore, that those who are investigating their
cases are fools.

A foolish medical man, some years ago, denied that there
was such a disease as rheumatism. A friend demanded his
reasons. He replied, “I have visited the hospital, and ex-
amined three patients who said that they could not walk be-
cause their joints were stiff and their limbs in pain, but by
means of the searching investigation I adopted, I satisfied
myself that they were impostors.” But said the friend, “I
am treating cases about which there can be no doubt; pray
come and see them.” “No,” said the foolish medical man,
“ all the patients are humbugs and impostors: I will not look
at your cases; and, I repeat, that I have never seen a case
where there was not deception.”

How very similar is Dr. Forbes’s argument, he does not
believe in mesmerism because he says that he has detected
one or two impostors. He will not visit cases calculated to
remove his doubts, but points to Alexis and George Goble.
His son tells him that he is in error and declares that he has


A Scotch Professorship of Phrenology, &c. 543


produced the mesmeric sleep—still he points to Alexis and
George Goble; but fearing the consequences of prolonged
opposition, he with the most jesuitical plausibility endeavours
“to bamboozle” his readers, and to leave a hole through
which he may hereafter creep, if necessary, by saying, “I
have not denied their possibility, or,-even their existence as
matters of fact. I still profess myself ready to believe them
on obtaining sufficient proof of their reality.” And yet this
proof he doggedly refuses to look for. The man who refuses
to work for his bread when he is able, has no right, when the
hunger fit comes, to prefer a claim on his neighbours. A man
has no right to raise himself into notoriety by mounting on
other men’s shoulders; and if Dr. Forbes refuses to perform
a simple experiment for himself, he has no legitimate claim
on the cases of our friends. Mesmerisers are not at all
anxious to convert Dr. Forbes,—as an individual, it is a
matter of perfect indifference whether he remains enshrined
in ignorance or not. We have always referred to him in his
public capacity, and his career is of importance to the cause
of truth, as long as he chooses to use the printing press for
the purpose of disseminating his ill-matured and mischiev-
ous opinions.
D. E. L. E.


XIII. A Scotch Professorship of Phrenology, and introduction
of Mesmerism at the Royal Society.


We extract the following from the Scotsman of Dec. 10 :—


“ ANDERSON’S UNIVERSITY.


“In common with many who have long felt an interest in phre-
nology, we have for some years past, and more especially of
late, been struck with the many sure though unobtrusive
indications of its steady progress in public estimation, and
with the extent to which its principles are incidentally, and
sometimes even unconsciously, appropriated, without any
allusion to their origin, in many works of professional merit
and reputation. Those, however, who have never looked
below the surface, and who know too little of phrenology to
be able to recognise even its plainest doctrines when divested
of their somewhat uncouth nomenclature, can have but so
imperfect an idea of the true state of the case, that they will
perhaps be more surprised than ourselves to learn that a lec-
tureship on phrenology, as a regular branch of science, has
VOL. III. PP


-


544 A Scotch Professorship of Phrenology, sc.


just been established in one of the most prosperous educational
establishments in the country, viz., the Andersonian Univer-
sity of Glasgow—and that, too, by the unanimous vote of its
managers. We have much pleasure in adding, that on the
24th of last month, Dr. William Weir, a gentleman well
known as a successful lecturer in the medical school of that
city, and now one of the physicians to the Glasgow Royal
Infirmary, was appointed to the lectureship, for the adequate
support of which an annual endowment has been granted by
the trustees of the late William Ramsay Henderson, Esq.”


It is however right to mention, That the Andersonian
is merely a private school, although now recognized by the
University of London. Dr. Weir enjoys no more than a mode-
rate reputation in Glasgow. He might perhaps be described as a
fourth or fifth-rate general practitioner. It is true he is, or has
been, one of the physicians to the Royal Infirmary, but that is
an office in which active canvassing usually carries the day, and
many men of good standing refuse to become competitors.
It is not an office held for life, but for a limited period of
some two or three years. We fear that there will be a very
scanty attendance of students at his prelections. It might
have been otherwise, had a man of higher reputation received
the appointment. .


The intellect and moral qualities of Dr. Weir will be best
estimated by referring to our second volume, pp. 286-7.


A new rule has been made at the Royal Society, by which
discussion is permitted. This first came into operation at
the last meeting, and the first subject introduced was Mes-
MERISM by the Dean of Westminster. He stated that a
daughter of Reichenbach, the discoverer of creosote and some
other substances in tar, has a daughter who in her mesmeric
state exclaimed that she saw light proceeding from the poles
of a magnet of her father’s which was in the room. In con-
sequence of this, the poles were presented to a piece of paper
prepared for the daguerrotype, and the effect of light was in-
duced upon it. A communication containing these things
was sent to Poggendorf’s Annalen, but refused admission. It
was then sent to Liebig, who has published it in his journal.


Books received, Notices to Correspondents, &c. 545


NOTICES OF BOOKS.


An Act (8 and 9 Vict. c. 100) for the Regulation of the Cure and Treat-
ment of Lunatics, with explanatory notes and comments, &c. &c. Edited
by Forbes Winslow, M.D., author of “The Plea of Insanity in Criminal
Cases,” “‘The Anatomy of Suicide,” &c.

Edinburgh Phrenological Journal, Oct. 1845.

Journal du Magnétisme. T.1. No.2. Paris.

Le Magnétisme traduit en cour d’assises. Acquittement. Paris.

The Curative Power of Vital Magnetism, verified by actual application
to numerous cases of disease.

A Lecture on the Nature of Miracles, delivered to the Members of the
Cheltenham Church of England Reading Association, at the Literary and
Philosophical Institution, on Thursday evening, Nov. 20, 1845. By the
Rev. F. Close, A.M.

Rationalism. A Treatise for the Times. By G. Jacob Holyoake.

The Journal of Health and Disease. No. 1 to 6.

The Rejected Cases; with a Letter to Thomas Wakley, Esq., M.P., on
the Scientific Character of Homoeopathy. By John Epps, M.D.

We do not feel justified in writing a syllable for or against homoeopathy,
any more than for or against miracles, or any other subject not in the pro-
vince of our journal. But we must express our amusement at a letter in
this work from a Dr. H. Bennett, who, it seems is Mr. Wakley’s obedient
sub-editor, in which the author is informed that his cases are imperatively
returned on account of the determined opposition of the subscribers and
readers of the Lancet to anything in the shape of homoeopathy ; so that when
one (the fourth) ‘‘ was inserted last winter, Mr. Wakley received an ava-
lanche of letters from all parts of the country, couched in such terms as to
make it next to impossible to insert any further communications of the kind.”
Our readers will remember that Mr. Wakley turned round upon mesmerism
as soon as he was inundated with letters from medical men, nineteen out of
twenty being against it. Mr. Wakley thus confesses himself an abject slave,
publishing on the side that brings him most money.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


Edith Jones, of Dublin, suggests that the diseases cured with mesmerism
should be “nominated” in our Index. Every disease so treated is *‘ nominated”’
in our Index. Dolland of St. Paul’s Church-yard sells excellent spectacles.

A Searcher after Truth, enquires,—‘ How is it that the Phrenological de-
velopments can be produced only in the mesmeric state? Why not in the
natural state of sleep? And why not inthe natural broad-awake state ?”—
The answer is at p. 482.

A Fellow of the College of Physicians.—We have found that Sir B. Brodie’s
prescription for Miss Collins’s neck, was a little assafetida. The Man-
chester plan with her was not only to strain the eyes to the utmost, but
to keep them at a double internal squint.


END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.


Walton & Mitctell, Printers, 24, Wardour Strect, Suho.

==============================================================================

INDEX.


PAGE,


Ackley, Mr., his Operation ceccccssccccscscccccsescccccsecceses 213
Alexis Didier ....... PITTTITITITITT TTL ETT TTT es.
Amaurosis, Cured ....eecccccccscccccsscccccers cccccoccccocoveese 325
Amputation without Pain ...cccccsccceceseeeses 207, 300, 490, 504, 506
Association, Phrenological .....sesssscccrcccccscccececccccsscess 150
Asthma, power of Mesmerism in .....ssecsesceceecccecvececes+ 182, 183
Bacon, Lord ..- scccccccccescccsccccccsccccccccsscccccs oe eeee128, 137
Buxton, Dr., his curious Case of Sweating........seees 219
———— Cure of Neuralgia.......cceccscccccccccceccsecesees Sal
Epilepsy ...... ° coc 333
Biggs, Mr., his recovery .....+csccccccccccccccccseccccecs 187
Kodinier, Dr., his Operation .......ccceccecsccccccccccceceessses 210
Baldock, Mr., Cure of Pain....ccccccosccccsccsccccvecscscecscess 79
Affection of the Stomach.....+.ssececesesseeee 337
Boyle, Hon Miss, her Account of Ellen Dawson .........
Brain, overworked, cured


eeerrecee


one half of, Mesmerisable separately......scescesesesesccccs

grows for about 40 years PITETTTT ETI TTT TTT
Breast, removal of, without pain .....cccccescccccccescccrsescese
Brindley, Mr., his Cures .cccccccccccccccccsccscvsssecscccccceces
I DED canrtndinnssenencasansiesiwaszéansentenndlh
Buchanan’s, Dr., Experiments .......cccccesccsscccccccccseccecs
Caldwell’s, Dr., Testimony ...0..eescceseccesececcess
Canterbury, Lady, Mitigation of her Suffering ..........
Case, Mr., his Cure of Nervous Disease .........++
_—_ Relief in Bronchitis ...


413226


iv INDEX.


PAGE.


Cerebral Sympathy......ccccccscccccsccccsccescccessccssccsssece
Cerebral Organs excited mesmerically .......+.++++++++-38, 68, 338,
Chandler, Mr. T., his Cases .....+---++ PITTTTT TTT 189,
Childs, Mr. A. Cure of Severe Nervous Disease ...seeeeeseecesees
Chorea, two Cures Of ...cccccccccccccccscceccncscsssccesccssees
Classics, Allusions in, to Mesmerism .......+sseeeeeees coccce eel 56,


Clairvoyance, .ccccccccccccccrcccccccseccccssess 29, 220, 226, 389,


Close, the Rev. Mr. ..... Cccccccccccccccccccccs


eee eee eereeeeeee


Collins, Miss, her Cure ....... Seccceces ecccccccoccccces coco |=S80,


Connor, the murderer ........ eeerevecececscoecesece


Consumption, Benefit in .....00 seccvesececncscceccessseecessens
Conscientiousness, Organ of ....... Svecccceesesees sevess eoveces
Contraction of Finger cured....c.csesseccecsecsesccccess occ cccce

Foot ditto ......e+eee0-- cccccccceces eecccccccccece
Criminals, treatment of....... o ccccccccccrcccccsccccceces occccccce


Cruelty of some Christians ....secssecceccccccccescececsssscccess
Curtis, Mr. Extraction of Teeth without Pain ........... ccvcccccce
Davey, Mr. .....2- eecccccocecccese PPTTTTTITITITITIT TTT TTT TT
Death, Punishment of ....... Ceocccece covcvccscccccecs coccccceeeld4,
Debility cured ..........+0.- Sbehde eres séecsocesee


Devil, the ...ccccccccccccccccccccccees ccccccccccccccocccs 000 0D,
Dawson, Ellen ....cscscccseecescess PPTTTSTTITITTTTTTT TTT ttt tt 4
Ducos, Dr., his Removal of a Breast without Pain ....... eeecscces
Durand, M., his Perseverance and Success .....+eeeseeeseessceces
Education ..cccccccccccccccccccccccccs eccccccccceccccccceseslal,
Ellison, the murderer ......cccccccscccccctevcssescccccsccsecs cece
Elliotson, Dr., on Prochaska .....cccsccecesscsecesceces eeccecece

Greatrakes ...ccccosccccccccccccces evcccccccces oe


On Materialism and Necessity .........seseeeeeees
Cure of Epilepsy .....-seeeesee ecccece


———_————— Hocker and Connor .............. PPTTTY TrTTTrTTe
——— Ellison...... PTETTTTITITITITTTTTITT TTT Trier

— Cures of Chorea .....scscesceseces: ecccccccccsoece
U1OCES cc cccccccccccccccccsseccoce eccccee

-— Contracted Finger ......cccccccccccccccccs

POR iccvcocces er cccccccccecece


PION. dovccccesceecoctentesdeceses


, Bn cc cnccccctadbenscessencncdes ecccccccs cooceedDly


Epilepsy cured ......cccccccccccccccecccccccccecccceed, 192, 333,
Esdaile, Dr., his Painless Operations


Fact agninet Fancy ...0cccccccccccccdcccscces eeee eecsees eccee
Fenton, Dr., his Removal of a Leg without Pain.......ccceceeseeeess
Forbes, Dr., his sad course .....scccccceseeces coccccocccecl IG, 24l,


GORGE cccn cvecscccces


SEEM ORE EEO HOHE E HEHE Ee HEE


236
453
486

36
201
304
529
533
446
138
523
281
318
339
131
276
387
207
275
486
532
236
380
490
280
260

22

98
418

39
121
260
201
316
318
339
513
367
509
498


385
537
98


INDEX.


Groenhow, Mrr., his conduct 2.000. ccccccccsccccvccccssecocscoscs
Gregory, Dr. George, his absurdity ..........eseeeee:
Grove, Mrs., her recovery
Gurwood, Col. .......


SOPOT HEHEHE eee ETE EH EEESEEES ERE EEE


Hands, Mr. D., his Cures.......+..e000 eeccccccccecceccccccceces
J. case of Ellen Dawson ........ecenesssees eoccee

Hydrophobia, reliefin ...........+. eoccccccccccccce ecccccccccces

Hare, Hon. Mrs., cure of ...-sceeesesecees ecccecccerccccces coves


Headache and Giddiness, cured ........ceesccccccceccecsesteccoes
Heart, long and severe affection of the, cured.......


Hobbes ........ TETTTTTYTITITIL ETE TTTT TTT eee oe ccccccccces .
Hocker, the Murderer ...ccccccoccscscccccccccccscces cocccsccesee
Hoppe’s, Dr., discovery of Alimentiveness ..........+- eeccccccvece
Horses, Mesmerism in .....0++++++ sseteincwds seaseadas esvcoses oe
Hysteria, cured with Mesmerism .......-cceeccecsceccceeeessI Il,
Imagination, force Of ..ceeesseeee cess eee ccrccccccevccccccecceeces
Immortality not dependent on Spirit ..... cerccscccccccseccse sda,


Inflammation cured ......ceceseeees
Insanity, cured cocccccccccccccccc cece cece ccccccseecccccccocs ee
Jago, Mr., his case of Clairvoyance .........eseeees
Jeffrey, Lord ....-scecees
Jerrold, Douglas ....... cccccoccccccesececoocce coool sey 196, 296,
Jolly, his Operation ....cccoccoscccccccccccccscccce

Kiste, Mr., cure of Ophthalmia ...........00.0-
Hon, Mrs. Hare .....sse00s Cocceccccccecccces
Neuralgia cccccccccccccccccesccocccces
Local Mesmerism .....++.:+-
Locke ..... 00 0es cccccccecccsccccocccecccece Cedeccece coccccee IG,
M‘Neile, his great opinion of the Devil.......cseeee. eeeeee
Macilwain, Mr., his absurdity ......seeeee0-
Mansfield, Mr., his Discovery .....cee.ssccsccccceeesscceseceences
Marshall Hall’s, Dr., absurdity ...cseccsecvcsescccessccessees 496,
Martineau, Miss.........seeeceeressees


eee e eee eeeeeseeeeseeeeeee


‘aadiluadiiaideddlihdchbaiciibininminditieliea .-100,


eeeeee ee eeereseeeeee


seccccccccccccccccccs 86,
Martineau, Miss, her cure .escccccccccccsccccccvesccccscccsccces
Materialism .....-ccccceccccccccccccccccccccccccccccsscelhidy 1G,
Mathematics of Phrenology .......+sseseesececs
Medical Times, its absurdity ......sssececceess
Medical Gazette, its depravity .....cceccccecccccccescccssccccecs
Mége, Dr., Application of Cerebral Physiology to Philosophy ......
Metals wccccccccccccccccccccccccecccccvecetccce scecccccevcecece
Mosely, his Extraction of Teeth, without Pain
Mucklestone, Rev. Mr., his cure ..... oe ereccescccvcccvcescceees
Necessity, Philosophical 1... wsecseseeessecees e cecccccccc ccc c 416,
Nervous Disease cured ......00.000:- ceccescecccccccesessdG, 189,


Ce eeeeereeeeeeseee ee


v
PAGE.
94
512
175
392
514
226
527
96
325
196
420
121
462
522
488
47
511
513
193
220
133


207
24
96

175

512

137

532

537

470

506

535

536

144

426

512

201

139
51

388

186

511

328


vi


PAGE.

Neuralgia, cure Of, sccccccccccccccccccccccccccscccccce veoeee175, 187
Newnham, Mr., his absurdities ..........eseeseeeees eeceecccccceedy 10
Beak ccccccccccccecccccccccccsccece sovcccccccce 102

Noel, Mr., on Materialism in Germany........ ce cccccccccese coccce 162


Organ of C ienti TITETTITTTI LITT ETT TTT - 281
Northway, Mrs., her Amputation .......+seccces-seevsccsccesesss 207
Ghege, Ge cccccccceess CocceccccccccccccccccccccececcccccceccsO0, 5&8
Opbthalmla, cared ...cccccccccscvcvcccccccccccccsccccccccccc et, S96
Organs of the Brain, spoken of before Gall’s time ......-+seeeresess 22


PUES CUIOE cvccccccceccsesecenecccosevesececeseecece eocccescesee 79
Parliament, choice for, by the Head......... eecccces coe cocccccce SOD
Pell, Master, his Recovery ....ccccccccccccccccccccccccccccescs 204
Polypus, Removal of, without Pain .......+....+. cccccccccccccccs S04


Prideaux, Mr., on selecting M.P.’s by the Head ........eeeeeeee-- 399
Professorship of Phrenology ..sccccssesseccecsccccecsccssscceees 543
Prochaska, the term Organs of the Brain before Gall ....seee.2-.++ 22
Purland, Mr., his Extraction of Teeth without Pain .......+..+++- 214
Religion not to Interfere with Inquiries into Nature .......ese.ee++ - 137
Rheumatism cured ...cccccccccccccscccccccccccccceccccccccscccccs 326
Riadore, Mr., his absurdity ........sccccccsccccsceccsecsecsecsces 339
Royal Society, Mesmerism introduced to .. ..seccecccceccccseseses 544
~“ Savage, Miss, her Poetry.....c.sccsccccccssccecccescccesesescces 120


Scrofula, its Cures ...cccscccccccccccccsccsvvcesscccces ecvceese 519
Sleep, curious Effects from, in Waking State .......cseccccceeseess 362
St. Vitus’s Dance cured......... coc cccceccccscccces eccsecsseccees 201
Storer, Dr. .cccccccccccce ee ccccceccccccccscccccceccccesessccccs SOG


Stomach, Cure of ...cccccccccccccccccecccvcccscccsccccsccccccce SOl
Straton, Mr., on Mathematics of Phrenology ....sseseeeessessesees 426
Stubbe, Dr., on Greatrakes ...... PITTTETICTICIT TTT Tree o- 99
Sweating, curious Case Of ....cccccsccerseccccscccccesecccccceses 216
Teeth, Painless Extraction of ...ssscecseecscceescesceeesstl4, 387, 388
Tic Douloureux cured ..cceseecescnceesess eeesees eeecceseeeeel 0, 187
Thompson, Rev. H., his Absurdities........ceccesrecseseccccccecs 5
Thompson, Mr., H.S., his Local Mesmerism.......-sesecesssesees 100
Relief of Asthma sess seseccccccceccescoes 182
Cure of ditto ...ccsccceccsccccsccccsccces 183
Neuralgia ....ccccccccccccccccccce 187
On the Force of Will ...... coccccccccccce S19
Cure of Amourosis, Ophthalmia, &c......... 325
Rheumatism and Pain in Head andGiddiness 325
Of Inflammation ........scececceeseseseees 520
in Horses ..--cccccccccce - 522
Tumor, Removal of, without Pain ....****....+e. «+++210, 213, 508, 509
Ulcers cured ....seceee cc cnccccccccccceccccccsc,,cecccescossess SIG


INDEX.


Uterine Disease cured ....cseccececeveccceceseeceecs

Vernon, Mr., cure of Uterine Disease ....eeeseseeeesees

Voltaire ccccccccccccccccccccccccccescceverccsesccces veececcees
Vivian’s, Mr., Cure of Fits......cccccccccccccecccccess
es + + F 8
Wallace, Miss, her Cures.....cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccsccces
Warburton, Eliot, Mr. .....ccccccccsscccccvcceseccccecccecsceess
Weir, Dr. W. Peer erence csveeescecessccessececs ereece eee
Will, force Of ....ccccccccccccccccccccccsccccesssseces

Wilson, Miss, her Recovery...... secccececscccces
Wheelock, Dr., his Removal of a Polypus without Pain .
