THE ZOIST: A Journal of Cerebral Physiology & Mesmerism, and their Applications
to Human Welfare. Vol. XI (April 1853 to January 1854).
Edited by John Elliotson. London: Hippolyte Bailliere, 219 Regent Street.
Public domain. Assembled from the five microfilm issue scans on the Internet Archive (sim_microfilm collection); no bound-volume scan of this volume is available.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. XLI.


APRIL, 1853.


INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME XI.


‘If this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought: But if it be
of God, ye cannot overthrow it.’”’—The Acts of the Apostles, v. 38, 39.


Ten Volumes of The Zoist are now completed, and we com-
mence the eleventh. Forty Numbers have been published,
containing four thousand four hundred and seventy pages.

How falsified are the predictions of the foes of mesmer-
ism! When our first Number appeared, Medical Lecturers,
Fellows of Medical Colleges, and of Medical Societies, Jour-
nalists, and private Practitioners, tossed up their heads in
contempt, and said there would never be a second. The
appearance of the second caused them to bite their lips and
sneer still more bitterly, declaring that the idea of a third
coming out would be absurd. However, here we are, forty
strong! and vigorous enough to produce forty more as good
as these.

When we commenced our labours in the spring of 1843,
the storm was raging pitilessly against mesmerism. For above
four years all the medical journals had been denouncing it in
the most intemperate language, vilely traducing innocent and
genuine mesmeric patients, and endeavouring to ruin him
who was too intelligent not to discern its truth, too honest
not to avow his knowledge and convictions, and too benevo-
lent not to endeavour to effect the distribution of its bless-
ings among all his fellow creatures suffering from disease
and perhaps destined to suffer also from the surgeon’s agon-
izing operations. It was spurned in every hospital, infirm-

VOL. XI. B


2 Furious Medical Opposition to Mesmerism.


ary, and dispensary in the United Kingdom. The physicians,
surgeons, and apothecary of University College Hospital had
been for four years exulting in the reflection, that not a
single patient in the Institution had been saved the pangs of
the surgeon’s knife, not a single patient blessed with calm
and refreshing sleep, not a single patient cured of disease,
by mesmerism, since they prevailed upon the Council of
University College, in 1838, to issue its mad edict, as bar-
barous as that of king Nebuchadnezzar or governor Gessler,
that mesmerism should be expelled from the hospital and
never be admitted again.*

All medical lecturers anxiously poisoned the minds of their
pupils in regard to it. It was all but universally spurned in
the private practice of physicians, royal, eastern, and rural ;
of surgeons and general practitioners. Not only was it
spurned, but all these persons carried on a clandestine sys-
tem of warfare against it and the two or three of their pro-
fession who were its advocates, by doing their utmost to pre-
vent them from being consulted, and from ceasing to call in
the very man whom, up to that moment, they had rejoiced
to call in on account, as they professed, of his practical acute-
ness and his integrity.

Only very few months previously, the Royal Medical and
Chirurgical Society of London had clamorously pronounced
it too absurd and disgraceful a matter for their consideration ;
and, after an account had been read, at one of their meet-
ings, of a painless surgical operation performed in the mes-
meric state, exactly similar to the hundreds subsequently per-
formed by Dr. Esdaile in India, had resolved that no trace of so
ridiculous and contemptible an account should disgrace their
minutes.t At that very moment the Royal physician, and the
Royal surgeon, who had far more practice than any others in
London, lost no opportunity of declaring to their patients and
brother practitioners that mesmerism was altogether a cheat
and delusion; that they not only did not believe a word
about it, though they had never witnessed it, but that they
would not go and witness it; nor, if they should witness it,
would they believe the evidence of their senses.


* The names of the Council will be found in No. XIII. p- 2; and in the
same Number will be found many most interesting particulars respecting the
opposition of University College and the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society.


+ Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations without pain in the Mesmeric
State ; with Remarks upon the opposition of many members of the Royal Medical
and Chirurgical Society and others to the reception of the inestimable blessings of
Mesmerism ; by Joun Exvtiotson, M.D. Canras. F.R.S. 1843.


Our Facts in 1848. 3


Yet, at this moment, we sallied forth and faced the storm:
well assured that the astounding phenomena of mesmerism
were as real and as natural as the phenomena of galvanism
and chemistry ; that its remedial powers were incalculable;
and that he who trusts to truth and not to man, poor feeble
man, stands upon a rock, and may defy the idle rage of
society, who, when their passions grow calm, will hurl con-
tempt upon those false lights which had led them astray.

We set to work disinterestedly, without hope of even dis-
tant advantage. At the time of the appearance of The Zoist,
one of us who takes an active part in its management had
suffered a reduction of his practice to one-third for having
declared and demonstrated the truth of mesmerism ; some
others had lost more or less of their practice ;* and all open
mesmerists were suffering persecution in some shape or other,
even from those who before had always shewn them confi-
dence, respect, and regard.

As we began in these circumstances, it was not likely
that we should lose heart and turn back.

The fury of the foe continued unabated for many a year.
Yet we stood undaunted, pouring forth on the first of every
April, July, September, and January, facts without end, in
return for empty declamations and unscrupulous invectives ;


and exposing his ignorance, dishonesty, abjectness, cruelty,
and heartlessness, and his want of self-respect and moral dig-
nity, although the foes name was legion.


In 1843 we gave to the world five cures of insanity.

Eight cures of St. Vitus’s dance.

Siz cures of palsy, of sensation or motion.

Seven cures of epileptic and other fits; some complicated
with other diseases.

A rapid cure of delirium from grief.

A cure of functional affection of the heart that had ex-
isted seven years.

Six cures of rheumatism.

Almost instantaneous cure of severe pain from a sprain.

Amongst these cases were beautiful examples of predic-
tion on the part of the patient respecting the cause and cure
of his disease; of clairvoyance, as to distant objects: and
other striking mesmeric phenomena.


* That excellent man and able surgeon, Mr. Tubbs, of Upwell, Cambridge-
shire, so many of whose contributions have appeared in The Zoist, suffered severe
pecuniary losses from the ignorance and malice of those in his neighbourhood.

B2


Predictions in 1843.


A few of the cases occurred in University College Hos-
pital. The details of several are a good mesmeric study.

The possibility of mesmerising one half only of the brain
was first proved in this Volume, p. 327. Clear proofs were
given of the truly mesmeric excitement of distinct cerebal
organs independently of suggestion or imagination, p. 240,
&c. The amazing power of imagination was pointed out
repeatedly.

We gave an interesting history of mesmerism in England
from 1828 to 1843, and concluded with these words :—


“It will soon be considered ridiculous for a man to declare he
believes mesmerism to be nonsense. The honest among the most
noisy opponents will become Sauls of Tarsus and be the most strenu-
ous proselytes ; each of this class will confess his sorrow, as Mr.
Chenevix did, that this—


«« « Presumptuous ignorance had shut in his own face the door of
a science more directly interesting to man than all that chemistry and
astronomy can teach. Nine-tenths,’ he continues, ‘who may read
will laugh at this as I did, in 1797, at my friend in Rotterdam. Let
them do so; but while they laugh, let them learn, and not, thirty
years afterwards, have to lament that so short a remnant of life is
left to them to enjoy this new and valuable secret of nature ;’ ”’—


The uncandid will be silent, and then at last begin to allow there is
something in it, and pretend that they always allowed as much, but
did not think it right to be precipitate, and only objected to the non-
sense of the matter.

**So at last it will be spoken and written of as a matter of
course, lectured upon as a matter of course, and employed as a
matter of course: and all the folly, ignorance, injustice, and vul-
garity that have been exhibited must be most charitably forgotten;
only that copies of the Lancet, its heavy offspring the Provincial
Medical Journal, the Dublin Medical Journal, Dr. Johnson’s Jour-
nal, and Dr. Forbes’s, will still be accessible on the shelves of public
medical libraries, and we, ‘ before we forget them,’ must from time
to time present our readers with a tit-bit of an extract, sometimes
from one of them and sometimes from another, to show the world
how wild and vulgar doctors can be among themselves, and how
closely their conduct resembles that of the most uneducated, who
wonder at what they never saw before and refuse to believe their
senses because they wonder, forgetting that what they do believe is
all equally wonderful, but not thought so because they are accus-
tomed to it.

“«* Wonderful,’ says Mr. Chenevix, ‘indeed, it may appear;
but what makes anything wonderful to us, if not our ignorance? In
my recollection, they have wondered at hydrogen and oxygen; at a
dead frog jumping between two slips of metal; at gas lights and
steam boats; and now they wonder at all who wonders at these
familiar things. They would pity the wretch who would not in-


Our Facts in 1844. 5


stantly believe that a stone falls, and a balloon rises, by the same
impulse : or that the taste which his tongue receives when placed be-
tween a piece of silver and a piece of zinc, has the same origin as the
thunder which strikes his soul with awe. Every thing in creation is
wonderful, or nothing is so, but the last known truth always appears
the most miraculous to unreflecting minds.’ ‘ Since the world began
men have been wondering at every thing till habit tamed their minds
upon it.’

‘* We ask not the aid of those medical journalists. On the con-
trary we entreat them to continue in their present course of absurdity,
for their ‘fantastic tricks,’ like those of ‘angry apes before high
heaven,’ will amuse us in our leisure moments, and enable us to
amuse our readers as well as ourselves, by playing with them,
and teasing them, and showing the world what comical creatures
they are when well worried. The facts of mesmerism which we
possess are now profusely abundant, and extensively scattered with-
out the assistance of professors, examiners, colleges, halls, medical
journalists, or fashionable practitioners. It must go on conquering
and to conquer—for MESMERISM IS ESTABLISHED.”


In 1844, we published a remarkable cure of hiccup, which
probably would have proved fatal but for mesmerism. The
mesmeric state was characterized by unusual rigidity ; and
the phenomena were all exquisite: the case is a valuable
study.

A cure of epilepsy of fifteen years’ standing ; and several
other examples of the power of mesmerism over the disease.
A second cure of epilepsy, with remarkable and exquisite
phenomena,—a complete study ; and a third cure.

A cure of intense, long, and obstinate spinal irritation.

Cure of a child’s diseased knee.

Extreme relief in one case of acute rheumatism, and cure
of another.

Cure of rheumatism—eighteen cases.

Diseased kidney.

Asthma.

Neuralgia—four cases.

Enlarged glands—two cases.

Inflamed knee-joint.

Contraction of an arm.

Advantage in fyphus and scarlet fever.

Cure of long standing head-ache and giddiness ; another
of head-ache.

Melancholy—two cases.

Apparently threatening consumption.

Deafness.

Withered arm after rheumatism.


Painless Surgical Operations now.


Inflammation of the eye—two cases.
Quinsy.

Wounded leg.

Loss of voice.

Chlorosis.

Injured knee, and arm, and sprained wrist.


We now began to relate painless surgical operations. The
only surgical operations rendered painless up to this time in
Europe were recorded in Dr. Elliotson’s pamphlet already
quoted. They were Cloquet’s removal of a breast, in France—
the first mesmeric painless operation recorded, we believe ; the
insertion of a seton in Elizabeth Okey’s neck, in University
College Hospital; the division of the ham strings, by Dr.
Engledue ; the extraction of teeth ; an operation on the jaw ;
and the amputation of the Nottinghamshire peasaut’s leg.

Cloquet’s case was totally disregarded by himself and all
other surgeons. The first operation rendered painless in
Great Britain by mesmerism was the insertion of the seton
in Elizabeth Okey ; the second was Dr. Engledue’s. In the
pamphlet was recorded also the opening of an abscess; and
an incision down upon, and the filing of, the lower jaw.

The painless operations which we now recorded were venc-
sections ; numerous extractions of teeth, some of which were
quoted at p. 103 from the American translation of De-
leuze’s Practical Illustrations in Animal Magnetism, and were
performed in America before the insertion of the seton in
Elizabeth Okey. So that America followed France, and pre-
ceded England in painless surgical operations. We recorded
at p. 108, a remarkable instance of a woman in whom the
mesmeric process, conducted by Mr. Case, at Fareham, in-
duced no other mesmeric effect than that she felt no pain
while the tooth was extracted. A patient similarly circum-
stanced in University College Hospital was considered to
have shammed, ib. We recorded likewise the painless esta-
blishment of setons and issues, excisions of tumors, openings
of abscesses, amputations, an operation for squinting, and
the painless cutting down upon the length of a nail and ex-
tracting a splinter.

In this year we gave abundant proofs of clairvoyance,
especially in the case of Alexis Didier.


1845.—This year is signalized by Dr. Esdaile making his
appearance with these words:—


7 Ever since Dr. Elliotson declared, years ago, ‘ that he should
despise himself if he did not declare his conviction of the truth of


Our Facts in 1845. 7


mesmerism,’ I ceased to regard it lightly, and paid attention to all
well-attested reports upon the subject; at last the facts became so
numerous, and were so well supported by credible witnesses, and
kept their ground so firmly both against adverse reasoning and ridi-
cule (the test of truth), that I felt compelled to surrender my belief
in the existence of the unknown power, or cease to be a reasoning
and judging being. Ten days before making my first experiment, I
thus wrote to a friend at home: ‘ What think you of this new mys-
tery, mesmerism? For my part I am thinking seriously about it,
and cannot help suspecting that we have hit upon one of nature’s
great secrets. I keep myself perfectly neutral, and hear the evidence
pro and con. If it turns out a delusion, I will be happy to assist in
digging its grave.’ ”’


Painless operations were now recorded from his practice
and that of others in France and America.


A cure of long-continued ophthalmia, with clairvoyance,
and exquisite phenomena for study; and three other cures of
the disease.

Inflammation of the lungs, and delirium, pronounced hope-
less.

Rheumatism.

Neuralgia, &c.—seven cases.

Uterine disease.

Hysterical epilepsy, &c., with phenomena rendering the
details a study: and of four others, one with catalepsy.

St. Vitus’s dance—two cases.

Epilepsy—five cases.

Nervous symptoms and debility.

Insanity.

Overworked brain.

Deafness.

Inflammatory loss of voice.

Erysipelas—two cases.

Burns.

Ulcers.

A contracted finger.

A threatening abscess.

A diseased elbow.

A contracted foot ; with endless exquisite phenomena: an
admirable study for any mesmerist.

Power over asthma—two cases.

Amaurosis.

Opacity of the cornea.

Stomach affection, with great emaciation.

Instances of great comfort in various incurable diseases.


Hostility in 1846.


A full account of Miss Martineau’s case is given, and an
exposure of shocking medical conduct.

Cures of inflammation in horses—two cases.

Painless amputations—five cases.

Removals of tumors—three cases.

Removal of a breast.

Removal of a polypus from the nose.

Forcible extension of a contracted cicatrix or scar.

Paring an ulcer of a heel.

Deep incisions into abscesses.

Several extractions of teeth.

Examples of the power of the silent will; of high clair-
voyance; of cerebral sympathy; and of genuine phreno-
mesmerism.


Some learned papers upon the notices of mesmerism
in the classics.


1846.—This was a remarkable year. At the beginning of
it, the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society declined to ac-
knowledge a present by Dr. Elliotson of a printed account
of an amputation performed painlessly through mesmerism at
Cherbourg.

This almost incredible fact is detailed respecting the Me-
dical and Chirurgical Society. Four years after the Society
had so furiously kicked out the case of painless amputation,
Dr. Elliotson presented it with a fresh pamphlet, containing
an account of a painless amputation performed at Cherbourg.
There is a printed form of thanks always sent to donors of
books. This was not sent; but only a short note from the
Secretary, acknowledging, not the pamphlet, but Dr. Elliot-
son’s letter—“ your letter ’—and without even allusion to its
contents.

«53, Berners Street, Feb. 13, 1846.

** Sir,—I am directed by the president and council of the Royal

Medical and Chirurgical Society to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of the 27th January. “T am, Sir,


“* Your obedient Servant,
** John Elliotson, M.D., &c. &. ‘“Grorce Cursnam, Hon. Sec.”


A more lamentable piece of inveterate hostility to truth,
and rudeness to a lover of truth, cannot be found. The Presi-
dent was Dr. Chambers; and the names of the Council, and
the whole affair, we recorded at p. 13.

A multitude of painless operations were performed under
mesmerism by Dr. Esdaile. The pain-preventing power of
the inhalation of ether was made known, and the medical
profession who had before violently opposed our attempts to


Our Facts in 1846. 9


prevent surgical pain, had despised ‘our evidence and denied
the necessity and utility of preventing pain, became converted
to the fact and the duty ;—in the case be it observed, however,
not of mesmerism, but of ether. We recorded

Cures of epilepsy—nine cases.

Of neuralgia—ten cases : one with a strange phenomenon,
p. 236-7.

Rheumatism—thirteen cases.

Head-ache—six cases.

Loss of voice—four cases.

Fatuity and insanity.

Melancholia.

St. Vitus’s dance.

Sensation as of insects crawling.

Deafness—three cases.

Disease of spinal marrow.

Tooth-ache—three cases.

Palsy of half the body.

Convulsions.

Great irritability of brain.

Scalds—two cases.

Dumbness, of many years standing.

Spasms.

Diseased breast, pronounced cancer, and condemned to
operation.

Diseased lung, pronounced consumption and hopeless by
Dr. Todd.

Dropsy.

Inflammation of eyes—four cases.

Disease of the bladder.

Sprain.

Indigestion—two cases.

A few instances of great benefit during and after partu-
rition.

The painless operations were very numerous :—

Amputations—six cases.

Removal of tumors—tweENTY-ONE: some weighing 30lbs ;
one 40]bs.; and one 112lbs.

Cutting out a nail.

Application of strong acid to a sore.

Application of red hot iron to a sore.

Many applications of caustic to the eye.

Removal of an enlarged testis—two cases.

Removal of preputium.

Removal of breast—two cases.

Paring sores—four cases.


10 Our Facts in 1847.


Tapping—two cases.

Opening abscesses, &c.

Operations, consisting in simple incisions, or for fistula—
eleven cases.

Injecting hydrocele—five cases.

Operation for cataract.

Removal of excrescence—two cases.

Tearing adhesions asunder.

Extending a contracted knee.

Extractions of teeth, numerous.

Introduction of setons.

Dividing the tendon of the heel.

Prevention of pain in reducing prolapsed intestine.

We gave good examples of clairvoyance: and even inde-
pendent of mesmerism :

Examples of double consciousness, also independent of
mesmerism ; and we pointed out the importance of knowing
this fact in courts of justice :

A long historical extract from Dr. Elliotson’s farewell ad-
dress to his pupils at University College, and a notice of his
Harveian Oration before the College of Physicians, in which
he rendered this year remarkable by declaring the truth of
the phenomena and practical benefit of mesmerism in medi-
cine and surgery, and imploring the College to investigate
the subject.

We detailed instances of the serious inconveniences of
trifling with mesmerism.


1847.—This year Mr. Wakley wrote the following pas-
sage in his Lancet. What he meant we do not know,—what
he wished we do know :—


“* We shall not allow the filthiest of all filthy slanders contained
in The Zoist to go unwhipped. Of course the parties concerned in
this infamous publication are in a state of perpetual mortification at
their fallen al degraded position, and therefore they bite and rail.
The leper must be taken with his spots.” —Lancet, July 31st, 1847.


We published cures of newralgia—nineteen cases: one of
the stomach, with remarkable facts.

Rheumatism—three cases.

Head-ache.

Hypochondriasis, with wonderful phenomena.

Rigidity of muscles.

Indigestion.

Irritation of the bladder.

Twisting of the head—two cases.


_ Our Facts in 1848.


Affection of the heart.

Short-sightedness.

Ophthalmia—three cases.

Loss of voice.

Deafness—five cases.

Injury of the knee.

Abscess.

After-pains.

Hiccup of 12 years’ standing.

Scalds and burns—three cases.

Strangury.

White leg; and another, but the treatment was inter-
rupted.

St. Vitus’s dance.

Injury of the spine.

Great relief of pain of inflammation.

Pain of chest and spitting of blood.

Asthma.

Palsy.

The painless operations were :—

Removal of a breast.

Removal of tumors—eight cases: one 40lbs., and another
100lbs. in weight.

Opening of a whitlow.

Cutting down upon and tying an artery.

Extractions of teeth.

We gave also remarkable instances of the temporary
transference of melancholia to the mesmeriser, and of the
temporary transference of rheumatism to the mesmeriser ; of
cerebral sympathy, and sympathy of taste and touch, placed,
like so many other instances, beyond the possibility of error ;
of clairvoyance,—and some instances independent of mes-
merism ; and of double consciousness without mesmerism ; of
mesmerisation without the patient’s knowledge; and of
cross-mesmerism.


1848.—This year was remarkable for the indisputable fact
of the complete dissipation of a hard genuine cancer of a breast
by mesmeric agency: by the publication, in Scotland, of a
barbarous letter from Mr. Liston, exulting in the probable
serious damage to mesmerism by the discovery of the pain-
preventing powers of inhaled ether; by a virulent and unjust
attack on mesmerism and mesmerists, in the College of Phy-
sicians, by a Dr. Hawkins, and the refusal of all redress by
the President, Dr. Paris; and of the medical persecution of
Dr. Esdaile, with his final triumph and reward, in India.


Our Facts in 1849.


We recorded cures of

Neuralgia—eleven cases.

Rheumatism—sixteen cases.

Epilepsy—three cases.

St. Vitus’s dance.

Loss of voice—two cases.

Painful affection of the heart.

Involuntary movements of an arm.

Cataleptic insanity, with wonderful phenomena: an excel-
lent study.

Palsy—five cases.

Contraction of a finger.

Hysteria.

Chronic inflammation of an elbow.

Inflammatory swelling of the face.

Inflammatory excitement of the brain.

Inflammation of the throat.

Acute gout.

Head-ache—two cases.

Ulcers.

Lumbar abscess.

Diseased knee.

Enlargement of glands—three cases.

A remarkable instance of the operation of mesmerism in
relinquishing opium eating; and one of its restoration of lost
weight.

The painless operations were :—

Removal of tumors, some of very great size and weight,
THIRTY-FOUR Cases.

Amputation of a great toe.

For Hydrocele.

Lithotomy.

Extractions of teeth.

Removal of scirrhus testis—two cases.

The application of strong nitric acid to a sore.

Ditto of caustic to a sore.

Unconscious parturition—two cases.

We gave proofs of clairvoyance ; and an instance of clair-
voyance in a dream ; and of the antiquity of mesmerism.


1849.—In this year three wholesale mesmerists appeared,
Mr. Capern here, and the two Messrs. Keeley in America;
and we printed their striking results.
We reported cures of
Neuralgia—seven cases.
Rheumatism—tTHIRTY-SIX Cases.


Our Facts in 1850.


Palsy—five cases.

Epilepsy—two cases.

Head-aches—two cases.

Insanity—five cases—with a report of the great utility of
mesmerism in Indian lunatic establishments.

Tooth-ache—with a remarkable effect.

Deafness—two cases: greatly improved—ten cases.

Dumbness : probably from palsy.

Blindness of 26 years duration, from opacity of the cornea,
and a second of the same kind; but of one year’s duration,

Spinal affection of long standing, greatly relieved.

Diseased knee, greatly improved.

Dropsy—two cases.

Palpitation.

Disease of the lungs, called consumption.

Scrofulous ulcerations, much improved—four cases.

Nervous debility—three cases.

Severe inflammation of an arm. Scald.

Vomiting, of above two months’ duration.

Instances of great relief in various diseases while treated
in the usual way: very numerous cases are mentioned, but not
fully reported for want of room, which were treated by the
Messrs. Keeley, in America.

The operations recorded from India were :—

Removal of tumors: some very large—ten cases.

Removal of a malignant tumor of the eye, and subsequent
application of strong nitric acid to the wound.

Application of strong nitric acid to a sore.

Reports in one half year, of rH1RTY-oNnE capital operations :
and in the next, of THIRTY-ONE.

In one place we read that of 100 capital operations in the
mesmeric insensibility, only two died within a month—one
from cholera, and the other of lock-jaw.

Two instances of unquestionable mesmerisation to sleep
at a distance of 46 miles are recorded by Mr. Adams of Ly-
mington. The imaginationists may think of them, and of
the other thousands of facts which upset their fancy. We
gave abundant examples of mesmeric disturbance through
mismanagement ; and of clairvoyance.


1850.—This year was signalized by a furious and ridicu- |


lous attack upon mesmerism, by a Dr. J. A. Wilson, in his |
Harveian Oration delivered before the College of Physicians ; |


Vv


and by the GREAT EVENT OF THE OPENING OF THE LONDON \ /


Mesmeric INFIRMARY.
We recorded cures of


Our Facts in 1850.


Rheumatism—nineteen cases.
Hysteria—three cases.
Epilepsy—two cases.
Wry Neck.
Gout.
Long standing vomiting.
Chronic headache—three cases
Spinal irritation.
Neuralgia—ten cases.
Palpitation.
Spinal and general debility—two cases.
Nervousness.
Violent fits—two cases.
Deafness—three cases.
A remarkable nervous case in Switzerland—a fine study.
Insanity—three cases.
Chronic tooth-ache.
Delirium tremens.
St. Vitus’s dance—three cases.
Loss of voice—five cases.
Inflammatory head-ache.
Diseased finger.
Spitting of blood.
Inability of a child to retain the urine at night.
Polypus of the uterus.
Ulcer of uterus—two cases.
Sprain.
Ulcerated glands.
Dropsy and diseased liver—two cases.
Wasting.
Chronic inflammation of the lungs—two cases.
Ulcer in the neck.
Chlorosis and dropsy.
Obstinate chlorosis.
Diseased heart.
Disease of a lung.
Agonized finger from a rusty nail.
Inflammation of the eyes, five cases—one with a speck.
Inflamed knee.
elbow.
Erysipelas—two cases.
Curvature of the spine—two cases.
Consumption.
Threatening consumption.
Inflammation of the knee-joint.
Inflammation of the bladder. —


Our Facts in 1851.


Delirium of fever.

Abscess of ear, of long standing.

Constipation—three cases.

The painless operations were :—

Bursting a ganglion by a blow.

The application of caustic to an inflamed eye.

The making an issue—two cases.

Venesection.

Teeth extractions.

Almost painless parturition.

We furnished instances of the power of the silent will ;
of sympathy of brain; of clairvoyance; of clairvoyance in
common sleep; of the successful mesmerisation of an old
lady, eighty years of age; and of the cure of several brutes
with mesmerism; we also pointed out the superstitions of
some mesmerists.


1851.—In this year two important circumstances oc-
curred :—Dr. Esdaile left India, the term being up beyond
which, on entering the service, he had resolved not to remain,
as it sufficed to gain him his pension and he detested the
region ; and demonstrations, absurdly called electro-biology
in America, were made in England, proving the mighty in-
fluence of a consciously felt mental impression over the belief


and the will with very little of mesmerism, and even with
none in persons previously mesmerised or highly susceptible
of impressions. Thousands admitted these facts, already
shewn in, and after, the perfect mesmeric state by us all for
many years, but ridiculed with the rest of our innumerable
evident facts.

Our cures were, of

Ulcers of the leg, with varicose veins—two cases.

Chronic inflammation of the eye, with ulcers of the cornea
—two cases.

Inflamed fingers—two cases.

Injured leg.

Ditto hip.

Benefit in severe injury of breast-bone and back.

Ditto in case of fractured leg.

Lock-jaw.

Chlorosis.

Ditto and neuralgia.

Chronic debility after cholera.

Deafness—two cases—(one of seven years’ duration).

Loss of voice.

Neuralgia—thirteen cases.


Our Facts in 1852.


Wry neck.

Asthma.

St. Vitus’s dance.

Convulsive and rigid fits—an excellent study.

Rheumatism——fifteen cases.

Epilepsy.

Spinal irritation—three cases.

Inflammation of the face.

Palsy of the legs, blindness, and dumbness.

Gout.

Dyspepsia.

Palsy—four cases.

Polypus of uterus.

Inflammation or neuralgia of the uterus.

Insanity—two cases.

Hysteria with convulsions and delirium.

We also recorded cures of lock-jaw in horses—two cases.

The cases of prevention of pain were :—

The removal of a very painful wart, many extractions of
teeth, and parturition.

We gave unquestionable examples of clairvoyance, and of
the kind of clairvoyance called introvision as to disease : also
two of sympathy with the disease of different individuals.

We again pointed out the absurdity of the imagination-


theory in papers by Drs. Gregory and Engledue and Mr.
Sandby.


1852.—In this year we were indulged with a third gross
attack in the College of Physicians—of course with the esta-
blished impunity of antimesmeric conduct in the College—
and the assailant was a Dr. Alderson; successors to Dr.
Esdaile in mesmerism appeared in India, and the different
impression made by a visit to the Mesmeric Hospital upon
a Batavian Governor and a Fellow of St. John’s College,
Cambridge, from that made upon doctors, is strikingly told.
Dr. Burq’s remarkable facts in the curative influence of
metals externally applied were detailed.

We recorded cures of :—

Severe cutaneous disease.

Insanity.

Despondency.

Sleeplessness and dimness of sight.

Palsy—two cases.

Ditto and debility.

A stiff knee.

Uterine disease.


Our Facts in 1852.


Crooked spine and hysteria.

Inflammation of the face.

Rickets.

Erysipelas.

Epilepsy.

Irritability of temper.

Gout.

Squinting.

Weakness of the knees.

Ditto of ankles.

Spasmodic cough.

Vomiting of blood, &c.

St. Vitus’s dance.

Neuralgia—nine cases.

Head-ache—five cases.

Loss of voice.

Palpitation.

Rheumatism—six cases.

Stiff knee.

Burn.

Trembling and nervousness.

Curious fits of apparent insensibility.

Blindness of seventeen years’ standing.

Singular variety of St. Vitus’s dance.

Lock-jaw.

Inflammation of the eyes.

Removal of after-pains.

We recorded the particulars of a painless removal of a
large tumor, and mentioned that twenty-nine painless ope-
rations had been performed in India in eight months, and
numerous teeth extractions in England.

We gave instances of clairvoyance and introvision.


With this array of solid facts we defy the entire host of
our medical adversaries. Other adversaries we have not, ;
except the silly Satanites, and they deserve commiseration |
only—not indignation.

Besides these facts, we have presented our readers with
dissertations and reviews; proved unconscious impressions,
knowledge, and willing ; and unsparingly exposed the fallacies
of some opponents and the abominations of others.

We have contributed to the stock of phrenology, or more
properly, cerebral physiology, in the way of both disquisition
and fresh illustration : and the original and laborious articles
by Mr. Straton appear of the very highest interest.

VOL. XI. c


18 Some of Mr. Capern’s rapid Cures.


Our work is the most important, though not the most
able, work of the age. For it conducts mankind into a new
region of physiology, a new region of psychology, and a new
region of the healing art. Animated nature transcends the
inanimate: cerebral physiology transcends the physiology
of all the rest of the body; and medicine, comprehending
the good formation and training of the whole human being,
and the prevention, cure, and assuaging of disease and suf-
fering, transcends all other arts, however noble, and whatever
talent and labour their successful cultivation may require.


Il. A few examples of such rapid relief in severe complaints
with Mesmerism by Mr. Capern in the Mesmeric In-
Jirmary as medical practitioners cannot effect with their
established routine.—1. Rheumatic Gout ; 2. Lumbago ;
3. Gout in the hand and arms; 4, severe and long-con-
tinued Hysterical Convulsions ; 5. intense Neuralgia (with
mesmeric sympathy of taste); 6. pain from injury of the
foot ; 7. agonizing White Swelling of the knee; 8. Rheu-
matic Gout; 9. Rheumatic Gout; 10. Neuralgia; 11.


Injury to a hand and arm. Communicated by Dr.
Elliotson.


‘* But now while on all sides they rode and they ran,
Trying all sorts of means to discover the catiffs,
Losing patience, the holy Gengulphus began
To think it high time to ‘ astonish the natives.’
First, a Rittmeister’s Frau, who was weak in both eyes,
And supposed the most short-sighted woman in Holland,
Found greater relief, to her joy and surprise,
From one glimpse of his squint ‘ than from glasses by Dolland.’
By the slightest approach to the tip of his Nose,
Megrims, head-ache, and vapours were put to the rout ;
And one single touch of his precious Great Toes
Was a certain specific for chilblains and gout.
Rheumatics,—sciatica,—tic douloureux !
Apply to his shin-bones,—not one of them lingers :
All bilious complaints in an instant withdrew
If the patient were tickled with one of his fingers.
Much virtue was found to reside in his thumbs :
When applied to the chest, they cured scantness of breathing,
Sea-sickness, and colick ; or, rubb’d on the gums,
Were ‘a blessing to mothers’ for infants in teething.
Whoever saluted the nape of his neck,
Where the mark remain’d visible still of the knife,
Notwithstanding east winds perspiration might check,
Was safe from sore throat for the rest of his life.
Thus while each acute and each chronic complaint
Giving way, proved an influence clearly divine,
They perceived the dead gentleman must be a saint,
So they locked him up body and bones in a shrine.”’
A Lay of Gengulphus in the Ingoldsby Legends,
by the Rev. Mr. Barham.


Some of Mr. Capern’s rapid Cures. 19


I. Rheumatic Gout.

“1, James Gladwell, 3, Mabledon Row, Burton Crescent,
do hereby certify that I have been afflicted with rheumatic
gout and rheumatism for about eleven months. Six months
ago the gout flew to my stomach, and thence settled in my
hands, arms and shoulders, since which time I have been
incapacitated from carrying on my business, not being able
to handle a tool. I was under my medical attendant, Mr.
Brown, of Gordon Street, for two months: after that at the
Northern Dispensary for the same time. I then took brim-
stone and mustard for seven weeks; after that Woolridge’s
mixture.* In fact I swallowed poisons till I was almost
killed, including aconite, iodide of potass, colchicum, &c.,
&e., from none of which did I find any relief. I was then
advised to apply to the Mesmeric Infirmary. J scoffed at the
idea of being mesmerised, but was at last induced to do so;
and, had I not experienced it, no one could have persuaded
me of the result. When I went there, on the 3rd of last
November, I could scarcely put my feet to the ground; and
my hands were so much swollen that I could not near close
them. I am now, November the 15th, so much better,
that I can walk without my stick, and can bear my whole
weight on the toes of that foot, a thing I have not done since
first attacked. I can now use my heavy hammer, which I had
not done for the previous siz months, and my health is de-
cidedly improved. In conclusion, allow me to say that my
scepticism is removed, and my faith as strong as was my un-
belief before; and I shall feel happy to recommend mes-
merism to any one.

“At the risk of being called intrusive, I cannot help
bearing my testimony to a case this day, November the 15th,
when a poor man named William Keating had hurt his back
so much that he could neither stoop nor sit down, and with
great difficulty could walk: and, within seven minutes after
entering the operating room, he stated that he was perfectly
cured. There was an immediate change in his countenance,
while Mr. Capern made the passes, as if from the expression
of intense pain to that of comfort and ease. He stated that


he felt a great heat in the back, as if he had been placed near
a large fire.”


NOTE BY MR. CAPERN.


This patient continued to recover and was about to ap-
pear before the committee to thank those gentlemen, when,


* A common colchicum mixture sold by a druggist in the New Road named
Woolridge.— Zoist.
c2


20 Some of Mr. Capern’s rapid Cures.


having an engagement in the country, he was unfortunately
placed in a damp bed, and this caused a return of the com-
plaint from which he is now recovering.
Jan. 16th, 1853.
II. Intense Pains in the Back.

William Keating, 7, Charles Street, Lisson Grove, states
that, on the morning of the 15th of November, whilst in the
act of lifting a heavy weight, he felt a sudden shock as if the
vertebre of the back were broken: he had no power to raise
himself from the chair, and he could not stand alone above two
minutes ; the pains were excruciating, and, although a strong
man, he shed tears whilst going to the Infirmary in the omni-
bus: he was helped to the Infirmary by ¢wo men, one on each
side. On his entrance Mr. Capern offered to relieve him,
and, immediately on Mr. Capern passing his hand over the
part affected, the pain diminished, and in a few minutes it
wholly disappeared. Great heat was produced, and, when
Mr. Capern breathed on the back, the sensation was as if a
hot coal were on it.

(Signed) Witiiam KEatine
November 15th.
Witnessed by Mr. James Gladwell.

This patient has not been heard of since ; and is therefore,
no doubt, still well.


III. Gout in the Hand and Arm.

Henry Oaten, of Newman Mews, Newman Street, states,
that he had been suffering severely from the gout in the hand
and arm for a fortnight: he was incapable of making any
exertion or performing any labour ; was in great pain, and his
hand much swollen. He was induced to apply at the Mes-
meric Infirmary, October the 11th. At that time his arm
was in a sling, for he was unable to use it. Mr. Capern
immediately mesmerised it, and within ¢wo or three minutes
the swelling disappeared ; and he has experienced no pain since.
He was at the time receiving pay from a sick society, and im-
mediately gave it up.

(Signed) Henry Oaten.
Dated Dec. 16th, 1852.


Statement referring to the above case, received from Mr.
Henry Edward Clawser, who was a visitor at the Infirmary,
and witnessed the operation.

“ Mitcham, October 20th, 1852.
“T visited the Mesmeric Infirmary, in Bedford Street,


Some of Mr. Capern’s rapid Cures. 21


on the 11th October, and saw Mr. Capern mesmerise a
person’s hand which was dreadfully swollen with the gout:
and the patient said he had not been able to use it for several
weeks. In two minutes and half the swelling went down, and
he could use his arm as well as he ever could in his life:
neither has the pain nor swelling returned. I feel a pleasure
in adding my testimony to the above.

“ Henry Epwarp Ciawser.”


IV. Hysteria with severe convulsions.

Christine Matthews, 9, Medway Street, Westminster, was
admitted a patient August 25th, and ceased attending Octo-
ber 15th, for violent and frequent neuralgia, hysterical con-
vulsions and insensibility, . Sleep was induced at the first mes-
merisation in two minutes and a half ; though she had never seen
mesmerism in her life. In her sleep she stated that she should
be cured. She had 33 sittings, and no fit after the first.


Copy of a letter received from Christine Matthews.


“9, Medway Street, Westminster,

“ Oct. 15th, 1852.
“Sir,—I feel deeply sensible of the kind attention you
have paid to me during my heavy affliction, which was


hysterical with striving fits, and had lasted for upwards of
four years, and unrelieved, though I was under eight medical
men in town and country. A long time under Dr. Golding
Bird at Guy’s Hospital, under Dr. Burgess at Yarmouth, and
Drs. Bean, Beck, Elston, Meadows, Peacock, and Sampson
at Ipswich. After the first sitting I found great relief: but,
after attending daily for six weeks, I am happy to say that I
had not had one fit during the whole time: neither do I feel
the least symptom of any kind. Previously to my application
to the Mesmeric Infirmary, I used to have three or four
severe fits a day; and my sufferings were most distressing.
And now, Sir, feeling deeply grateful, I would return you
my sincere thanks for the cure that you, under the blessing
of God, have been able to accomplish.
“T remain, your grateful and obedient servant,
“CuristinE MatrHews.
“To Mr. Capern.”


V. Tic Douloureux, Nervousness, and an Affection of the
Heart (with mesmeric sympathy of taste).
Mrs. Ann Doeg, 17, Goodge Street, states, that above
four months ago, she experienced violent paroxysms of pain
in the face and head, accompanied with giddiness. She has


22 Sympathy of Taste.


been confined to her bed fourteen days at a time, and been
under the care of medical men in Kent, and was latterly
under the treatment of Dr. Thompson, Charlotte Street, who
assured her that medicine was not likely to affect her case, as
she wanted quietude and rest. On her naming to Dr. Thomp-
son that she intended applying to the Mesmeric Infirmary, that
gentleman advised her making the attempt, a friend of his
having been benefitted by mesmerism. The paroxysms, at
times, were fearfully agonizing ; her life was a continuation of
misery, and the least excitement occasioned an attack. She
attended at the Infirmary, and, on relating her sufferings to
Mr. Capern he immediately requested her to be seated, and
in a few minules she was put into the mesmeric sleep. She
awoke in about twenty minutes free from pain. This was on
the 14th November. She remained free from any paroxysms
until Monday, the 6th of December, when she was awakened
at midnight by some of her friends from the country, and
dressed herself to receive them. This sudden exposure occa-
sioned another attack, which was again completely relieved by
Mr. Capern giving her another sitting. She is now mes-
merised for the palpitation of the heart and nervousness, and
is deriving benefit.


NOTE BY MR. CAPERN.


This patient is extremely susceptible of the mesmeric in-
fluence ; she may be put in a state of coma by a look in
fifteen seconds, by taking a wine glass of mesmerised water,
or by the inhalation of mesmerised air. The sympathy of
taste is displayed or proved without contact of the person
with whom she sympathizes. On the 11th of December, I
tried the effects of the taste by drinking a glass of water,
at the same time looking intently towards her. This imme-
diately produced motions of the mouth, larynx, and throat,
similar to my own ;* and, after I had drunk the greater portion
of the water, she said, “I have taken enough of the water ;
[ will take no more: thank you.” Finding the sympathy of
taste so great, and having a small phial containing a prepar-
ation as received from Mr. Purland, the dentist, containing
brandy, myrrh, &c., as a gargle, I was induced to try the
experiment at a distance of four or five feet. Immediately
on my applying the bottle to my lips, and taking a small
portion into my mouth, she gave evident proofs of her disap-
proval of the taste, by stating that she had a great dislike to
brandy, and requested that I would desist and not give her


Some of Mr. Capern’s rapid Cures.


any more. She instantly said she should be sick; and, on
her giving evidences of it, I requested Mrs. Sherbourne, the
matron, to assist me in taking her down stairs. She de-
scended with us cautiously, and, when in the back garden,
she relieved her stomach. On her being awakened from her
sleep, she knew nothing of the occurrence, and we learnt that
she had the greatest repugnance to the taste of brandy.


VI. Severe pain from Injury of a Foot.

Thomas Hayes, postman, 31, Charles Street, Hampstead
Road, states, that nearly three months since he injured his
foot by a blow ; was not able to bend it, and was compelled,
when walking, to rest the weight of his body on the heel.
The pain was considerable, and the only relief he experienced
was by his son rubbing the injured part. It was inflamed
and much swollen. He was alarmed as to the result, being
apprehensive that he should be compelled to relinquish his
duty, when fortunately he met Mr. Capern at Mr. Andrews’,
Post-office keeper, in Tottenham Court Road, who, observing
that he walked with difficulty, and apparently in pain, offered
to relieve him, and in a few minutes, to his great surprise and
comfort, the pain disappeared, and has not since returned.

Tuomas Hayes.
Jan. 3rd, 1853. (Witness) Wiuiam Love ty.


I have seen Mr. Capern relieve several persons at different
times, that he has met afflicted at my house.
A. ANDREW.


VII. Agonizing Scrofulous Enlargement of the Right
Knee. (White Swelling.)

George Townsend, son of Mr. George Townsend, 14,
Upper Mary-le-bonée Street, aged 34 years, admitted June
30th. Statement of Mrs. Townsend his mother :—About
fifteen months ago, he fell from his crib, and injured his
right knee. A swelling commenced and he became lame, and
complained of ‘great pain. A surgeon was applied to, who
ordered medicines, and leeched and blistered the limb for six
months. No improvement whatever resulted from this mode
of treatment. On the contrary, the knee increased in size, he
became weaker and weaker, and the knee gave proofs that
the disease was advancing. His moans were truly distressing
to hear. He was generally seated on a chair near the win-
dow, and from day to day was continually crying out, “ Oh,
bad knee! bad knee! bad knee!” He could not allow it
being touched. His mother then applied to Mr. Gay, of
Finsbury Pavement, who considered it scrofula, gave him


24 Cure of a White Swelling.


iron medicines and lotions. As he still became worse under
this treatment, his mother took the poor little sufferer to Mr.
Ayling, of Upper Marylebone Street, who concurred with
the opinion expressed by Mr. Gay, and, in addition to the
medicines, painted the knee with tincture of iodine. His
health was now much impaired, and his appearance indi-
cated a steady progress to dissolution. This hitherto fine
child was a pitiable object, ouly repeating, “bad knee! bad
knee !”” from day to day; and he pinched his mother’s breasts
until they became discoloured whenever she attempted to put
his stocking on the affected leg. Mr. A. then kindly introduced
the case to the consideration of some of his medical friends
at the Middlesex Hospital. Mr. Campbell De Morgan, and
the house-surgeon saw him. They considered the case was
a desperate one; they suggested the application or use of
splints, and, should they not succeed, considered that am-
putation would be unavoidable. There appeared, then, no
hope for the parent but to witness the amputation of the
little sufferer’s limb, or to see him consigned to an early
tomb. The latter would have been preferred. No hope re-
maining, the anguish of the parent’s heart may be faintly
conceived, when, providentially, a relative of Mrs. Towns-
end’s, residing at Exeter, recommended mesmerism, having
witnessed mesmeric phenomena at Mr. Parker’s parties, and
known many cures performed by that power at Exeter and
Tiverton. As the last resource, Mrs. Townsend who had also
been present at one of Mr. Parker’s parties,* took her son
to the Infirmary, 9, Bedford Street, Bedford Square. Mr.
Capern instantly commenced to operate on the suffering
child, his only request being that they would attend regu-
larly, and desist from taking medicines. After the third
mesmerisation there was evidently a mitigation of the pain,
and, after the first week, he would cry if not taken to the In-
Jirmary in proper time. The improvement in the limb became
every week more decided, the hue of health appeared in the
cheek of this beautiful child, and Mrs. Townsend’s neighbours,
generally, congratulated her on his altered and deliyhtful
appearance, whilst others, with this powerful proof, would not
believe the improvement to be the effects of mesmerism.
Mrs. Townsend believes that after the first month he eaxpe-
rienced no pain; but was perpetually at play, hopping about
the room, and took no notice of an accidental blow. Two
months after his admission he could rest his toe on the ground.


* Mr. Parker may have the heartfelt ition « of thus ienlen been the in-


direct means of terminating a poor child’s suffe rings, and preventing the loss of
his leg.—Zois¢.


Some of Mr. Capern’s rapid Cures. 25


He can now place his whole foot on the ground. The limb is
gaining strength and power of motion, although the knee is
still enlarged ; but there is a diminution of two inches and
three quarters in its circumference. Mesmerised water was
occasionally given him to drink, and the limb washed with it.
He was put into the mesmeric sleep only twice : local passes,
with contact, were invariably made, frequently with both
hands, from above the knee downward.


VIII. Rheumatic Gout.

John Inkle, 12, Dudley Street, St. Giles, states, that on
the 28th June, he had a second attack of rheumatic gout in
the back, hip joint, and legs, that confined him to his bed for
six weeks, except that he occasionally got up in fine weather
in order to be assisted to the King’s College Hospital. Re-
ceiving no benefit there, he applied to the Homceopathic Hos-
pital, Bloomsbury, and, finding no progress from the infinitesi-
mal treatment, he was taken to the Workhouse, where the sur-
geon used a lotion which increased the pain so much that he
left the place. He then became a patient at the Gerrard
Street Dispensary, where he remained three weeks, experienc-
ing only a slight mitigation of the pain. He was induced to
apply to the Mesmeric Infirmary, on the 6th of September,
at that time ignorant of what mesmerism meant. Mr. Ca-
pern promptly gave him confidence, and a sitting. The result
was, that the pains were driven from one part of the limb to
another, and within ten minutes the relief was so great that he
leaped down the stairs, and walked through the passage with
the greatest ease. He had experienced no rest night or day
from the day he was attacked until Mr. Capern operated
upon him. He had not earned sixpence during that time.
On the fourth day after being mesmerised he earned three
shillings. On the fifteenth of September he appeared before
the Committee, and thanked the gentlemen for the great
benefit derived, stating that he was cured.

The passes were generally made locally with contact,
commencing above the seat of pain. Occasionally the hand
was placed on the part. Even when the passes were made
without contact, but at a little distance, he felt as if the blood
was trickling down the limb, just as he did when they were
made with contact. It was particularly pleasing to hear him
rejoicing the morning after he had earned three shillings for
his starving wife and children. Every article of furniture
was at that time in the hands of the broker. Had Satan
anything to do with this cure? Was this poor, hard-working
Englishman, almost in a state of nudity and in the greatest


26 Dr. Cowan’s wretched folly.


depth of misery, influenced by a kind diabolical emissary
from the infernal regions? and was the operator induced,
even unconsciously, by secret solicitations of impure and un-
holy spirits, to endeavour to relieve this suffering man? if so,
let us not speak harshly of those invisible agents from what-
ever part of God’s creation they come, but at all times invoke
their aid in assisting us in this holy work.*


IX. Rheumatic Gout.

George Arnold, 24 years of age, harness-maker, 22,
Charles Street, Hampstead Road, has been suffering severely
from a second attack of rheumatic gout for the last fourteen
weeks. He first experienced sudden pains in the limbs, more
especially in the lower extremities. On his return from his
labour at Highgate, a surgeon attended on him, and it was
only after being confined to his bed for six weeks that he was
able with difficulty to dress himself and walk across his


* With a chance of disgusting our readers we record the following state-
ment from the Salisbury and Winchester Journal, Jan. 22, 1853 :—*‘* Odiham.
Mechanics’ Institute—Through the interest of Dr. Mac Intyre, one of the vice-
presidents of the institution, the members were favoured with a lecture from
Dr. Cowan, of Reading, ‘ Mesmerism condemned on its own evidence,’ was the
subject ; the lecturer arguing that the practice of mesmerism was sinful, and
that the wonderful effects produced by it are the results of Satanic agency. In
support of this assumption the lecturer read from the publications of professors
of the art accounts of disclosures, revelations, predictions, &c., by persons in
the mesmeric state, a faculty he contended that could not be possibly acquired
by human aid alone. The lecture was replete with advice, caution, and admoni-
tion to the young, warning them of the consequences resulting from a departure
from the path inculcated by divine truth. The room was crowded on the occasion
by a highly respectable audience, including several gentlemen of the medical
profession. A vote of thanks proposed by J. G. Seymour, Esq., and seconded
by William Brooks, Esq., was given to Dr. Cowan, who replied that the best
way in which they could thank him was to seriously think over what he had
advanced.”” This poor orator may glory in the presence of village geese, but the
intelligent and the good look upon him with pity.

Let us turn for refreshment and a better view of human nature to a Dublin
newspaper of the same month and nearly the same date :—‘‘ Dublin Mesmeric
Association.—Mesmerism a Curative Power.—The first annual meeting of the
above association was held on Monday evening, January 17th, at the committee
rooms, 13, Anglesea Street. The chair was taken by the patron of the associa-
tion, His Grace the Archbishop of Dublin, who at some length addressed the
meeting on the value of mesmerism as a curative agent, citing, as an instance,
the benefit which he himself had received after the first physicians in Dublin had
failed in their efforts to cure him. The report of the past year was then read by
the honorary secretary, who enumerated a variety of cures effected in the in-
firmary of the association, including diseases to which we were not previously
aware that mesmerism could be so successfully applied. In moving and second-
ing the various resolutions, several argumentative and eloquent speeches were
delivered, the last of which was an earnest appeal to all the believers in mes-
merism to co-operate with the associaton in their efforts for its establishment,
and to stimulate the honest but sceptical public to a candid inquiry into its
claims.’’—Zoist. -


Defective Instruction in University College. 27


room. This was a slight improvement. He was induced to
apply to the London University College Hospital, where he
was a patient three weeks, deriving no benefit. He applied
to the Middlesex Hospital, but was not admitted a patient,
although they gave him medicine. This treatment produced
no more relief than the medicines of University College
Hospital. The pains were constant and severe. He had no
sleep or quiet night or day for six weeks; he walked with
difficulty and in misery; could not stand alone without the
assistance of sticks: his knees were almost powerless and
much swollen. Whilst on his way in Gower Street to the
University College Hospital on the morning of February 12th,
he met a stranger, who, observing his condition, requested
he would return and call at 9, Bedford Street, Bedford Square,
and that he would have some good done for him. On his
entering the building he was invited by the stranger, whom
he found to be Mr. Capern, to the second floor. Mr. Capern
said that he was glad to see him, and requested him to sit,
assuring him that he would not be hurt, and desired that he
would look Mr. Capern firmly in the face. Mr. Capern then
gazed at him about five minutes, when he felt unusual sensa-
tions in the legs and knees, as if the blood had found anew
channel or a greater impetus was given to it, and felt also a
throbbing feeling. In less than another five minutes he felt a
comfortable genial warmth diffused over the whole body: the
pain had nearly disappeared, and the knees became flexible.
He was able to move them with more freedom than he could
have done before, had all the gold in London been given him.
His friend, whom he understood to be Mr. Capern, then
requested that he would go to the University College Hos-
pital, shew himself to the surgeon, and relate the facts as
they had presented themselves: and also requested him to
give to the surgeon one of the reports of the Mesmeric
Infirmary, accompanying it with his compliments. He did so,
and the young gentleman in attendance appeared to be asto-
nished at the circumstance.*


* The young gentleman was of course perfectly ignorant of the truth of
mesmerism through the perverseness of his instructors. Fifteen years ago exqui-
site cures were effected with mesmerism in the University College Hospital.
But through the working of Dr. Sharpey, Mr. Quain, Dr. A. T. Thompson,
Dr. Davis, Mr. Liston, and others, upon the Council of the College, mesmerism
was suddenly forbidden, and thus during fifteen years hundreds of poor sufferers
have been left a prey to disease who might have been relieved or cured: and now
splendid mesmeric cures are effected in a building absolutely in sight of the Col-
lege, and shaming it, its councils, and committees, and medical teachers.—Zoist.


Some of Mr. Capern’s rapid Cures.


X. Neuralgia.

Georgiana Couzens, who had been suffering from the
severe pain of tic douloureux for four months, and had tried
numerous remedies without the least success, was kindly per-
suaded by Mr. Lyle (in whose service she is) to try the effect
of mesmerism, and feels great pleasure in stating that, after
having had it applied eight times by Mr. Capern (to whom
she will ever feel most grateful), the pain has entirely sub-
sided, and she has reason to think permanently.


“Tn so far as expression of pain and acknowledgment of
relief from the aids of the Mesmeric Infirmary, I have much
satisfaction in adding my testimony to the above.

“ WitiiaM G, Lytr.*
“17, Bloomsbury Street, Bedford Square.”


XI. Injury to a hand and arm.

Mr. David Holsgrove, ironfounder, 21, Olive Street,
Bishop Wearmouth Pans, Sunderland, whilst on his passage
on board a steamer from Sunderland to London, severely
injured his arm and hand by a fall: he had constant pains.
He called at the Infirmary, Bedford Street, and Mr. Capern
without ceremony immediately relieved him. The following
is the patient’s own account sent to Mr. Capern :—


** 21, Olive Street, Feb. 22, 1853.

“ My dear Sir,—. . . . You are aware that I am an anchor
and chain maker. A large ship of 1000 tons, belonging to
London, her name Bank of England, got a new chain in
London. It proved faulty or not very good, so that a gen-
tleman in London wrote to me to go to Shields, seven miles
north of Sunderland, and inspect the chain and put it all
right. When put right, and tested by twelve strong men,
I was going to put the chain down in the chain trunk, but
the men let it slip out of their hands, and it ran off the deck
with fury, and got me down on my side in the bites or coils;
about five tons weight ran below, and tossed me about on my
arm: and while the twelve men were looking on, my son, a
lad 16 years old, ran in to me and was knocked down ; and,
strange to say, yet true, we were both drawn to the deck-
pipe, and my boy’s boot got fixed in the pipe and stopped
the chain, and saved us both. He of course was not hurt,
when I got picked up, and my arm from shoulder, elbow, and
all my fingers were swelled to a great size: so I got on shore


* This gentleman had presented £10 to the Infirmary: and now presented
five more.—Zoist. .


Some of Mr. Capern’s rapid Cures. 29


to a chemist’s shop, and wanted something for my arm the
pain was so-bad. He told me the best thing I could do was
to put it in warm water, which I did for two hours, and then
got home to Sunderland at half-past eight o’clock. I need
not say I got no sleep that night, but I sat up all night and
tried to magnetize my right arm with my left, and thought I
felt a little easier. By so doing, my shoulder, arm, and
fingers swelled and was very painful, and continued till I got
up to London. A few days afterwards, when I made my
way up to the Bedford Square Mesmeric Institution, and
told you about my accident, you made long passes from my
shoulder to my finger ends and took the pain away. You
would not be more than two or three minutes; but I wrote
it down on a bit of paper in the office at the time if I mis-
take not. I have not had the pain any more: it is now nine
months ago; and, what makes it more surprising to me, the
arm was broke six years ago on the railway by saving two
women from being killed.

“ Now, my dear Sir, I hope you will be able to under-
stand this scrawl writing, and make it out. You can put it
in any way you like and my name to it, and I should be most
happy to answer any letters to the afflicted of the good you
did me at the time, and the pain never returned, and the
swelling all went away in about six weeks. I now send you
post stamps, so when you get it put in the valuable Zoist.
I have got about fourteen of them, and shall get more when
I can afford it; but still I want more information how to
mesmerise. I have not got much done with my daughter :
you will recollect it was on her account that you were so kind
as let me see into your institution to learn to mesmerise.
She has had epileptic fits from being a baby: she is now 19
years of age, and this last week she was very bad. I am
afraid she will quite lose her senses, but I will persevere all
Ican. If there is any books you can recommend I will get
them, as I am quite convinced it will do good.

“David Holsgrove sends his thanks for good received,
being relieved from pain by the hands of Thomas Capern,
and his best wishes for the invaluable institution.

“ T remain, yours respectfully,
“ Davip HotseRove.*

“P.S. Shall be glad to hear from you, and do all in my
power in the good cause.”


* Here is an example to those who are not poor men: and to the members
of the medical profession.—Zoist.


( 30 )


Ill. The Rev. Dr. Maitland, the Rev. Mr. Sandby, and Mr.
Combe on the conduct of the Clergy in the persecution of
Witchcraft. By Anti-Grorioso.


“* Leave nature at full freedom to work her own way, and all will be well.
This is what we aim at, and nothing short of this can come up to our principles.”’
—Bishop Berkeley, Minute Philosopher, 2nd Dialogue.


‘The making anything known which was unknown before, is an innovation
in knowledge ; and if all such innovations had been forbidden, men would have
made a notable progress in the arts and sciences.’”’—Bishop Berkeley, 3rd Dialogue.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


February Ist, 1853.

Six,—Some of your readers may by possibility remember
the case of a ruffian, who was handed up a few years back
before my Lord Mayor, or the grave authorities of Bow
Street (I forget which), for some wantonly outrageous assault.
The main facts of the story are unimportant ; but there were
circumstances which may have fixed the incidents in more
memories than my own. When the man was called upon for
his defence, he took no notice whatever of the accusation,
but poured forth all the vials of his wrath upon an unhappy
witness. “ That fellow Johnson,” he kept exclaiming, “ bor-
rowed an umbrella, and forgot to return it.” When requested
to confine his observations to the charge against himself, he
still persevered in his taunts about the umbrella, and with a
petty spite that astonished the bystanders, seemed only anxi-
ous to damage the character of the unlucky Johnson. . His
own position of a cowardly assailant and offender against the
law appeared a point perfectly immaterial ; if he could but
fasten an imputation, however frivolous, upon the man who
presumed to give testimony against him, his small malice was
satisfied ; and having accomplished this feat, as he hoped, he
walked off to prison with a glow of delight, as if justice had
received an ample atonement.

This little event in the annals of the police was brought
to my mind the other day by the perusal of an article in the
Theological Critic, by Dr. Maitland, which was recently
placed before me by a clerical friend. The question under
consideration is not one, indeed, about which I feel any con-
cern, viz., “the conduct of the clergy with regard to magic
and sorcery ;” but as the article takes the shape of a dispute
between two of our writers on mesmerism,—one of them
being a staunch and valued friend to our cause, the other an
antagonist with some strange prepossessions against it,—the
matter is not wholly devoid of interest. As you have done
me the favour, more than once,- of inserting some of my ob-


Dr.. Maitland’s opposition to Mesmerism. 31


servations on mesmeric topics, perhaps you will not refuse
me a hearing on this occasion, unless, indeed, you regard the
point under review as foreign to the pages of The Zoist.*

In 1849, the Rev. Dr. Maitland, “ sometime librarian to
the late Archbishop of Canterbury,” published a small pam-
phlet, called, I//ustrations and Enquiries relating to Mesmerism,
Part I., with the purport of propounding some very peculiar
views as to the unlawfulness of clairvoyance. He cited co-
piously from The Zoist, shewing himself, in general, a believer
in its statements, and admitting at the same time that for
“more than twenty years he had formed a very decided opi-
nion on the subject,” having arrived at the conclusion that
mesmeric phenomena were “ realities.” But then came this
question, “ What is mesmerism, and what is it like?” and
then again we were asked, what was the true nature of
ancient magic divination? and what were the “ familiar
spirits” of Scripture? Perhaps (he says) ancient magic was
only a pretence, and perhaps the sorcerers of old times were
cheats: still his question is, did not these sorcerers employ
the realities of clairvoyance as part of their evil system? and
were not sorceries, divinations, charms, witches, familiar
spirits, &c., forbidden in Scripture as abominations to the
Lord? and therefore asks Dr. Maitland, if clairvoyance be
identical with some of their arts, did not clairvoyance fall
under the terms of the divine prohibition, and is not mes-
merism a practice which God in his Bible has forbidden man
to exercise ?

You, Mr. Editor, want not to be told, how Dr. Maitland
and his theory were disposed of in The Zoist for January,
1850. Whether the writer of the unanswered and unan-
swerable article be really the eminent person to whom com-
mon fame has ascribed it, you know best: at any rate, it is
worthy of that great man’s distinguished pen: the author of
Historic Doubts need feel no shame if he ever found that
clear and convincing “ Review of Dr. Maitland’s Book”
bound up in the same volume which contains his own original
and most successful pamphlet.


* We are always happy to hear from our intelligent correspondent. . His first
paper, on the Fire-away Style of Philosophy, No. XXXIII., p. 68, was ini-
mitable in its way, and attracted much observation. His Comments upon Pro-
fessor Gregory's Letters, No. XXXIV., p. 201, were somewhat severe: but
nothing could be better than his reply to Blackwood’s question, What is Mes-
merism ? No. XXXV., p. 274: and his fourth paper, On the Roman Catholic
Priesthood and Mesmerism, afforded us some useful information, No. XXXVIL.,
p- 152.—Zoist.

t Zoist, Vol. VII., p. 395. It has since been reprinted in a separate pam-
phlet, entitled, Mesmeric Phenomena: their reality and importance, attested by
Dr. Maitland, the Edinburgh Review, and others. Bailliére, 219, Regent Street.


.


32 Two replies in The Zoist to Dr. Maitland.


It may be convenient to offer an outline of the answer.
Good reasons are given in the first place, which make it more
than doubtful whether Dr. M.’s interpretation be correct,
and whether the “ witchcraft” of the Old Testament and the
employment of “familiar spirits” be identical with clairvoy-
ance and other mesmeric phenomena. The translation is
perfectly novel, and rests on the etymology of one Hebrew
word; and if that translation be incorrect, the argument
falls to the ground.

But, says the Review, let us for argument’s sake suppose
the translation to be demonstrably established as correct : let
it be supposed that the passages in question were understood
by the ancient Hebrews as applicable to persons who were in
reality mesmeric clairvoyants, or their mesmerisers: what is
the inference? Simply, that the Mosaic Law forbade appli-
cation to be made to them. And then comes the next ques-
tion, whether that Mosaic Law be binding on us.

The reviewer shows, that unless Dr. Maitland can prove
mesmerism to be an evil in itself (a position which he would
find somewhat difficult), its prohibition to the Jew under the
Mosaic Law would not affect us, who are Gentiles. There
was a reason for that prohibition, which reason has ceased.
The reason was, that every attempt to resort to the aid of
demons, whether those demons were imaginary or real, was
wrong ; everything connected with idolatry, however remotely,
was forbidden: and if mesmerism were mixed up with idola-
trous practices, mesmerism, in that case, became so far an
unlawful art.

The argument is so cogent, and so lucidly arranged, that
if the reader has not yet examined the Review, he will be
well rewarded by a perusal.

In the following number of The Zoist, the Rev. Mr.
Sandby, who has in so many ways conferred service on the
cause of mesmerism, pursued the subject still further ; filling
up the outline with those details, “upon which the first
writer from the evident purpose of brevity had dwelt far less
than his readers could desire.” Various passages of Scrip-
ture were adduced or referred to by him, in which the pro-
hibition of “familiar spirits” is introduced, and their refer-
ence alone to the idolatrous customs of the people around is
established beyond doubt. If the first writer drove the nail
home, the second clinched it: and Dr. Maitland’s interpre-
tation of his anti-clairvoyant texts, with his hypothesis and
its consequences, was at an end.*


* Zoist, Vol. VIII., p. 1. This is also reprinted together with the other review.


Dr. Maitland has not attempted an Answer. 33


At the same time we must add, that though our friend
entered very fully into Dr. Maitland’s argument, and dis-
cussed each separate point most closely and logically, he still
treated his opponent with every courtesy, “ thanked him for
his honourable testimony ” to the facts of clairvoyance, called
him “a lover of truth,” and expressed a hope of seeing him
one day enlisted on the side of mesmerism.

Of course, it was expected that after two such decisive
and argumentative reviews of Dr. Maitland’s I/lustrations and
Enquiries, Part I., some notice, if not some reply, would at
least make its appearance on the part of the reverend com-
mentator, more especially as in his preface he spoke of “ pub-
lishing first a small part of what he had written.” The pub-
lication of “ Part the First,” generally implies that “ Part
the Second” will follow, and at no unreasonable distance of
time ; and the mesmeric public were all looking out for an
answer: but the oracle has not spoken, or at least not spoken
on this subject. The ex-librarian has maintained a profound
silence upon the charge of “ misinterpretation ” that has been
laid against him: his translation of the Hebrew word “ aub,”
his character as a commentator with hypothesis, arguments,
and inference were all at stake; he is accused of having
libelled and calumniated mesmerism, yet he neither “ justi-
fies” nor owns himself wrong; but to “ dumb forgetfulness
a prey,” he evidently wishes, with Baillie Nicol Jarvie, that
his boots had been full of scalding water, ere he had worn
them in the erudite errand on which he had sallied forth.*


* In No. XXVIIIL., Dr. Elliotson accuses Dr. Maitland of two gross mis-
representations : and Dr. Maitland has not yet shewn himself able to reply.

‘In my note to the motto of Article VI., I repelled Dr. Maitland’s accusa-
tion that we found philosophy on man,—that is, upon human speculations, as
though philosophy could be founded on anything but observation of nature. His
readers would suppose that he had seen in The Zoist an exhortation to found
philosophy on man. His words are, p. 48,—

‘** But among the advocates and practitioners of mesmerism, there are many
who adopt the Bible, and are not willing to see all religious belief swept away to
make room for something contradistinguished as a true philosophy, and founded on
man instead of God.’

“The passage in The Zoist to which he refers for this misrepresentation, has
no such words; it says, ‘founded on the physiology of man,’ i.e., upon the
handywork of Dr. Maitland’s Creator. The physiology of man can mean only
the laws of human nature ; and moral philosophy ought to be so founded.

‘* But this is not the whole of Dr. Maitland’s misrepresentation. He quotes
this and a similar passage simply from The Zoist, leading his readers to suppose
that they were the words of the editors: whereas they are no such thing. They are
the words of a gentleman, named Atkinson, who was never in any way connected
with The Zoist, and bear his signature: and they do not occur in any communi-
cation sent by him to The Zoist, but in a paper read before the Phrenological
Society, whose proceedings The Zoist regularly recorded, just as the Atheneum
records the proceedings of various societies ; and The Zoist, whether it agrees or

VOL. XI. D


34 Two more unanswered Accusations of Dr. Maitland.


And now comes in that little point in his conduct which
recalls to my mind the odd police transaction mentioned
above. Though this learned expositor, standing arraigned,
as he does, at the bar of scholastic opinion for a blunder in
criticism, takes no heed whatever of the charge that is


not with Mr. Atkinson, has no more to do with these statements than the 4¢he-
neum with the various statements which occur in the papers read before the so-
cieties whose proceedings it records.

‘* These two instances of misrepresentation agree very badly with his parade
of his religious belief. All is anise and cummin, and neglect of the weightier
matters of the law: and his conduct is calculated to injure true Christianity more
than all the dogmatic and formulary religion, which signalizes the present day as
strongly as it did the time of Christ, can do good.”


The motto and note to which this refers are as follows :—

** If this be a real power, is it natural or supernatural? Is it lawful or un-
lawful, in whole or in part ?”’ p. 598.

‘* If this act or power, in its different branches, can be applied to medicine or
surgery, can this use of it be separated from other uses? and whether it can or
cannot, is the application a lawful one?” p. 600.—The British Magazine, Nov.,
1849. Review of Dr. Maitland’s book by a friend of that gentleman.*


* “ What can have been the education of men, though at Oxford or Cam-
bridge, who can ask such a childish question, as whether moving the hands up
and down before a sick person, or upon an agonized part, and looking at him,
and thus restoring ease and health, is natural or supernatural—miraculous, law-
ful or unlawful? Are men who ask such questions superior in information and
intelligence to an old village nurse or even an untutored Indian? Can they be fit
to instruct the people as ministers of religion, and point out the distinction of
the miraculous characters of revelation from the stupendous universal laws of
nature ? But Dr. Maitland and his friend the reviewer consider such doating to
be adopting the Bible, and philosophy to be founded on man instead of God: as
though philosophy or science were anything else than the knowledge of the na-
tural truths of the universe, inanimate, animate, and animal. Believers should
hold it sinful to pretend to derive their own nonsensical opinions upon physical,
historical, or moral matters from the Bible, and then attempt to damage the
good name of others, not so ill informed or so weak as themselves, by accusing
them of not adopting the Bible. Christ taught us to learn men from their
works ; and a Christian ought to learn nature from observing nature. Philosophy
founded on man !

‘*The Archbishop of Canterbury four hundred years ago would have dismissed


a librarian so superstitious as to fancy mesmeric passes supernatural. He knew
that—


“ Miracles are ceased,
And therefore we must needs admit the means,
How things are perfected.”
Archbishop of Canterbury, in King Henry V., Act i., Sc. i.


‘* Had Dr. Maitland and his reviewer lived earlier, they would no doubt have
considered the natural philosophy of Friar Bacon to be witchcraft and unlawful.
I wonder they can stand the electric telegraph or a balloon.

**The manual classes in our towns are far above such ignorance, and begin to
look with contempt upon the teachers in Israel who write and discourse ignorance
and superstition. Were Lord Bacon alive, he would still repeat what he said in
his Novum Organum :— Religion is full of vile suspicions and imbecile contempt
of all the improvements and discoveries of philosophy,’ (vol. i., p. 89.)

‘* Happily for us, we have clergymen who understand science, and, like Bishop


Dr. Maitland shuffles unworthily. 35


brought against him, he still endeavours, like his prototype,
to cast a slur upon one of the witnesses, not indeed upon the
subject under consideration, but upon a matter as foreign to
the real point at issue, as was the loan of the umbrella in the
original transaction. And strange enough too, the imputa-
tion regards a question of “borrowing,” not of borrowing
indeed without return or acknowledgment, but borrowing
that of which, in Dr. Maitland’s opinion, use ought not to
have been made. But that which has struck me so parti-
larly, is the exhibition of the same poor spirit of petty vin-
dictiveness that was displayed by the worthy character in the
hands of the police. The latter could not, indeed, gainsay
the truthfulness of the accusation; but he could at least
“pay the witness off” for the impertinence of his evidence,
and give him to understand that no one should appear with
impunity against a man of his degree.

It will be remembered, that in Mr. Sandby’s work, called
Mesmerism and its Opponents, a standard book on the sub-
ject, with which few of your readers are unacquainted, the
reverend gentleman entered into argument with Dr. M‘Neile
upon the question of Satanic agency. The absurdity of
M‘Neile’s opinion was exposed ; but then came the observa-
tion from sundry antagonists, that an opinion which was
entertained by so many good and pious men ought to have
great weight, and that if they objected to mesmerism, surely
mesmerism was wrong. Upon this it was shewn that the
piety of an opponent was not a test,—that religion was
indeed the medicine of the soul, but that if religion were
transmuted into superstition, such medicine became rather a
noxious ingredient ; and that if the clergy, instead of preach-
ing against sin, chose to preach against science, such clergy
were but blind guides, and the less that they were attended
to the better. It was next shewn that such preaching had
not been unfrequent ; that inoculation had been preached at,
vaccination had been preached at, astronomy and geology
had been preached at, and that the modern preaching against
mesmerism was nothing more than the old feeling under a
new face.


In the course of his argument Mr. Sandby entered a


Butler, acknowledge that Christianity is a republication of ‘ natural religion in
its genuine simplicity,’ and that ‘moral precepts are precepts the reason of
which we see’ and which ‘ arise out of the nature of the case itself prior to ex-
ternal command.’ A life of usefulness and virtue—of true philosophy—is the
best creed. An enlightened man, as Milton says of the divine spirit, prefers


** Before all temples the upright heart and pure.”


“‘ Joun Exxiorson.”’—Zoist.


p2


36 Passage in Mr. Sandby’s Work attacked by Dr. Maitland.


little into the fate which had attended the accusation of witch-
craft: for here certain of the clergy had not been content
with preaching, but had proceeded to persecuting: popish,
puritanic, and presbyterian divines had been all active in
the onslaught; and to their account a large proportion of
the crime must be placed.

And here comes in the passage, which offers to Dr. Mait-
land a handle for an attack. In presenting an historic state-
ment of this persecution against witchcraft, Mr. Sandby
quotes Combe’s well-known work on the Constitution of Man.
Mr. Combe, in his ninth chapter, had gone at some length
into the topic, giving copious but harrowing details, many of
which he had himself extracted from the Foreign Quarterly
Review, in an article now generally ascribed to Sir W. Scott.
The leading points of Combe’s narrative Mr. S. compressed
into a paragraph of about fifteen or twenty lines, not pre-
tending in the slightest degree that the said paragraph was
the result of his own researches, but carefully adding, at
the bottom of the page, the following foot-note :—“I have
abridged the above facts and figures from Combe’s admirable
work on the Constitution of Man, and rely on his accuracy
for their correctness.” The main position that Popes’ had
fulminated—that the Roman Catholic clergy had actively
carried out their decrees, and that numerous victims had suf-
fered, was a point too undeniable to be called in doubt:
whether all the details were to be depended upon, was
another question; and here, our author exercised his discre-
tion and referred to authority: nay, he did more, for he adds
the expression “of a hope that there must be some mistake
in the calculations.” As, however, it is desirable that your
readers should understand what was actually written, 1 will
give the passage entire, merely observing by the way, that
Mr. Sandby was guilty of the grave impropriety of terming
it “a tale of horror.”


“The persecutions for witchcraft did not commence in Europe
till towards the close of the fifteenth century ; that is, when what
are called the dark, or middle ages, were rapidly passing away. In
1484, at the time of our Richard III., Pope Innocent VIIL., in his
conclave of Cardinals, denounced death to all who should be con-
victed of witchcraft. The succeeding Popes, Alexander VI., and
even Pope Leo X., the polished and enlightened Leo, lent their aid
in this fearful persecution. About 1515, just before Luther com-
menced his career, 500 witches were executed in Geneva; 1,000
were executed in the diocese of Como. In Lorraine 900 were burnt.
In France, the multitude of executions is called “incredible.” In
Germany, after the publication of the Pope’s Bull, the number of


Dr. Maitland accuses unjustly.


victims stated is so portentous, as to lead to the hope that there
must be some mistake in the calculation. And we are told that the
clergy -went about preaching what were called ‘ Witch Sermons,’
and inspiring the people with a fanatic ardour in the pursuit.”*


The above, then, is the passage upon which an adverse
critic has fastened; for in June, 1852, there comes out, in
the Theological Critic, vol. ii. part 2, an article by Dr. Mait-
land, ‘‘ On the conduct of the Clergy with regard to Magic
and Sorcery,” in which the Popes and Catholic clergy, who
are referred to in these quotations from Mr. Combe, are
taken under the writer’s especial protection. Dr. Maitland,
whose learning no one questions, has consulted the original
documents, and favours us with the fruit of his investigations.
The language attributed to the Papal decrees, he thinks, has
been exaggerated; and the number of those who fell victims
to the persecution overstated. Whether, however, upon care-
fully analyzing the above paragraph, and the quotations which
Dr. Maitland himself produces to disprove it, any serious dis-
crepancy will be found to exist between the two statements
on the essential point, the reader, who studies them both,
will be the best judge. Your pages can only allow of a most
brief exposition.

I. It is shewn that the attack against witchcraft did not
commence so late as in the time of Innocent the VIII., but
in the pontificate of his predecessor. Whether humanity
gains much by this change of date may be a question, upon
which we will not dwell; but when Pope Innocent the VIII.,
at length published his Bull, he did not actually “ denounce
death,’ as Mr. Combe states ; he only gave power to his In-
quisitors to “correct, imprison, and punish,” all offenders in
Sorcery. But when we remember the practical effect, too
commonly, of imprisonment by an Inquisitor, it may be
doubted whether the phrase, “denounced death,” be any
serious misrepresentation : wrong they are as to the /etter ;
but, perhaps, the spirit of the Pope’s Bull has been only too
faithfully rendered by Combe and Sandby. II. It is next
said, that “Pope Alexander VI. /ent his aid in the perse-
cution.” A milder phrase than that of “lending aid” can
scarcely be employed: still Dr. M. is displeased, and says,
that “much ado is made about nothing,” and a “ mole-hill
turned into a mountain.” Most obligingly, however, he gives
us an extract from the Bull directed to the Inquisitor of
Lombardy, from which this much ado about nothing was


* Mesmerism and ils Opponents, Second Edition, p. 103.


Dr. Maitland accuses unjustly.


taken, and therein we actually find power is given to the said
Inquisitor to punish and repress all persons of both sexes
who were guilty of practising incantations and diabolical
superstitions (contra easdem utriusque sexis personas dili-
genter inquiratis, easque puniatis et compescatis). To repre-
sent the power given to an Inquisitor to “punish and
repress,” by the gentler term of “lending aid,” Dr. Mait-
land, in his zeal for accuracy, calls making mountains out of
mole-hills. The contrary, however, is the fact; the truth has
been understated, and far more expressive language might,
with great propriety, have been used. III. In regard to
Leo X., however, (unless there were other Bulls on the sub-
ject issued by him,) it would appear that there is a mistake.
Dr. Maitland shews that Leo’s Bull was not designed to
punish, but to enforce moderation: and so far Leo himself
has been misrepresented; but the nature of his Bull proves
too truly the general accuracy of the main allegation. The
Bull was issued to mitigate the severity with which the
Inquisitors acted in punishing those who were guilty of the
abominations of Sorcery. That severity must have been,
indeed, excessive, which required the moderating influences
of a Papal Bull. IV. The statement about Geneva seems
doubtful: the story is not actually disproved; but no great
weight can be attached to it. V. It is next said, “ One thou-
sand were executed in the diocese of Como:” this is all ; and
Dr. M. takes an odd way of contradicting this statement by
proving from the original writer, that “a hundred a-yeur
were burned by the inquisitors in that diocese for some
time.” A hundred victims a-year for some time would soon
mount up to a thousand: and this is all that Mr. Sandby
asserts. And is this the “tale of horror,” at which Dr.
Maitland sneers without intermission as undue and exagger-
ated language on the part of our author? The fact is, that
he is very angry because the latter has exercised his judg-
ment, and did not copy the mistakes of those who went
before him: he simply says that one thousand victims were
executed in Como, by the Romish Inquisitors ; and Dr. Mait-
land, again most obligingly furnishes him with a proof of the
accuracy of his statement. Where is the egregious misre-
presentation here? VI. To the charge of nine hundred being
burnt in Lorraine, Dr. M. brings forward nothing that can
be regarded as a refutation, unless it be that the number
amounted rather to eight hundred. VII. In respect to France,
all that is said is that the “ multitude of executions is called
incredible ;” and, in reply to this cautious statement, Dr.
Maitland simply offers a tedious, dissertation on the inaccu-


Dr. Maitland’s soreness the cause of his attacks. 39


racy of sundry French writers; but he has not ventured to
assert that the number of victims in that country was not
fearfully great. VIII. In regard to Germany, a hope is ex-
pressed that there is a mistake in the calculations of those
who have stated the numbers. Is this hope one of those “ ig-
norant and scandalous falsehoods by which the clergy have
been calumniated,” and in the refutation of which, Dr. Mait-
land, as a great censor morum, has taken Mr. Sandby to task ?
The persecution in Germany was dreadful; and after large
deductions that may be made on the score of this chari-
table hope, and of Dr. Maitland’s unsatisfactory winnowings,
enough remains to establish a “tale of horror,” at which,
though malice may love to make it the subject of a sneer,
humanity cannot reflect without a pang.*

The above, then, are all the points on which Dr. Maitland
has touched in his answer; and, if these points be dissected
carefully, the abatement to be made on the previous allega-
tion will not be large. If our author, indeed, had presented
the statement on his own authority, from a professed exa-
mination of the original documents, he might have been
convicted of inaccuracy in detail, though his general conclu-
sion could not be greatly controverted ; but when confessedly
he appeals to the testimony of another; and when so far
from amplifying that testimony’s language, he has, as his
very accuser admits, subdued and softened it down, he cer-
tainly ought to have been safe from the offensive tone in
which he has been here spoken of. But haeret lateri lethalis
arundo: a vent must be found for choked-up bile; and Mr.
Sandby’s character is to be damaged at any cost ; and, there-
fore an unwarrantable calumny is introduced into the Theo-
logical Critic, which, of course, like all other calumnies will
not fall void to the ground. Mr. Sandby is accused of “ ma-
ligning the Church of which he is a Minister.” Strong lan-
guage this against a brother clergyman, and a somewhat
railing accusation !

I have no right,” says Dr. M., “to be offended with The
Zoist for speaking of clerical dolts. If one should, on any ground,
feel a momentary pain in reading the hard things which some philo-
sophers love to say of the Church, one is pretty sure to be comforted
by finding, within a page or two, something to certify that they
knew no better. ... When, however, anything of the sort comes
from a clergyman the case is different. He may be expected to know
something of the history of his own order, and of the Church of


* It will be seen that the above reply to Dr. Maitland’s observations is
founded upon the data which he himself furnished for his attack. Whether a
much more conclusive reply might not be obtained from a larger inspection of
other historical works, is a question.


40 Dr. Maitland’s Attack most unjustifiable.


which he is a Minister, and to be free from any temptation to malign
either. And when he offers to the public “a tale of horror,”’ made
up of surprising allegations, &c., &c., he cannot be surprised if
some of his brethren enquire into his authorities.”’*


Who would not understand, from the perusal of the above
extract, that in his narrative of the persecutions of witchcraft,
and of the conduct of the clergy with regard to sorcery, Mr.
Sandby, in compiling his “tale of horror,” had marked for
his especial vituperations his own brethren of the Established
Church? Who would not infer “that these surprising alle-
gations” were all laid on the shoulders of that body of which
he is a Minister? This is what Dr. Maitland’s language ex-
presses, and what the writer wished to be understood. A
slander more utterly devoid of truth never fell from any pen.
In his description of those cruel persecutions, which the
charge of witchcraft generated, Mr. Sandby does not present
one single instance which can apply to the clergy of his own
persuasion. His tale of horror and his surprising allegations
relate alone to the clergy of the Church of Rome, to the
clergy of the Presbyterian and Independent Churches, at the
period of the Commonwealth, and to the clergy of the Pres-
byterian Kirk of Scotland ; of none of which churches is he
a Minister. And for a brief reference to this notorious state
of things, which is substantially matter of history, and the
truth of which, in certain points, Dr. Maitland has actually
assisted to confirm, Mr. Sandby is accused by him of “ malign-
ing” the Church to which he belongs. And yet, strange to
say, the very paragraph which Dr. M. has selected in proof
of his accusation, and the very instances which are recited in
it, relate not to the Church of England, as one might expect,
but to the Church of Rome exclusively. Pope Innocent
VIII., Pope Alexander VI. (that monster of iniquity, as most
historians designate him), and the Inquisitors of Lombardy,
are the ill-used men, before whom Dr. Maitland places his
zegis to shield them from the darts of the Protestant Vicar.
And this is called “ exposing the ignorant and scandalous
falsehoods by which the clergy have been calumniated !”
Truly, it is not Mr. Sandby who has calumniated his own
brethren; but Dr. Maitland, who has grossly calumniated
Mr. Sandby. And if the former in his extracts from these
ancient writers, with which he would claim a monopoly of
acquaintance, has not been more conscientiously accurate
than he has been in his insinuations of Mr. Sandby’s “ ma-
lignings,” his emendations of history will not be of much


* Theological Critic, Vol. ii., p. 164.


Dr. Maitland’s Philosophic Indifference. 41


value. He talks, indeed, with much virtuous horror of the
offence of “slyly tampering with historical truth;’ but to
tamper slyly with character is something quite as bad, espe-
cially when the tamperer perverts the language of a brother-
clergyman in the pages of a Theological Review, not nine in
ten of whose readers will know anything whatsoever of the
refutation.

Not that we mean that the researches which have been
made into these ancient records, or the corrections which
have arisen in consequence, are of slight price, and amount
to nothing. On the contrary, it must be admitted that the
ex-librarian has occasionally done service in this respect. All
truth, and all approach to truth, is valuable; and he who
helps us onward in the right path, deserves our thanks, It
is not, therefore, Dr. Maitland’s emendation of historical
error to which we object, it is the uncalled-for spiteful spirit
in which it is conveyed—it is the unjust insinuation with
which it is accompanied, which is the subject of censure.
To tell the truth is one thing: but to snarl, while we are
telling it, proves not so much a love of that which is com-
municated, as malevolence against those to whom it is di-
rected. Dr. Maitland assumes that he shall be accused of
loving persecution in a milder degree, because he may in
some instances have struck off a few’ hundreds from the
number of the witchcraft-victims. ‘There are probably those
who will think it quite enough to say, ‘ Well, but was it not
bad enough to burn hundreds?’ and to represent me as
rather liking and commending the thing in its mitigated
form.” {p. 178.) Timid, worthy gentleman, he need not be
under any such an apprehension ! His philosophic indifference
must be palpable to all who read him. Likings or dislikings
in that matter he has none, and is probably as humane as
most of his craft. His feelings are of a very different order.
To pounce on an error in a transcript from an annalist—to
detect a flaw in an indictment—to erase a cypher from an
opponent’s calculation,—this it is which sharpens the edge of
his spirit, and emboldens him to mingle so much gall with
his ink. His antagonist may be substantially correct in his
main position and in his general principles,—but if he have
fortunately committed one or two unintentional blunders in
his quotations, Dr. Maitland is the man to ferret them out.
And if by a lucky coincidence there should be an old grudge
lurking in his bosom against the inaccurate offender, the
correction will lose nothing of its pungency in the sauce
with which it is served up.

But how is it that Dr. Maitland, in his zeal for truth, has


42 Dr. Maitland’s Criticism very discreditable.


stopped short after his exculpation of the clergy of the Church
of Rome, and not proceeded to defend the Presbyterian and
Independent preachers in the time of Cromwell, and the
General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, from the censures
of Mr. Sandby, all of whom the latter in his impartiality has
included in the charge ?


“In England,” says the author, ‘the executions were fright-
fully numerous, especially at the period when the Presbyterian and
Independent clergy were in the ascendant. During the puritanic
supremacy of the famous Long Parliament, 3000 victims suffered.

. - In Scotland, the General Assembly passed an act for all minis-
ters to take note of witches and charms. The clergy exhibited the
most rancorous zeal: and there was a system of espionage, of in-
formations and visitations, which carried dismay and unhappiness
to every household hearth,” &c.*


And several extracts are then given from the Miscellanies
of the Spalding Club, referring to trials before the Kirk
Sessions for the offence. Why then has not Dr. M. exa-
mined the Presbytery Book of Strathbogie and the Trials for
Witchcraft, and shewn that the citations are wrong? Such
silence has a language. It proves that the “ surprising alle-
gations” of our author, and his “tale of horror” against
the clergy, are true in the main, and not to be gainsayed.
The diction of one Pope’s Bull may have been too strongly
described by him: he may have “ maligned” another Pope
by only saying that he “lent his aid” in the persecutivn,
when he ought to have stated that power was given by him
to the Inquisitor “to punish and repress persons of both sexes
who practised incantations ;” and he may have written that a
thousand were burnt in the Diocese of Como, when he ought
to have quoted the words of Bartholomzus de Spina, and
said that they “went on burning a hundred per annum for
several years together ;” of all such “rhodomontades and
sly tamperings with historical truth,” our author is proved
clearly guilty, and ought, as Dr. "Maitland says, to feel
“ashamed of :” but his general position remains undamaged,
and one half of his statements is not even examined or re-
ferred to. This sort of criticism I call a “sly tampering”
with evidence, and a suppression of truth, “in which some
writers indulge when they want to use rhodomontades,” and
to imply more than they “dare express in the rank integrity
of their falsehood.”+ But w hy, it must be again asked, is it


* Mesmerism and its Opponents, p. 104.
+ All the above phrases within inverted commas are quotations from some of


Mr. Sandby’s enlightened views distasteful to Dr. Maitland. 43


that a Pope must be protected, and a Puritan left unscreened ;
that the Inquisition of Lombardy is to be sheltered from
attack, and the Kirk Sessions of Scotland left to its fate ?
This seems but a one-sided justice. The author of Mesmerism
and its Opponents may “ calumniate with his scandalous false-
hoods ”* the reverend followers of John Knox, and say what
he likes respecting their spiritual tyranny, and not a line is
penned in their behalf: but let Alexander Borgia, who, by
certain historians, is accused of every crime of which human
nature is capable, be simply taxed with “ lending his aid” in
a persecution, and our calumnious author is charged with
converting mole-hills into mountains by that priestly specimen
of all that is orthodox, the “sometime librarian to the late
Archbishop of Canterbury |”

I suspect that we have here stumbled upon another cause
of offence in Mr. Sandby. That gentleman shews too plainly
that he is no friend to any system of priestcraft, which exalts
the sacerdotal order beyond their legitimate position. While
he neither finds all that is perfect in those “dark ages” in
which others love to grope, so neither does he belong to that
sect in his own church which in so many of its tastes and
doctrines is but thinly separated from that other church of
which the aforesaid calumniated Alexander Borgia was such
an eminent ornament. Hine ille lacryme. Nay, he is some-
thing worse than this. He has dared to say, with an honesty
which ought to command our respect, that when the clergy
either preach sermons or write pamphlets against physical
truth, they wander from their province, and go beyond their
commission. He has ventured to express his regret that the
“clergy of all denominations” should more or less have
joined in this sad crusade of preaching against knowledge,
and he has brought forward instances in his own church to
prove his position. This position Dr. Maitland is surely the
very last person to deny, or to call a “ calumnious and scan-
dalous falsehood,” when he himself so recently published a
pamphlet, in which he attempted to shew that we must not
consult the services of an introvisionist in favour of a sick
relative, because clairvoyance was interdicted to the Jews in
the book of Deuteronomy !

However, to go back to the question of persecution for
witchcraft, there has been a curious little publication recently


Dr. Maitland’s insinuations against Mr. Sandby, who has simply copied and
understated Mr. Combe’s narrative. The decency of such language and its un-
truthfulness at the same time are points on which comment is needless.

* Maitland’s language again, p. 163.


Ak Good Advice to Dr. Maitland.


put forth by the Camden Society, which throws additional
light on the subject. It is called, Proceedings against Dame
Alice Kyteler. This unhappy woman, with her household
and relatives, was prosecuted about the year 1324 by the
then Bishop of Ossory, Richard Ledrede, on the charge of
sorcery. The tract is considered to be a cotemporary narra-
tive, and was probably written by a monk, and gives, as the
editor adds, “a remarkable picture of the overbearing con-
duct of a proud prelate of the ancien regime.” When appli-
cation was_made to the Bishop for a slight relaxation of
punishment, he peremptorily refused: “every grace in this
matter,” he says, “is dangerous, and I will concede nothing
in any degree.” Dr. Maitland would probably laugh at my
morbid indulgence of sentiment, if I were to term this
Bishop’s persecution q “tale of horror ;” yet the effects were
fearful. “Some,” says the tract, “were publicly burned ;
others were publicly marked with the cross; others publicly
flogged through the city ; others exiled beyond the diocese ;
others excommunicated ; others fled through fear, and were
not heard of.” A goodly number of unhappy victims! But
the special point to notice in the narrative is the fact, that
the Bishop, and the Bishop alone, was the cause of all the
misery. This the monkish historian singles out as a peculiar
subject for episcopal glorification. “There was not through-
out all Ireland one single person to be found, who had the
wish or the courage to oppose himself to these men, but the
Bishop alone (sold persond Episcopi exceptd): and this,’ adds
the monk, “ was by the special grace of God.” In short, in
his melancholy visitation of the city of Kilkenny, the Bishop
of Ossory “lent his aid” to the cruel persecution, much after
the same fashion that Popes Innocent and Alexander afforded
their assistance upon similar occasions.

Though it is but too evident that Dr. Maitland has per-
mitted his personal feelings to guide his pen in that criticism
which we have been just considering, yet it is equally certain
that few men are better qualified to furnish a correct exami-
nation of medizeval literature, if he would address himself to
the task without spleen or partiality. I am not unacquainted
with some of his writings, and can attest their usefulness in
some points, and their fidelity in others. Let him, then,
proceed onwards in his own walk. Let him throw still far-
ther light on what he would seem to think are wrongfully
termed, our “dark ages:” let him facilitate the interpreta-
tion of many obscure passages in ecclesiastical biography ;
nay, if his benevolence must take a retrospective action, let
him find humility in every pope, humanity in every inquisitor,


The course of all Antimesmerists characterized. 45


and the odour of sanctity in every monk: but let him not
go out of his way to invent a depreciating charge against a
brother clergyman, and disseminate imputations which are
more easily spread than contradicted. If our archeologist
had paid to the paragraph which offended him but a quarter
of the attention,which he devotes to the elucidation of some
moth-eaten tome, he would have perceived that the writer
had not produced one instance of persecution for witchcraft
in reference to the church of which he is a minister, but
solely in referénce to churches from whose discipline he dis-
sents, and against whose doctrine he probably protests much
more strongly than does Dr. Maitland. But there is a fatality
attendant upon the opponents of mesmerism. Whether the
writers be medical or clerical, whether they pen a pamphlet,
or indite an octavo, whether they preach a sermon, or poison
the minds* of their patients, there is in them all the very
same perversion of facts and the same misrepresentation of
evidence,—the very same suppression of truth and the same
omission of essential points,—the same nasty, dirty, truampery
feeling, which in a man of education we call paltriness and
meanness, but in a man who is uneducated, we call some-
thing else.
I am, Sir, yours, &c.,
Anti1-GLorioso.


IV. Cure of Epilepsy of ten years’ standing, with remarkable
phenomena, in a Lady, with Mesmerism. By Wit11aM
Forses Lauriz, M.D., Edin., Hydropathic Establish-
ment, Dunstable, Bedfordshire.


‘‘In our times the phenomena of animal magnetism have lately received
an attestation which, in my judg t, establishes the facts beyond question, while
certainly as far as mere strangeness is concerned, and departure from the known
laws of nature, they are, perhaps, more extraordinary than some things which we
might call miracles. I am inclined to think that there exists a lurking fear of
these phenomena, as if they might shake our faith in true miracles: and there-
fore men are inclined to disbelieve them, in spite of testimony ; a habit far more
unreasonable and far more dangerous to our Christian faith than any belief in the
facts of magnetism. For these facts are mere wonders in our present state of
knowledge: at a future period, perhaps, they may become the principles of a new
science, but they neither are, nor will be, miracles.” Sermons by the Rev. Thos.
Arnold, D.D., late Head Master of Rugby School, and Regius Professor of Mo-
dern History in the University of Oxford: vol. iii., p. 48.


Ir is now about six years since Mrs. L became subject
to epileptic fits, which were originally brought on partly by


* It might be too often added, and their bodies too, rather than make use of
the healing virtues of nature and mesmerism.


46 Cure of Epilepsy


mental anxiety, and partly by sudden fright. The circum-
stances are as follows.

Mr. and Mrs. L— had an only child, an infant of four
months old, who was seized with inflammation of the lungs.
Two or three days of painful suspense passed away, and at
length the medical man in attendance assured them that
there was no hope of the child’s recovery. All that night the
little sufferer was watched by his parents, expecting every
moment would be his last. The crisis however passed ; in
the morning he was better, and, to the inexpressible joy of his
father and mother, he was in a day or two declared to be out
of danger. This was towards the end of the week, and on
Sunday so great was the change that his parents could hardly
believe he had been so near the grave. On this day, one or
two relatives dined with Mr. and Mrs. L . The conver-
sation naturally turned on the recovery of the child, who had
been left up stairs with the servant. However, on their
going a short time after to see it, it was suddenly seized with
a convulsive cough and died in the nurse’s arms.

The mother on witnessing this unexpected change fell
senseless on the floor. This her husband considers to have
laid the foundation for that extreme nervous susceptibility
which followed; and it appears necessary to describe all the
antecedents particularly, because it would seem to shew how
the mental suffering was aggravated by occurring when Mrs.
L was in the fulness of hope and joy, all but realizing
the child’s recovery.

The event thus related occurred in January, and from
that time Mrs. L was subject to slight fainting fits,
though it was observed that they never yielded to the ordi-
nary restoratives, and that the colour did not leave the lips.*

In August she sustained the fright alluded to. It was on
a sultry and oppressive day in the afternoon, that she read
one of the tales in the Diary of a Physician, in which a phi-
losopher is described as sitting in his study, when a ghostly
visitor dressed as a gentleman in black clothes enters the
room, closes his writing desk, arranges his papers, cleans the
inkstand, &e., and thus silently intimates that the philoso-
pher’s work in this world is done.

The impression produced on Mrs. L ’s mind by read-
ing this tale in her feeble state of health at that time was deep
and melancholy. After taking tea, however, she seemed


* These were no doubt comatose attacks—which are partial epileptic or hys-
teric seizures: and the difference between such and fainting is carefully pointed
out in No. IX., p. 42.—2Zoist. .


of ten years’ standing. 47


better, and went to a service at the Scotch church in the
neighbourhood. Returning alone in the dusk of the evening,
she was insulted and terrified by some young men smoking,
who had just come out of a public house as she passed,
and who rudely addressed her. One of them caught hold of
her bonnet and puffed some cigar smoke into her face. She
hurried home, however, but in a very excited state, and in
about half an hour was seized with a most distressing and awful
fit, which had every appearance of being decidedly epileptic.

She struggled violently, foamed at the mouth, and the
eyes rolled frightfully. The wildest expression of terror was
depicted on the countenance. Her medical attendant con-
sidered it a case of hysteria, and treated it accordingly. After
the violence of the fit had subsided, she was carried to bed in
an almost totally unconscious and helpless state. The next
day, slight hysterical fits followed each other in quick suc-
cession, and for several days her mind was painfully be-
wildered. One of the delusions was the greatest horror of
anything black. She could not endure her husband’s ap-
proach, or even that he should sit in her bed room, with a
black coat on, and shuddered violently when he attempted to
do so. On this account it was found necessary to cover over
the fire place, and every dark object in the room. This at
the time her husband could not account for as he was not
then aware of her having read the tale previously mentioned :
but some remarks which she made during her wanderings
shewed him that she had done so, and that it was connected
with the aversion to anything black.

She then discovered, and also seemed to explain, the
depression of spirits which Mr. L remarked without
being aware of the cause, on the afternoon of her visiting the
Scotch church.

After about a week the excitement subsided, and the full
exercise of reason returned ; but with it came exhaustion to
such a degree, that for one day her life was almost despaired
of; the crisis however was safely passed, and she slowly
recovered.

To remove the nervous susceptibility which still remained,
change of air was resorted to and with visible improvement,
which however was but of short duration: for in a few weeks
the fits returned worse than ever; insomuch that the mind
began to be visibly and painfully affected, leading her hus-
band to apprehend the most serious result.

It ought to be remarked here, that the fits about this
time assumed a more active character, sometimes occurring in
the night, when she would rise from her bed and proceed in


18 Cure of Epilepsy


the most determined manner to the greatest extravagance.
Sometimes in the day while the fit lasted she would talk and
act as one under mental derangement, and even require the
employment of force to prevent mischief.

In these circumstances a total change of residence and
occupation was resorted to, and with considerable advantage :
so that, although subject to a recurrence of fits occasionally,
and sometimes frequently, from over fatigue, a close atmos-
phere, or any sudden emotion, yet for about two years there
was nothing to excite serious apprehension.

In about a year after, however, the symptoms returned
in an aggravated form, accompanied by a general lassitude
and extreme depression of spirits.

It was nearly six years after the fits of an epileptic cha-
racter had manifested themselves in Mrs. L——’s case, that
her husband, hearing of several cures which I had effected of
epilepsy by mesmerism, requested me to try what I could do
by this means in benefitting his wife.

I commenced the case in March, 1852. Mrs. L
then by my directions slept for three nights with the copper
and zine disk wetted and bound in the hand; after which the
first experiment was made by this lady’s sitting for about
half an hour with the eyes steadily fixed on the disc held in
one hand. I made transverse passes firmly on the forehead
about every five minutes.* In about half an hour a fit came
on just such as Mrs. L—— had been long subject to. This
fit was accompanied by violent flatulence, so as to threaten
suffocation, which was however removed at once by a few
passes made over the chest and stomach; and from that time
it never recurred so as to be worth notice.

After the fit, to the astonishment of this lady’s husband,
Mrs. L was better than she had been for some weeks,
had a good night, and the next day was unusually cheerful,
describing herself as feeling a sensation of lightness and
buoyancy, as though something had been removed from her,
especially about the eyes. This was to herself and her hus-
band more surprising, as, whenever a fit had come on in the
ordinary way, it was invariably followed by langour, stupor,
and sometimes by utter prostration.

The experiment was then repeated once or twice without
any fit being brought on, and on these occasions no advantage
seemed to be gained.

During further applications of mesmerism at intervals of


* It was these, and not the metallic disk or staring, that induced the mes-
meric state. See No. XXXVII., p. 48.—Zoist.


of ten years’ standing. 49


a few days, the fits reappeared, though it sometimes occupied
as much as two hours to produce them.

The time, however, thus consumed was gradually short-
ened, and ultimately the effect was produced in less than
three minutes. The three or four fits thus excited differed
so slightly from the first as to render any particular notice
of them needless: but it should be remarked that after every
one Mrs. L seemed better, and her general health and
cheerfulness rapidly improved. The first time that a change
was noticed in the character of the fits, was in one which I
brought on in about twenty minutes, and which struck her
husband as strongly resembling those that she used to have at
a much earlier period than when I commenced mesmerism
in her case.

On this occasion she sat in an easy chair in a kind of
swoon ; then, suddenly starting up, she said in a very excited
manner, “ Give me the book; give me the book; I will read
it.” After which she swooned again; and upon waking suf-
fered from head-ache and excessive langour, which however
were quickly removed by a few mesmeric passes.

As this lady and her husband walked home from my
house after the séance, she remarked, “ I have a strong notion
of having seen F- to night, (this was a relative who had been
dead about three months,) as if in a sort of vision.” She
then proceeded to describe the place and circumstances, men-
tioning the very hour; and she added, “I asked him to read
to me from the Bible, which he refused, and I then did it
myself.” Her husband then immediately remembered the
scene and circumstances alluded to, which she described with
a perfect minuteness as having somehow actually just then
passed before her. The whole occurred about five years ago,
one day when she had a fit precisely similar to this; and
the words, “ Give me the book,” were thus explained. Mr.
L said nothing to her, however, as to the resemblance
he discovered between this fit and that at an earlier period :
she herself had no perception of it.

Every experiment now produced a fit in a few minutes:
all commencing with a swoon, but having also some active
development: each exhibiting some peculiarity, and nothin,
being repeated in one that had occurred in those which
preceded it. The whole character of the fits had an exact
resemblance to those which have been described in the ac-
count given of the first relapse after partial recovery. The
patient was evidently by an artificial process going over again
what she had experienced in a six years’ illness, only in an
inverted order. As one who retraces a road familiar to him

VOL, XI. E


50 Cure of Epilepsy


recognizes objects on either side, so, in this process, the asso-
ciations of her illness, names, places, persons, events were
described, talked with, and acted over again in the most per-
fect and vivid manner without the slightest confusion or inac-
curacy. The following examples will give the reader an idea
of the character of these interesting phenomena.

On one occasion, the swoon being brought on in a few
minutes, she rose from the sofa, and, taking her husband’s
arm, said, “ My dear, let us go to B . Do you know
what we will do then? We will buy a piano; and I shall
get well. Papa shall look at it first.”

To try the effect, a note was touched on the piano, when
she said, “Ah, H , you cannot play.” “I shall play it
to the song of Mrs. Hemans’s ‘ Better Land.’” A short
coma followed, then came a troubled expression of counte-
nance, and she said sharply and in a very different tone from
that of her former remarks, “ J shall not have those things on ;
tell Dr. P. I never did, and I never will”’ Her husband
could not understand this allusion; but I thought leeches
were referred to; and so it proved, for in a minute or two
she seemed resigned, and said, “ Mother, I would not let
any one but you put them on.” Then a feeling of delicacy
was expressed in her face, and she covered it with her hands,
and wept a little. “Mind you keep G down stairs,”
she exclaimed. In a few minutes she composed herself to
sleep, as if soothed by the attention of friends, saying, “ Weii,
that is kind of you.”

All this was a complete representation of what had really
occurred. Her husband well remembers the morning on
which she proposed the visit to their relatives at B , the
purchase of the piano, and the leeches which had been re-
commended by Dr. P. , their medical attendant at the
time; while, by her relatives who attended her, every sen-
tence she uttered is distinctly remembered as having been
spoken at the time.

After this experiment she said to Mr. L » “TI have
been thinking to-day of Ann,”—a person who happened to be
visiting B—— at the time the leeches were applied, whom
she never saw except then, and whose name her husband had
never before heard her mention: but she remembered no-
thing of what had passed in the coma. At another time,
shortly after this, there was an exact representation of the
first serious fit she ever had, which occurred, as has been
described, on the night of her visit to the Scotch church.
She became unconscious, as usual, under the influence of
mesmerism, and in a few minutes she started up with the


of ten years’ standing. 51


most awful expression of terror upon her face. Her eyes
were open and fixed as if staring at some frightful object,
towards which, as if following round the room, she gradually
turned her head. She started back, shrieked as if with fright,
and clutched her hair wildly, saying, “There !—there! don’t
you see it?” She became insensible again, and in a few mi-
nutes started up and said with a quick motion of the hand
and a jerk of the head, as if pushing some one from her,
“Go about your business,’ while at the same time I ob-
served an expression on the face of mingled indignation,
contempt, and fear. The last greatly predominated: the lips
being curled in scorn, but having the appearance of being
assumed to conceal fear. Then followed a strong epileptic
fit. Afterwards she became calm, and lay upon the sofa
with her eyes open and fixed upon her husband, who was
present, as if imploring help, yet unable to speak and ap-
pearing to derive no satisfaction from his approaching closely
to her. The whole of the phenomena thus described lasted
about two hours and a half. An hour or two afterwards she
said to her husband, “I cannot tell how it is, but I keep
thinking of that Scotch church at G . I seem as if I
had just seen it. There are the pews, and the people, and
the minister with the long sermon. What can make it haunt
me so to-day?” In the evening she was observed to have an
unusual depression of spirits, and she remarked, “I feel as
if I had been frightened to-day. I have an impression of
having seen some very frightful object, but I cannot tell
what. I seem to remember having been in some great
trouble and seeing you, but not being able to get near you.”
No allusion was made to the street insult, which, however,
clearly passed before her mind, as expressed by the motion of
the hand, connected with the words, “ Go about your busi-
ness.”

The object of terror which her eyes seemed to be follow-
ing round the room, her husband imagines to be connected
with the tale in the Diary of a Physician before alluded to.

Mr. L now felt confident in his convictions that the
whole progress of the fits from the first would be retraced,
but he carefully concealed from his wife these impressions and
everything that had transpired during the whole process. He
expected that the next experiment would present the scene
of his child’s death. Instead of this however nothing oc-
curred but a gentle coma of a few minutes, unconnected
with any mental phenomena; and he then remembered that
between the child’s death and the first fit, Mrs. L was
subject to slight attacks of coma. On the next occasion,

E2


4


52 Cure of Epilepsy of ten years’ standing.


however, a complete and painful revival of this sad event did
occur. From the usual coma she started up and cried, “Oh
my baby ; he’s gone,’ with the most violent expressions of
grief. Then clinging to her husband she said, “ What does
Dr. P. say?” While all the time she wept and sobbed
and wrung her hands most piteously. A few moments of un-
consciousness followed, and then while lying upon the sofa
she moaned as if in pain, appeared to breathe with difficulty,
and rubbed her hands across her breasts. Her husband
asked her what troubled her, and she said, “The milk; the
plasters have not come yet.” She then awoke, and the usual
manipulations removed the feeling of heaviness and languor.
On going into another room, she saw her little girl at play,
and the sight seemed to bring before her the whole affair of
the little boy’s death. The sensation of fulness and pain in
the breasts remained the whole day. It may be remarked
that everything which has been stated forms a complete pic-
ture of the facts connected with the child’s death, including
the allusion to the plasters.

From this time all mental association with the past van-
ished, and at about the third experiment afterwards no effect
from mesmerism was produced beyond slight drowsiness.

At this time a curious circumstance occurred. Her hus-
band, desirous of trying his own hand at mesmerism, made
his first experiment upon a young lady in the presence of his
wife, and produced some of the amusing phenomena com-
monly seen at public lectures. Then in a sort of half jest
he proceeded to try the same upon his wife, producing how-
ever a very different result from what he had anticipated.
She fell into a fit, the effects of which he could by no means
remove. On partially recovering she said, “I feel as if there
were two hammers in my head fighting against each other.”
She was scarcely able to stand, so that she was with difficulty
got to bed, and in the morning her husband was obliged to
send for me, when I speedily succeeded in removing the ill
effects she had sustained from her husband’s mesmeric in-
fluence. After this the results of the various experiments
became perplexing; a series of cataleptic fits followed, some
severe, others very slight. About this time two or three fits
came on in the ordinary way—the only ones she had while
under electro-biology. Gradually however the fits ceased
altogether. The electro-biology only producing drowsiness,
it was then discontinued.

This was about six months since, and from that time
there has been no return of the fits, nor any apparent ten-
dency to them: and the general health and cheerfulness have


Cures and painless Teeth Extraction. 53


been such as Mrs. L—— had not enjoyed for years. She is
perfectly well.

_ The whole time from the commencement of these expe-
riments to their close was about four months, subject how-
ever to some interruptions.

I have already described the interesting mental pheno-
mena which presented themselves during the treatment of
this case, but there are still some circumstances relative to
the modus operandi in inducing. these states that deserve
notice.

1. The usual method was to remove the disk from the hand
as soon as the fit came on; but on two occasions it was al-
lowed to remain, when there was a partial return of the fit
after an hour or two, that is to say, convulsive action without
loss of consciousness.

2. It was observed repeatedly that for removing the head-
ache and stupor, which followed each experiment, passes
made with the hand from the top of the head down the spine
were much more effective than those made down the front of
the person.

3. In addition to the disk being held in the hand of the
patient, the hand of the operator was placed upon the fore-
head of the patient occasionally, and a tingling sensation
from the fingers was experienced.


I have related the facts in this case exactly as they oc-
curred, and hope, by keeping a record of several cases of
epilepsy which I am treating by similar means, to be able to
throw more light upon this exceedingly interesting subject.

W. Forses Laurie.


March 3, 1853.


V. Cures and painless Teeth Extraction. By Mr. Parker,
Surgeon, Exeter.


‘** Shall I be pardoned if I say that in the experiments of an incipient and
maltreated science,’ &c. ‘‘ If these experiments be not all delusion, (and how
can we reasonably infer that experiments so multiplied, so various, and in many
cases, when not in the hands of itinerant jugglers, so fairly performed,) I say
how can we regard all these as mere trickery ?”’ p. 325.

‘‘It may indeed be doubted whether any created intellect operates, except in
connexion with some form of matter. Yet there are certain facts in the history
of individuals in an abnormal state, which shew that one mind acts upon another,
independent of the senses or any other material means discoverable by the senses.
Take the details of sleep-waking, or somnambulism: and do not they present us
with*numerous cases in which impressions are made by one mind upon another,
even separated beyond the sphere of the senses? Take the facts respecting


54 Curious folly, and Loss of Voice.


double consciousness, and those where the power was possessed of reading the
thoughts of others, or the facts relating to prevision: and surely they cannot be
explained but by the supposition of a direct influence of one mind upon another,”
p. 350.—The Religion of Geology, and its connected sciences. By Edward
Hitchcock, D.D., LL.D., President of Amherst College, and Professor of Natural
Theology and Geology. Glasgow: 1851.


Curious return for benefit derived from Mesmerism.

A tapy had suffered from rheumatic gout for fourteen years.
She was unable to dress or undress herself, unable to walk,
or to raise either hand to her head, to separate her fingers,
or to hold anything in either hand. Every kind of medical
treatment had been tried in vain; change of air, and change
of residence, but all without effect. She seldom slept at
night without a very large dose of Battley’s opiate ; and, as
her sufferings had baffled all previous treatment, I advised
her husband to have recourse to mesmerism, which he treated
with ridicule. I then referred him and his daughter to many
of my patients, whom this wonderful agent had cured. At
last the husband consented to have it tried, and one of my
mesmerisers attended, and made slow passes in my presence
over one of the patient’s arms, from the shoulder down-
wards, and in half an hour she was enabled to open her hand
and raise it to her forehead—a feat she had not performed
for seven years. The following day the other arm was mes-
merised with similar results ; then her legs were mesmerised,
which enabled her to walk down stairs with the assistance of
a servant. She slept comfortably at night without her opiate,
and the fifth night after being mesmerised she slept so soundly
that she did not disturb her husband for the whole night—
an event which had been unprecedented for years.

Now I have to record one of the most extraordinary
scenes I have ever witnessed. On the seventh day of her
being mesmerised, I called in the morning to see my patient,
when her husband met me in a perfect fury at the prospect
of his wife’s being cured by mesmerism, as all the world, in-
cluding his visiting friends, would laugh at him, and conse-
quently drop his acquaintance : therefore he would not allow
his wife to be mesmerised any more, and she relapsed into
the miserable condition in which she had passed so many
years. Is cruelty like this exceeded by any description in
Uncle Tom’s Cabin ?


Loss of Voice.

Mrs. Bannister had lost her voice for two years when she
applied to me. At our first interview the slightest whisper
only could be heard. She was mesmerised daily for six weeks,
when her voice was quite restored, and it has not left her since.


Cures and Tooth Extraction. 55


Rheumatism.

William Fay had suffered from an attack of rheumatic
fever, which confined him to his bed for six weeks. It left
his legs so stiff that he could not walk across a room without
two sticks; his arms also were so stiff that he could not raise
his hands to his head. He was obliged to quit a gentleman’s
service in this state, and came to consult me about mes-
merism. After a few days’ trial of it, he was enabled to
raise his hands to his head, and to walk without sticks; he
slept better at night, and at the end of a fortnight was
restored, and returned to his place.


Epilepsy.

William Roach, a cabinet-maker, was attacked with con-
vulsive unconsciousness, attended with considerable determi-
nation of blood to the head. When partial consciousness
returned, I proposed bleeding him, to which he objected.
The next day the fit returned with increased violence, and on
recovering from this attack his intellect was very much
clouded. I then bled him, and gave him some active medi-
cine. Still the fits returned with greater violence, and I then
had him mesmerised daily. I am happy to add that he had
no fit after the first mesmerisation, but I continued the


treatment for a fortnight, when he returned to his work con-
valescent.


Epilepsy and Extraction of a Tooth.

— Bidgood whilst in service had an epileptic fit, in which
she was discovered prostrate on the ground. On enquiry, I
found she had injured her thumb some time before. She
complained of pain and involuntary movement of the arm.
The fits returned daily, and she became stupid and listless
from their frequency. As other remedies produced no relief,
I had her mesmerised daily for a fortnight, and she has had
no fit since.

Some time after this she suffered much pain from a de-
cayed tooth, which I extracted during mesmeric sleep with-
out the least consciousness of pain.


Threatened Delirium.

— Roper had been bathing in the river whilst he was
very much heated. This brought on a severe attack of de-
termination of blood to the head, for which I bled him, and
gave some active medicines. These produced temporary
relief, but two nights after I found him in the same state,
for which I repeated the former treatment. Temporary relief


56 Cures and Tooth Extraction.


was again produced, but was soon followed by symptoms
threatening delirium. He was then mesmerised with imme-
diate relief. Mesmerism was continued for a few days, when
he became quite well, and resumed his work.


Great benefit from Mesmerism in a case of Fracture of the
upper Arm.

An elderly lady was found insensible on the floor of her
bed-room. On my arrival I found her perfectly unconscious,
with stertorous breathing, and the movement of the mouth
described by French authors as “pipe du tabac.” A copi-
ous bleeding restored her senses; and as I feared that such
an attack would be attended with an effusion of blood on the
brain, and consequently paralysis, I did not disturb the limb.
On the following day she was unable to raise her hand to her
head, although she had a perfect use of the fore arm, hand,
and fingers. On examining the humerus, there was con-
siderable extravasation of blood from the lower third of the
arm, extending to the elbow. As it was evident that the
bone was broken, the ends were put in apposition, and pro-
per splints and bandages applied. The injured part of the
arm became so painful as to disturb the patient’s rest. 1
then had the limb mesmerised, and the first trial removed
the pain. Mesmerising was repeated daily for ten days, and


there was no further return of pain, although the injured
part retained the green tint of extravasation for six weeks
from the date of the accident.


Hemorrhage from the Lungs, severe Head-ache, and
Extraction of a Molar Tooth.

E. Haydon (like — Roper) had imprudently bathed in
the river when he was very warm from running. This pro-
duced severe pain in the side, with cough and bloody phlegm,
and severe head-ache. The family medical man attended him
for several days, and gave him some very active medicines,
which produced no relief. As he had been mesmerised by
me at my séances two years before, he requested his father
to fetch me. When I arrived, I found him very feverish,
with cough, intense pain in the side, blood-spitting, and
head-ache. As two years had elapsed since he had been
mesmerised, I questioned my being able to put him into the
mesmeric sleep under such intense suffering: but in less
than two minutes I succeeded in producing deep mesmeric
sleep. He then gave me directions how to mesmerise him
in order to relieve him, which instructions I strictly followed,
as prudent mesmerisers are always safe in doing so. I mes-


Teeth Extraction. 57


merised him once daily, for three days, when all his suffer-
ings were removed, and he was able to resume his occupation.

The 30th November he came to my house to have a large
molar tooth extracted, as it was much decayed and had
pained him for several weeks. I put him to sleep in less
than a minute, and he told me when to proceed. I extracted
the tooth without the least consciousness of pain. Just before
he came to my house, he had fallen down stairs, and bruised
his back, for which he desired me to make a few passes down
his back, and they soon relieved him. When I awoke him,
he found the tooth out, and the pain in his back gone, with-
out knowing the source of either removal.


Painless Extraction of two Teeth.

Mary Ann Long had two of her second set of teeth grow-
ing from the roof of her mouth. She was mesmerised in the
presence of more than fifty persons, and the teeth extracted
without the least consciousness of pain.


Another case of Tooth Extraction.

Miss Beedle, whose case is recorded in a former number
of The Zoist, came to have a tooth extracted by me. As she
had not been mesmerised for two years, I did not know how
I should succeed, for she was suffering very acutely. How-


ever, I mesmerised her in less than two minutes, and, having
deepened the sleep, I removed the tooth without the least
pain being felt.


The more I see of operations under the influence of mes-
merism, the more I fee] astonished at the indifference, not to
say contempt, which the majority of our profession evince
at the most glorious discovery of our age.

Joun B. Parker.


VI. Review of “‘ Agnes, the Possessed, a Revelation of Mes-
merism.” A tale by T. 8. Arthur.


** While we are very much in the dark with regard to the real agents or causes
which produce the phenomena of nature, and have at the same time an avidity to
know them, ingenious men frame conjectures, which those of weaker understanding
take fom truth. The fare is coarse, but appetite makes it go down.’’—Reid on
Powers of the Human Mind, vol. iii., p. 45.

‘* With these vast and bottomless follies men have been entertained. But we
that hold firm to the works of God, and to the sense, which is God’s lamp, will
inquire with all sobriety and severity, whether there be to be found in the foot-
steps of nature any such transmission and influx.’’—Bacon, vol. iv., p. 488.


Tue object of this tale is to discourage the employment of
mesmerism, on the ground of the alleged submission of the


Agnes, the Possessed.


will of the patient to the will of the operator. The writer
(a Mr. Arthur of the United States) fully admits the “ exist-
ence of the power called mesmerism,” but he assigns to it a
disorderly, and therefore an evil origin; in other words, a
spiritual or supernatural source. The mesmeriser, according
to Mr. Arthur, possesses the ability of calling evil spirits
from the vasty deep, but not, as it would seem, that of so
readily remanding them back again to their black abodes.
The evil spirit becomes, as it were, summoned by the very
exercise of the manipulations; the will of the patient is
thereby disturbed, and eventually placed under the control
of another; moral injury is sustained by this loss of ration-
ality and freedom, and the unhappy victim is brought into a
most sinful condition ; i. e., “ possessed” by a bad spirit ; and
therefore, as a natural conclusion, mesmerism is an art not
to be sanctioned.

We do not propose, on this occasion, to enter into a re-
futation of the above most ludicrous notion; neither shall
we ask, whether it be really true, as asserted in this tale,
that one person in twenty is liable to any peculiar subjection
of the will, as a consequence of being mesmerised ; or rather,
whether any such sort of subjection be not a most extreme
and very unusual case; neither do we ask, whether in such
extreme case, this mental subjection really does remain, in
any such fashion or degree as here described, after the mes-
meric sleep has passed off; or even if it so remain, whether
such continuance of the influence would counterbalance or
make void the enormous amount of benefit received through
the mitigation of pain, or through the diminution and cure
of disease; all these are points which the tale suggests, and
which are open for our consideration, in answer to the alle-
gations of our author: we simply propose to analyse his
story, as it is given us, and to shew the inconsistency and
absurdity of its details.

At the same time the tale is in certain respects not badly
written, and some of the points are well put: the dialogues
are sustained with spirit, except of course that the best
arguments are all given to one side: the author is evidently
a practised writer; and we may assume that he has done his
utmost to prove his case: how completely his position breaks
down, even with his own machinery and with his own oppor-
tunity of establishing his case, we will proceed to shew.

Agnes Wellmore, a young lady in delicate health,. and
whose nervous system, from one cause or another, had be-
come highly susceptible of impressions, and, as a conse-
quence, most sensitive to pain, is suffering from a distressing


The Will is not necessarily subdued. 59


tooth-ache, at the opening of our tale. For months her
sufferings had been so severe, as at times to occasion almost
a loss of consciousness. It is at last suggested that she
should allow herself to be mesmerised, and so have the tooth
extracted while she is in an insensible state. It so happened
that at that time a Monsieur Florién, an itinerant French
lecturer, was in the town, giving a course of experiments on
mesmerism. No one knew where he came from, or what his
antecedents had been: but he possessed a good deal of intel-
ligence and much force of mind, and by the attraction of his
manners was able to interest nearly all with whom he came
in contact. M. Florién is sent for: his face and attitude ex-
press an intensely-felt purpose: but says a bystander, “I
did not like the look of his face, and as to his eyes, there
was something snakey about them.” However, our heroine is
soon thrown into a profound sleep, and the tooth is extracted
without nerve or muscle quivering: but alas! though this
apparent good is obtained, enormous mischief is effected at
the same time. For according to the author’s theory, the
patient’s will has been influenced by this one sitting, and
this single mesmeric action. She need not, indeed, be again
mesmerised against her will ; but this is a mere play of words,
for her will has been acted upon, and she will not be willing
to refuse. The question, therefore, upon which the whole
story hinges, is, how far any person who has been once mes-
merised, may or may not have the will to decline to have the
process repeated. ‘The gist of the whole matter,” says the
author, “lies in the effect of magnetism upon the will.”
Now it strikes us that this question is to be answered by
what is philosophically called, induction,—or to speak more
clearly, by the evidence of the most experienced mesmerisers
on the subject. What is their opinion as to the fact? and
what the result of their observation? Do they, for example,
find that the success of a first sitting and a single submission
to mesmeric influence, does so work upon any one patient’s
brain as to compel him or her to submit to the process again,
in spite of a natural disinclination, until the will be brought
completely under the mesmeriser’s control. Judging from
our own experiments, we must say that we regard this opinion
of our author’s to be as absurd in its notion as it is false in
its fact. That a patient, who has been relieved from acute
suffering, or who has obtained a refreshing night’s rest by its
aid, should be willing to recur to the influence again, is, we
believe, both natural and true: it would be the same as to
all other remedial agents: the potency of the physician in
such a case would be as absolute as that of the mesmeriser ;


60 The stronger mind victorious in all things.


and so far the will would be affected : but, on the other hand,
are persons in health always ready or willing to be mesmerised
a second time? and is it not a fact that many patients who
for weeks have been subject to mesmeric treatment, and who
have derived acknowledged benefits from its use, often abandon
all application of its aid, in spite of the earnest entreaties of
the mesmeriser, at the very time that they have before them
the most certain prospect of a cure? This is notorious:
whether it arise from idleness, or carelessness, or want of the
power of perseverance, or from the tedium occasioned by
lengthened attendance, or from contentment at the amount
of the health or the benefit already received by them,—we
repeat it, that it is a fact, and a fact very much to be de-
plored, that in opposition to the wishes and requests of the
mesmerisers, numerous patients do discontinue their sittings,
at the very time when it might be assumed, according to our
author’s theory, that the influence of the operator would have
been rendered paramount. We consider this well-known
fact to be in itself subversive of the above preposterous hypo-
thesis. The truth is, that in cases of intercourse between
man and man, and especially between man and woman, quite
irrespective of and apart from mesmerism, the influence of a
strong mind over one far weaker is supreme. It is in propor-
tion to the relative strength and weakness of the two parties
whose minds come in contact, that the ascendancy becomes
developed. The strong-minded physician, equally with the
strong-minded mesmeriser, carries his point, and enforces
obedience. It is the same in religion, in politics, in study,
in social and domestic arrangement, in everything, in short,
into which the mind of man enters, that the strong will rules
and the weak gives way. The strong-willed priest sways the
mind of his delicate and gentle convert, as readily, if not
far more readily, than does the most successful mesmeriser.
Look to the annals of Methodism, Calvinism, Puseyism,
Catholicism, Mormonism, &c., and see this great physio-
logical truth established beyond a doubt. This argument,
therefore, respecting the will might be made as conclusive
against religion itself as much as against mesmerism. The
will is there seen to be rendered prostrate under superstition,
under idolatry, under the most false and pernicious practices,
under customs that are alike repugnant to good morals and
good sense. We might carry this argument to great length,
and prove the truth of our assertion by an examination of
its bearing on all the relations of life. To single out mes-
merism, therefore, for its exclusive application, shews an
ignorance of the mind of man, and an inattention to the


The idea of an evil spirit absurd. 61


workings of the human brain. The will is not more chained
or led in one case than in another ; not more by an evil-disposed
mesmeriser than by an evil-disposed priest ; and certainly in
our experience we have seen nothing of the supreme ascend-
ancy and control of the operator over the patient, to which
this tale of Agnes endeavours to give a colour: at the same
time we must admit that we are not able to decide as to the
amount of influence, which a gentleman with an “ unpleasant
expression in the look of his face, and with something snakey
in his eyes,” may be supposed to obtain. The fascination in
such a case would doubtless exceed anything to which our
poor power could hope to reach.

To return, then, to our story. This gentleman with
“ much force of mind, attractive manners, and snakey eyes,”
is invited to a large evening party soon after the extraction of
the aforesaid tooth; Miss Agnes and her friends are also
there. The presence of Monsieur Florién turns the attention
of all to the subject of mesmerism ; and the evening had not
far advanced before a circle is formed round the Frenchman,
besetting him with questions ; when a pale and thin gentle-
man (evidently some wicked sceptic), at length observes with
a confident air, “I don’t believe you can mesmerise any one
here.” “TI can,” answers Florién, “if I may choose my
subject.” Leave is granted him after a time; and he selects
Agnes, who with horror it must be mentioned, makes no
objection !

Now here it is evidently assumed by our author, that his
heroine had no power to offer any real resistance. Her first
feeling respecting mesmerism had been that of almost uncon-
querable repugnance : but that feeling was changed ; because
“the will was now changed ; and desire is from the will ;” in
other words, Agnes had become “ possessed ;” and her free-
dom of action was gone. Now whether this case be drawn
from one in real life, we cannot pretend to say: in all pro-
bability it is so in the main; but whether that be the fact or
not, we see no necessity of calling up the machinery of an evil
spirit to explain this young lady’s compliance. Mesmerism
had liberated her from very acute suffering: she was free
from pain, and improved in health and spirits; and out of
a grateful feeling to M. Florién, she was ready to oblige him,
and also her friends who were present, by permitting herself
to be mesmerised. All this is a natural and very common
proceeding ; in short, of daily occurrence. What is there
strange in the matter? However, Agnes is soon asleep; and
we need only add that the phenomena, which were developed,


62 The influence explicable without Mesmerism.


were of the usual order, and proved the susceptibility of the
patient to mesmeric impressions.

We find a few days after, that the fair Agnes is still con-
tinuing to derive benefit. ‘I’m sure,” she says, “that I
am better since I was magnetized than I have been for a long
time. The doctor was here to-day, and says that my pulse
has not been so indicative of health for months as it now is.”
In fact, she becomes a regular patient of M. Florién, and is
placed under a systematic course of mesmerism: and seri-
ously ill as she had been, and enfeebled in nerves and spirits,
it cannot be denied, it is said, that her health visibly im-
proved during the period of six weeks under which she
remained under the Frenchman’s care." And his power over
her was great; for by a single effort of his will, he could
throw her into the sleep-waking state.

However, at length the time is approaching, when M.
Florién will have to proceed onwards in his travels for his
lectures and public exhibitions. He feels that he shall leave
Agnes with regret: for she had developed in so remarkable
a degree the faculties of the somnambule, that he is per-
suaded that if he had been able to remain, he could have
investigated the higher phenomena of mesmerism by her
agency with great success, and have attained the most
astounding results; in short, “ nothing less than a full
penetration into the invisible world, and a revelation of the
causes of all things which there lie concealed from our eyes.”

It ought, now, however, to be mentioned that in con-
sequence of opposition on the part of her lover, the mesmeric
treatment had at this time ceased for about a week: still
Florién called daily to see Miss Wellmore, and to talk on the
subject of mesmerism, and of her astonishing power. For
this purpose he is allowed to have private interviews with
her: what her friends were about all this time, we do not
pretend to understand: for such meetings seem to be con-
trary, if not to the rules of society, at least to the regulations
of prudence. Here is a foreigner, with engaging manners,
whose character and history are perfectly unknown, permitted
to pay daily visits to a young lady, not for the purpose of
mesmerisation according to the rules of mesmerism in the
presence of her family; but for the sake of making himself
agreeable, and of talking on subjects with which her mind
was full. We are all quite aware that these private and
daily conversations are necessary for the sake of the story:
for without them how could the fair Agnes be influenced ?
But they quite upset the author’s theory: we want no evil


The charge against Mesmerism preposterous. 63


spirit, and no subjection of the will by supernatural possession,
to explain the ascendancy of M. Florién. The means, by
which he obtains his controlling power, are natural enough,
viz., daily visits and daily flattery. An eloquent and attrac-
tive Frenchman, who has secured primarily a feeling of gra-
titude in the patient’s breast for health improved, has the
opportunity granted him of talking to this very susceptible
girl about higher destinies, and the invisible world, and all
that sort of exciting nonsense. “ Already,” he says, “ has
the morning star arisen as a gladdening precursor to the
coming dawn. It isin your power to hasten the coming of
the approaching day. It must come by means of some one.
Who knows but that you may be indeed the heaven-sent
agent ?”

And this is a tale written to expose the dangers of mes-
merism, and to prove how lamentably the will of the patient
is prostrated under the will of the magnetizer. Listen to the
language which the author puts forth in explanation of his
views. “Such a state, (i.e., the state of being willing to be
mesmerised, in order to be cured of long-standing disease,)
he (Ralph) clearly saw to be a disorderly one, and being dis-
orderly, he very naturally inferred. that it was governed by
evil influences, for none other could reign over disorder.”
Ridiculous trash : well worthy, indeed, of a follower of Dr.
Maitland, and of his puzzle-pated and bewildered school. If
the ordinary regulations which the best mesmeric writers
advise to be adopted in the intercourse between a magnetizer
and the patient be but carefully observed, and we will answer
for it, that no improper ascendency will be obtained. But
let an impressible girl be permitted to receive daily visits
from an eloquent and attractive physician, or from an elo-
quent and attractive curate, and to hold private conversa-
tions with him on some favorite topic, and to be flattered
about her powers, we want no ghost to tell us that the phy-
sician or curate would soon acquire an undue influence over
her will. And should we blame medicine or religion, and
not rather the relatives of the young lady for such a result ?
And why is mesmerism to be considered as so specially
responsible for the folly or misconduct of those who have
recourse to it? The charge is preposterous: and we should
really feel a shame at entering into this lengthened refutation
of so idle a fancy, did we not know that the views which the
author of Agnes, the Possessed, is putting forth in this tale,
are views which are receiving extensive circulation in a
pseudo-religious circle.

To return, however, to our story, and to the next proof


64 Neither evil spirit nor Mesmerism required.


of diabolical possession. Florién so worked upon the feelings
of Miss Wellmore at these interviews, and inspired her with
such a desire of placing herself in his hands, “ in order that
she might become the medium of bringing down from the
invisible world the knowledge of things moré wonderful than
any yet imagined,” that she at last agrees to carry on with
him a secret correspondence! The Frenchman, therefore,
proceeds on his journey, and settles at a distant town: but
his letters, we are told, arrive regularly, and are written with
the skill of one who had an end to gain, and who understood
well the character of the individual he was desirous of winning
over to his purposes. Again we ask, where was the need of
introducing the machinations of an evil spirit into the plot?
A weak girl, and a cunning clever man, who thoroughly
understands her character, meeting every day, and afterwards
carrying on a private correspondence, constitute of them-
selves a very pretty story, without any need of superna-
turalism. However, this secret letter-writing proceeds, till
such a time as that Florién by its means induces Agnes to
undertake a visit to the same town, in which he is himself a
resident. She has some relations there, with whom she is to
be a guest. The day for her departure is fixed: and this
very discreet young lady prefers to travel alone rather than
wait one week, when she would have had the escort of a
merchant, known to her friends, who could have taken
charge of her. Such companionship would not have suited
the views of our interesting heroine. What, however, oc-
curred at the end of the journey, shall be told in the author’s
own words :—


‘In the blindness of the one purpose she had in view, she had
neglected to mention to any one but Florién the precise time at which
she would arrive. .. . But Florién was too much interested in the
fact of her arrival to forget the time. He was at the depét for the
cars, and ready to receive her. ‘How glad I am to see you, my
dear Miss Wellmore !’ he said, grasping her hand, ‘I have a car-
riage ready to convey you to your friends. Come!’ To refuse this
civility was out of the question. Even the wish to do so faded from
the mind of Agnes. The baggage was quickly placed behind the
carriage into which she entered with Florién. The driver mounted
his box, cracked his whip, and away they dashed over the rattling
pavement,” &c.


What happened to the fair Agnes, after the above act of
folly and indiscretion, we shall not. proceed to narrate. <A
young lady who can place herself alone in a carriage with an
itinerant French lecturer of whom she really knows nothing,


This revelation is “ bottomless folly.” 65


deserves any fate that she may meet with, and is no longer a
subject of interest. Let it be sufficient to say, that her sub-
sequent adventures are all in keeping with the above most
precious commencement ; the author, however, finishes the
chapter by informing his readers that his heroine remained
sitting upon the chair in the room in which she was impri-
soned by the Frenchman and his fellow-conspirators, “ with
every sense of her soul locked up and asleep, and all her
wonderful organism in the possession of some evil spirit,
who used it for a time as his own.” (p. 112.)

This, then, is called a “revelation” respecting mesmerism,
or a tale to prove the mode in which satanic agency works
through its means upon the will. We feel that some apology
is due to the readers of The Zoist for occupying any portion
of its pages with what Bacon calls in the motto of this paper
such “ bottomless folly” and balderdash. But we must deal
with fools after their foolishness. And we announce with
regret, and also with amazement, that, in spite of the enor-
mous sums that are annually expended in this country towards
the instruction of the soi-disant educated classes, the non-
sense which this silly story propounds, embraces a numerous
body of believers. ? Dr. Maitland, who shews himself so £¥ Py
wrathful if the clergy are accused of preaching against scien- ,', 3, 4-
tific novelties, has the especial honour of being the founder of » gd Us
this select sect. Henceforward, those fanatics should be / ~
called Maitlandites,* who teach that when a patient is re-
ceiving relief from the aid of mesmerism, the soul is fairly
walked out of the body and the evil spirit fairly walked in. +
For this it is, which this theory respecting the will enun-
ciates, and which the tale of Agnes, the Possessed, is intended
to establish. And whether Mr. T. S. Arthur, its author,
has succeeded in proving his own most alarming hypothesis,
we must now leave our readers to determine.

But really, after all, we mesmerisers are in a sad case.
First, we are sneered at for being dupes and idiots; then we


* Among those whom Dr. Maitland can claim as his followers, may be named
a certain number of the Jrvingites. A sermon on Mesmerism and Spiritual
Agency has been preached and published by one of them, in which a debt of gra-
titude to the learned doctor is handsomely acknowledged. The Archbishop’s
late librarian must be proud of his disciples. As a specimen of their style of
argument, we will give one short extract :—-‘‘ Men perform things which it is
impossible to account for, otherwise than by the agency of spirits. For let them
say what they will of latent powers in human nature, we know,—every one must
know,—that it possesses no faculty by which it can disclose what is being done
in secret and distant places. We need not argue the point,” &c. This cool
assumption of the position that nature has no latent powers of the kind alluded
without any sort of argument being permitted, is worthy of the Maitland
school.


VOL. XI. F


66 Shortsighted dishonesty and folly.


are libelled and called rogues and impostors: then, again,
when the facts of the impostors are found to be too truthful
to be denied, a vain theory about expectant attention is in-
vented in explanation, and a dull physician, whose hatred of
mesmerism and mesmerisers (on account, we presume, of
their success) has become a subject of ridicule even among
his acquaintance, writes a self-sufficient volume, ascribing
all the phenomena to the action of the mind on the body,
in which aforesaid volume he cunningly contrives to forget
the very examples which tell against him.* Then comes
forward the long array of spiritualists, with Professor Bush
and the Swedenborgians in their train, who accuse us next
of a hard and gross materialism for not adopting certain tran-
scendental views respecting the bright inhabitants of the in-
visible world, who are said to be moving all around us and
filling the atmosphere with their presence. With the thoughts
and affections of these beauteous beings we are admonished
that we might hold a daily and improving intercourse, if we
would but address ourselves to them in faith. And, lastly,
appears the gloomy school of the saturnine Maitland, which
teaches that mesmerism is but too true a tale, and that the
very blackest spirits from the blackest pits of Erebus are the
patrons of that unholy art, having formed an especial alliance
with the writers of The Zoist. Of any connexion, however,


with such potent beings, we must, in all modesty, proclaim
ourselves entirely innocent ; whether they be—


‘* Black spirits or white,
Red spirits or grey ;’’


Whether they bring with them blasts from hell or airs from
heaven; whether they be the gracious loving forms, with


* We call the especial attention of our readers to the following extract from
an article in the British and Foreign Medical Review for October, 1852 :—‘‘ The
influence of concentrated attention, especially when accompanied with the ez-
pectation of a change, in modifying the organic functions, which is the real agent,
as Dr. Holland has so well shewn, in the cures worked by mesmerism, &c.”

There are two points peculiarly worthy of observation in the above quotation.

Ist. The British and Foreign Medical Review, the great quarterly organ of
the profession, is at length driven to admit by the force of evidence, that cures
are worked by mesmerism! Let not this confession be forgotten: there it is,
printed, published, and circulated among the faculty, without, however, one
word of shame or regret being added thereto, for the scandalous insinuations in
which the medical world has indulged against the character and conduct of our
patients.

2nd. It is said that ‘‘ Dr. Holland has so well shewn” what is the real agent
of mesmeric action. This he has shewn by utterly ignoring all the well-authen-
ticated facts which contradict his theory. A curious system of proof! but thus
it is that medical writers go on repeating, one after the other, arguments and
statements which have been refuted again and again.


Our only spirit is the spirit of truth. 67


whom Cahagnet’s somnambules and Dr. Haddock’s Emma
hold a sweet communion, or the foul fiends that seized upon
the soul of “ Agnes, the Possessed ;” of all or any of these
spiritualities we know nothing,—we have seen nothing,—and
we can say nothing. Our experiences relate to manifesta-
tions of far less exalted origin, and of far more practical
purposes. Ignorant, however, as we are of these unearthly
visitants, there are “spirits” of whom, alas, we have seen
and known a great deal too much. Of the spirit of false-
hood,—of the spirit of folly,—of the spirit of fanaticism,—
of the spirit of misrepresentation and of the suppression of
truth,—and of the spirit of malevolence in its very blackest
die, and of those who have been “ possessed” and led by
these bad spirits, we have many a “revelation” to unfold,
and many a dark picture to portray. By these evil natures
have we been pursued and persecuted without remission or
remorse ; and such has been the implacability of their rage,
that no stone has been left unturned, and no means unat-
tempted, to deter and drive us from our course. And such,
indeed, was the loudness with which they screamed and gib-
bered, and such was the activity with which they beset us on
every side, (for their name was legion,) that many who looked
only at the outside of things, and who loved to coalesce with
the winning faction, deemed that our cause was hopeless,
and parted from our company, in spite of their own convic-
tions. But a brighter sun has been beaming upon us for
many a day: and though at times the malignity of our ene-
mies will not allow us to proceed onward unassailed, still it
may be seen, that their spells are becoming less potent every
hour, that their circle is being narrowed every year,—and
that the good cause, in which we have cast our venture, is
approaching to a certain, and not distant, triumph. For
ourselves, not even when the sky was most dark and over-
cast, did we ever for one moment quail or blench in our faith,
or deviate one hair’s-breadth from our path. From the first
we have relied upon the integrity of our purpose, the accu-
racy of our observations, and the fidelity with which we have
adhered to nature, and to nature’s laws and developments ;
and in spite of the host of evil spirits that have been leagued
in enmity against us, upon the aid of one good spirit only
have we trusted, and with the weapons of one good spirit only
have we fought and conquered,—and the name of that good
spirit is—Trura.


( 68 )


VII. Cure of diseased Gums: and a case of remarkable


Clairvoyance. By Mr. Cuasz. Commmunicated by Dr.
Elliotson.


‘**It is plain from the whole history of human religion and of human philo-
sophy that, in the uncultivated periods, men have been prone to imagine in all
that-surrounds them and happens to them the action of some power superior to
themselves, operating specially and immediately on each separate occasion. As
civilization advances, the domain of the preternatural recedes, daw is found to
embrace continually more and more, the exceptional and the occasional is found
to be less and less frequent, and at length the conviction rises clear and well
defined that in the divine creation all is subject to law, and that it argues no ex-
alted conception of the Maker of all things, that He should be interposing,
correcting, and adjusting defects in his own works.’’—Bampton Lectures, deli-
vered before the University of Oxford, by H. B. Wilson, B.D., late Fellow and
Tutor of St. John’s College; p. 121.


Vittoria Lodge, West Clifton, Bristol,
March 2, 1853.

Dear Sir,—Should you consider the following case worth
transmitting to The Zoist, it is at your disposal: the young
lady has consented for her name to be published.

Miss 8. Smith, milliner and dress-maker, Shaftesbury,
suffered for more than two years from a remarkable disease
of the gums. It began to show itself when she was recover-
ing from a severe fit of illness. At that time many remedies
were applied: but they only appeared to aggravate it, for the
disease so increased that it was with difficulty she masticated.
The pain and inconvenience became so great, that she has
frequently told me she was unable to bite off the cotton she
sewed with. But this was not the worst: for her teeth so
decayed that she was reluctantly compelled to discontinue
every kind of meat, and found it very difficult to eat bread.
When I first saw her (March, 1852) she was living entirely
upon sops, baked and boiled fruit, &c., and had done so for
a considerable time. As can be easily imagined, such a
regime was not likely to be conducive to her general health,
especially with her sedentary employment.

I had been going daily to the house for several weeks to
mesmerise her brother, who-suffered from epileptic fits of a
most extraordinary character, (a beautiful case for the pages
of The Zoist some future time,) when one day she told me
what a long time she had been a sufferer in her gums, and
shewed them to me. Not being a medical man, I know not
what to call the disease: but over or under each tooth, there
was a very red spot unlike anything I had ever seen before,
and the teeth were injured, I have no doubt in consequence
of having so long used various astringent applications for the
purpose of strengthening the gums. Mercury may have been


Diseased Gums permanently cured. 69


administered. From the incisor and canine teeth all the
enamel had disappeared; I need scarcely say to the great
mortification of the young lady.

I said there could be no harm in trying mesmerism : pro-
bably it would effect a cure, though I had never tried it in
any case of the kind. I was very much engaged at that time,
and could only afford from ten minutes to a quarter of an
hour. However, I made very slow passes over the face, &c.,
for a month, at the end of which time she was delighted to
find that she could not only masticate bread and butter, but
meat, and, what was no small joy to her, dite off her thread
again. From that time to the present she has had no pain
or trouble with them, excepting so far as their appearance is
concerned, and can eat with comfort what other people can.

When at her house one day in June last, having an hour
to spare, I tried to mesmerise Miss Smith. In a quarter of
an hour she was deeply entranced, and I was pleased to dis-
cover that she possessed the faculties of introvision and me-
dical instinct. Since that time she has examined a great
number of persons of all classes, from the peer to the peasant.

Having a sister-in-law in Bath, who has been suffering
for five or six years from epilepsy, and gradually getting
worse, Miss Smith kindly obliged us by coming to examine
her a fortnight ago, when I was on a visit to my brother,
S. Chase, 5, Saville Row. I had been urging them to try
mesmerism, for everything had been tried that could be
thought of: but she continued to get worse, and, as it was a
case likely to require very judicious treatment, I was anxious
that the clairvoyant should see her first, and tell me the
cause of the fits, if possible. As the examination was a very
interesting one, I will subjoin a very brief account of it.

After she was put into the sleep, she requested my sister-
in-law to give her hand. In a few minutes she said, “ Medi-
cine will never cure her; the principal cause is the too rapid
circulation of the blood, it is now flowing as fast again over
the brain as it ought. What a good thing it is you have not
tried to mesmerise Mrs. Chase: a single pass made now over
her head with both your hands would bring on a fit.” I did
not feel inclined to try the experiment, for on one occasion
last summer she had examined a young man who suffered
from fits, and saw a mass of dark matter on the cerebellum,
telling me at the same time that, if I made passes over the
back part of his head for three minutes, he would, when in
mesmeric sleep, have a very heavy fit. I was rather incre-
dulous, and the following night when I had mesmerised him
I tried the effect a few passes would have on that part; for I


70 Clairvoyance and cruel wickedness.


had made hundreds over him when standing before him
without such a result. But on this occasion I soon had the
truth of her prediction verified. For in less than three mi-
nutes I saw that I had done mischief, and should be punished
for my unbelief. He was a tall and powerful young fellow,
and it was with difficulty eight stout men could keep him on
the floor: but his raging ceased the moment I placed my
hand on the epigastric region.

I must, however, proceed. The clairvoyant continued :—
“Your sister must have a female to mesmerise her for the
first month or six weeks: but mind, the female must not
make the passes over her head; she must make them from
the neck to the feet for ten minutes twice a day; after that
time a man may do it: but at first the influence from a male
mesmeriser would be too powerful; she could not bear it.”
I said, “Is there any other cause for these fits?” “ Yes,”
she replied, “ I see a number of worms in her stomach, and
they are partly the cause; stop a minute, and I will tell you
how many there are: five Jarge and eighteen small ones;
the larger ones are of a light brown colour, quite round, and
upwards of four inches long; the smaller ones are quite
white, flat, and about three quarters of an inch in length :—
nasty things! she must take some salt and water twice every
day to destroy them.”

Some time ago my brother and his wife saw a worm which
came from her, of the exact appearance and size described
by the clairvoyant.

Many other interesting things were said by her, but I
fear that already I have spun my communication to too great
a length.

There is a gentleman residing in Bath, the nephew of a
great man who died last year, whose opinion has consider-
able weight with my brother and his wife. He has called
the clairvoyant a sorceress, and expressed his hope that they
will have nothing to do with her. I fear he has succeeded
in preventing her being mesmerised for the present, and per-
haps altogether.

If, Sir, these pages are of any interest to you, you are
at liberty to make what use you please of them.

Believe me to remain, dear Sir,
Yours very respectfully,
Dr. Elliotson. C. W. Cuasz.


( 71 )


VIII. Cure of a diseased Toe, condemned to amputation by
Mr. Norman, surgeon, at Bath: and an instance of
clairvoyant knowledge of disease and the remedy. By
Mr. S. D. Saunpers, Clifton. Communicated by Dr.
Elliotson.


“Another false meteor which has visited the world at various times now
flourishes somewhat under the name of the dreamer—Mesmer. Now, this so-
called science has no pretension whatever to the name, as even its advocates say
that the knowledge and the influence of it can only be felt and possessed by a
few. ... But what most provokes one’s ire is, that the doctrine of Mesmer has
been introduced into the treatment of disease,—that persons who are otherwise
sensible people, believe that they, (knowing nothing of the medical art,) can cure
by this mysterious agent, the most formidable complaints; and not content with
believing this absurdity themselves, they make the most strenuous endeavour to
procure converts to their faith, of which they have so much dread on some other
occasions, and unscrupulously infrude themselves into the chambers of our
patients, persuading them that they can cure disorders much more quickly than
we can, and even diseases which we make no pretension to do more than palliate,
inducing the poor creatures to believe, and probably believing themselves, that
they can give an earthly immortality to our frail and perishable bodies.””—Address
of Mr. Norman on taking the chair as President of the Bath and Bristol Branch
of the Provincial Medical Association. Provincial Medical and Surgical Journal,
August 18, 1852.


A youne lady, by the name of Werrett, living upon Combe
Downs, near Bath, called upon me when I was residing at
Ivy Cottage, Bath, and stated that she had been suffering
for a very long time from a disease in her great toe. She


had been under Mr. Norman, surgeon, of Bath, who had
tried everything he could think of without producing the
slightest benefit, till at last he came to the conclusion that
the toe must be amputated, and that immediately. Miss
Werrett at this time having become acquainted with a family
named Parsons, and being told by them that I had with the
agency of mesmerism cured the mother of rheumatism, the
uncle of rheumatism, the eldest daughter of deafness, and
the third daughter of consumption, requested I would try
and see if by mesmerism I could prevent the necessity of her
toe being taken off.

She had on at the time a large cloth slipper, and said she
had, owing to the pain, been scarcely able to walk from her
home to my house, a distance of about half a mile. I did
not examine her toe, but she told me that there was an ulcer
on the upper part just behind the nail and over the joint. I
placed her in an easy chair and tried to induce the sleep:
but could not succeed. I therefore directed my attention
entirely to her toe, and made strong passes. Sometimes I
made the passes from the forehead to beyond the toe. The
only sensation she felt was a slight tingling and drawing as
the hands passed over the disease. Af the end of the first


72 "Condemned Toe permanently cured.


sitting she felt her toe much easier,—that is, after I had blown
upon it. I very often find that my patients feel additional
benefit after I have blown over the part that I have been
mesmerising.

Miss Werrett came to me altogether about fifteen times,
and at last she was able to wear her ordinary leather boots
and shoes without feeling any pain, or limping in the slightest
degree.

This took place in the year 1846, and on my removal to
Clifton I entirely lost sight of her. But about a year ago
she met my mother in Bath, and asked my mother to thank
me for my former kindness to her, and say that her toe had
remained quite well up to that time.


Effects of the Upward Passes.

About a fortnight ago I had been over to Bath, and on
my return in the afternoon I found Mrs. Saunders in bed
experiencing the greatest sufferings. She was almost frantic
with pain in her right side just under her breast. She told
me that she had been suffering in this way for upwards of
two hours. I immediately made two or three passes over her
face, and she went as usual into the mesmeric sleep. I then
questioned her as to her disease, and what ought to be done.
She said, “ There is a little lump in my side like a very large
pea or small marble; it looks rather yellow and is gritty ;
and, if it remains where it is for twenty-four hours, it will
become hard and I shall never get rid of it. You must make
upward passes, from my side, up my chest, to my mouth ;
and I shall be sick and bring up the lump.” I asked if the
downward passes would not be best. But she replied that
they would not get rid of the lump. I therefore made up-
ward passes with both hands, and in about five minutes she
vomited some phlegm and also a kind of gritty matter. She
said, “There, part of it is wp, but not-all: you must stop a
little.” In about a quarter of an hour she told me to resume
the upward passes. This I did, and she was again sick, and
threw off a little more of the gritty matter. She said, “ Now
it is all off, and you must make the downward passes to
soothe me.” I made them, and in about half an hour she
was able tg get up; and before bed-time she felt herself
quite well. Her reason no doubt for prescribing the upward
passes was that I had mesmerised her in that way to bring
on vomiting some little time before, when she was suffering
from an attack of bile.

S. D. SaunpERs,
Penrose Cottage, Clifton, Feb. 12, 1853.


Slobbering childishness of some opponents. 78


N.B. May not the phenomenon of sea-sickness be ex-
plained by the upward and downward passes ?


*,.* In No. XXII., p. 202, is a beautiful cure of a lumbar
abscess which Mr. Norman had said would prove fatal in two years.
After the cure the patient rode recklessly about, had many falls, and
brought back the disease (see No. XXXIV., p. 224). Compare a
similar cure in No. XXXIII., p. 25.—Zoist.


IX. A Review of “ What is Mesmerism?”


‘* Ye shepherds—tell me,
Tell me—tell me —tell me.”
The Wreath.

Our cause must be, indeed, thriving and making no unim-
portant progress, if we may form a judgment from the num-
ber of missives that are sent out to arrest its course. There
is no more certain sign of success than the small-pamphlet-
opposition. Here is another little publication, full of male-
dictions and Maitlandism,—quoting Scripture with a happy
inappropriateness,—raising up giants for the satisfaction of
knocking them on the head,—reproducing arguments which
have been refuted again and again,—conjuring up the most
alarming consequences from problematical contingencies,—
seeing nothing but mischief and evil in that which in itself
is so full of good,—and overlooking, with the cold bigotry
of a theorist, the vast amount of relief and blessing which
our art, judiciously administered, is capable of communicat-
ing to the race of man.

“What is mesmerism !” asks our fanatical author, with
his hair bristling all on end, like quills upon the fretful por-
cupine. ‘“ Look back at the ten volumes of The Zoist,” (we
might, if we so cared, tell him in reply,) “and you will
there see that mesmerism is a gift out of the mighty store-
house of nature, full of mercy and comfort and health to the
suffering and to the miserable.” But though we cannot
spare time to inform our mystified author “ what mesmerism
is,” we will at least have the pleasure of instructing him
as to what it is not. It is not anything that can be consi-
dered, even by the most forced construction, as now “ for-
bidden to the people of God” by the books of Moses. It is
not anything, to which the numerous passages of Scripture,
which are quoted in this pamphlet, have now, if they ever
had, the slightest application. It is nof anything, as it is
recommended to be practised. by those who contribute to our


74 Slobbering childishness of some opponents.


pages, which can be called a dealing with “ necromancy and
familiar spirits,” or a pretension of working miracles and
signs. There may be those who have used, or still use, mes-
merism for such purposes, for what we know,—for instance,
among eastern nations at this moment: but how does that
affect the question, supposing such to be the case? There
have been fire-worshippers before now : nations or tribes, who
have either worshipped the fire itself, or made use of fire as
a means of communication with the other world, and of ap-
peasing or controlling imaginary demons by its light. The
prohibition of fire in our domestic arrangements might, ac-
cording to our author’s principles, be as much enfvrced as
the prohibition of mesmerism.

However, the principal point in this pamphlet relates to
the Maitlandite view, that the will of the patient is subjected
to the will of the mesmeriser during the sleep, and while the
influence is in full work on the system. This subjection, of
course, is very distinct from the influence over the will, which
is also said to exist after the sitting, and between the inter-
vals of sleep; upon which we have already touched at some
length in our review of Agnes, the Possessed. As to this
subjection of the will during the sleep, we fully admit the
fact, and regard it as one of our most curious phenomena:
and where is the harm of it, if it be properly exercised by
judicious mesmerisers? That this power might be abused,
like every other power or every other gift, we do not deny :
the evil-disposed may do what is evil with that which is alone
excellent and good. But we are weary of this argument
drawn from abuse; and we only ask in reply, what is the
mischief that arises from the simple, harmless, inconse-
quential experiments that take place at a mesmeric sitting,
to prove the influence of the operator over his patients ?
Even if there were any mischief, would it be enough to
counterbalance the immense amount of benefit received in
the matter of health?

The truth is, argument is of no use in a question of this
sort. It is a matter of sentiment and feeling, or rather of
prejudice and misdirected zeal, the effect of the novelty and
strangeness of the phenomena; and those who are influenced
by considerations of this nature are inaccessible to argu-
ment, even were the arguer a Bacon or a Newton. We
remember, for instance, to have heard it strongly asserted,
that expeditions to the North Pole were very sinful, seeing
that Providence, by the barriers of ice that were purposely
placed in the way, had clearly not intended a passage to be
forced in that direction. More lately, the use of chloroform


Clairvoyance of M. Adolphe Didier. 75


in surgical operations was objected to, on the ground, that
pain was part of the inheritance of man; and that to anni-
hilate pain, was to oppose God and upset his word! And
we have known some very interesting bodies gravely con-
tend against the propriety of railway travelling, because the
pace, at which the trains proceeded, was infinitely faster
than that which poor human beings were authorized to
attempt. Men tried, it was said, in all these schemes to
exceed the natural limit by which their Maker had intended
to hem them in! And they who talked this nonsense, deemed
themselves very religious all the while, and very superior in
piety and virtue to those who did not so talk. Again we
say, that there is no use in reasoning with fanatics like these,
any more than in reasoning with the writer of this pamphlet.
Sentimentalism must have its swing: and we shall not waste
any further time in endeavouring to make it wiser.


X. Indisputable Clairvoyance of M. Adolphe Didier. By
the Rev. Cyauncy Hare TownsHenp. Communi-
cated by Dr. Elliotson.


**You assure me solemnly that you do not tell the Medium anything. I
declare unequivocally that you do. It is the same in cases of clairvoyance: you
tell all, and fancy you are told: you do not tell it in so many words, but uncon-
sciously you are made to believe the very thing you believe is communicated to
you.”—Mr. G. H. Lewes, Leader Newspaper, March 12, 1853; p, 262


My dear Elliotson,—As you were so good as to think my
slight communication respecting Adolphe Didier sufficiently
interesting to find a place in The Zoist (No. XL., p. 409), I
am induced to give you a more detailed account of the cir-
cumstances referred to in my former letter.

My friend, Mr. Lawrence, now residing at Geneva, (and
who has derived much benefit to his health from mesmerism,)
invited me, in September last, to come and test the clair-
voyance of Adolphe Didier. The day after my arrival at the
Hétel de ? Ecu at Geneva, about a quarter past 11 o’clock in
the morning, Mr. Lawrence entered my apartment, intro-
ducing to me a quiet pleasing-looking young man, of an
agreeable honest countenance, and a gentlemanly exterior.
This was Adolphe Didier. As my time was limited, I did
not waste the moments in conversation, but soon threw
Adolphe into the mesmeric state by the usual passes. In
him I did not perceive any of the convulsive contortions of
countenance which had preceded the sleep of his brother
Alexis. With a slight sigh and a shiver, he closed his eyes


Clairvoyance of M. Adolphe Didier.


in less than five minutes from the first mesmerisation. Ask-
ing him if he slept—if he were clairvoyant, I received affirm-
ative answers. I now begged of Mr. Lawrence, who sat
slightly removed from us, to be attentive to my questions,
and to Adolphe’s answers, in order that I might have a cor-
roborating witness of what should pass. My first question
was (I translate the French, in which the whole conversation
was carried on), “Can you see a person (I was careful not
to name the sex) whom I know at Lausanne?” Answer—
‘IT shall be able; but you must first lead me to Lausanne
by your thoughts.” Then, after a pause, “I embark on the
steamer—I go up the Lake—the vessel stops at various places
—I am now opposite a small town (this was Ouchy)—I get
into a boat—I land—I walk up a broad road—up hill—now
I turn to the right.” (Here I must observe that Adolphe
never had been at Lausanne). “ Now I see a house to my
right,” (here he paused:) “the house stands in a sort of
angle, between two smaller roads than the one by which I first
came. It is very near the road. I go up steps to the door—
—I enter a not large vestibule; from this I go into a salon.
There is a door open in the salon, which connects it with
another room. The two rooms seem to me almost like one
large apartment that stretches quite from one end of the
house to the other.” “ And where is the person who lives in
the house ?”’ I asked. “ Wait, wait,” said he; “ there is no
one in the salon. I go up stairs (again a pause)—Je vois une
dame,” (this was uttered very slowly.) ‘“ Describe her,”
said I. Now followed a very accurate description of the lady
—my cousin—Miss C——, on whom I had thought. The
features, the hair, way of wearing it, &c., were all correct.
Now, without further question from me, Adolphe went on,
** Quelle drole de chose elle met sur la téte.”’ 1 fancied this
odd head-dress might be my cousin’s “ wide-awake,” in which
I believed she was accustomed to ride out. With this idea I
asked for a description, but was surprised at Adolphe’s in-
sisting upon it that the article in question was, “wun filet
brun.” In vain I tried to get him away from this (as I
thought) false scent. He persisted in the “filet brun.’” Now
again he began to exclaim, “ What an odd dress this lady
wears! She has the upper and lower part of her dress
quite unlike! The upper part is more like a man’s—a sort
of jacket; then there are skirts of quite another material.”
I must here observe that I thought this was a clumsy de-
scription of a riding-habit. It is necessary also to remark
that, never having seen Miss C—— in her riding-dress, save
once casually when she was attired in a full habit and wide-


Clairvoyance of M. Adolphe Didier.


awake, I was fancying all the time that Adolphe was very
incorrect—a surmise, however, afterwards disproved. Adolphe
went on, “ She goes to the window—she looks out anxiously
—she is doubting about the weather: ah! she is wishing to
go out on horseback. Monter a cheval! (he repeated) c’est
sa passion d@aujourdhui !’ Here I was indeed struck; for
nothing could be more true than this assertion. Adolphe
now seemed fatigued, and asked me to give him a few passes,
which he declared refreshed him. From this quiescent state,
he suddenly and spontaneously (and I must own this is one
of the most extraordinary instances of true clairvoyance I
ever met with) cried out, “Iam at a point of time anterior
to that of which we were just now speaking. I see the same
lady in another room—in another house. What I see hap-
pened before you left Lausanne for Geneva. She sits in a
latge arm-chair by the fire. You are sitting on another chair
(not an arm-chair) facing her. You are telling her about
your going to Geneva: you seem interested: you lean for-
ward in your chair. I see you both perfectly !”

Now I must observe that the circumstances described
were rendered remarkable by this, namely, not only that the
whole was true, but that the visit of Miss C to me just
before I left Lausanne was accidental. In passing, she had
seen my carriage at the door—had entered to ask where I
was going, and had been seated exactly as described while I
was speaking of my going to Geneva.

These are the chief circumstances of Adolphe Didier’s
clairvoyance, as witnessed by me; and to the correctness
with which I have narrated them my friend Mr. Lawrence
can add his testimony, though all was an enigma to him
until (the somnambulist having gone away) I explained to
what lady the revelations had alluded, and how far they were
founded in fact. ‘“ But,’ I added, “I think Adolphe was
wrong on some points; namely, about the being able to see
from one end of the house to the other—about the brown net
and the dress—possibly even about my cousin riding out at
all to-day, for I believe it is not her day for going to the
riding-school.”

But now comes the most singular part of the business.
On returning to Lausanne, I related the whole history to
Miss C , pointing out where I thought the somnambulist
had made errors. What, however, was my surprise to hear
her say, “But he was not wrong. The day you left Lau-
sanne, I opened the door between my two rooms, to let in
the warmth from the stove in the dining room, and so they
have remained ever since.”


78 Clairvoyance after the fact.


“ But,” I said, “ he was wrong about the brown net?”

“Not so! I was putting on a brown net to keep my hair
up: I will shew it you. I did not wear my wide-awake that
day. Moreover, though not my regular day for riding, I
went to take a lesson, because the days had just been changed.
I also had put on only my jacket, but had my usual dress
below it.”

“And what o’clock was all this?” I still rather incredu-
lously asked. “ Between 11 and 12,” replied Miss C .

This indeed was the very time I had been questioning
Adolphe. In short, it turned out that he had been right in
every particular, and even the apparent failures substantiated
more the accuracy of his assertions.

This I declare to be an accurate account of one of the
most searching investigations possible. No leading questions
were asked: the somnambulist almost spontaneously made
the statements. I tell but the truth, and leave the readers
of The Zoist to draw their conclusions.

Believe me, my dear Elliotson,
Very faithfully yours,
C. Hare TownsHEND.
London, March, 1853.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.


In the most interesting and instructive history of his
case of cataleptic insanity, No. XXIII., Mr. Parsons, at p.
357, gives the following report of the events of “Tuesday,
June 6 :”—


** Various feats of clairvoyance, concerning the school, which we
verified: and, strange to say, the things had been accurately de-
scribed, but had happened and ceased half an hour before he de-
scribed them to us as passing at the moment.”


In my note to the case I wrote as follows :—


‘The curious circumstance of clairvoyants communicating a
knowledge of things as now occurring which had occurred just_be-
fore is well established. What is stated at p. 357 as having hap-
pened on June 6th is similar to what was noticed by Capt. James at
Dover in one of his clairvoyants. I recollect being informed of it by
Capt. James at the time; but, wishing for minute particulars, I
requested the Captain to give me an account in writing, and he did
so upon the 17th of the present month.

* With respect to the case of clairvoyance to which you allude, I
will endeavour to give you as correct an account as possible of what
occurred.

* About three years since, a servant in my employ exhibited dur-
ing the mesmeric sleep very extraordimary clairvoyant powers. Some


Clairvoyant Dreaming. 79


friends having one day desired to witness my experiments, the ser-
vant was mesmerised, and, after giving various proofs of the pos-
session of the faculty of clairvoyance, I suggested that two of the
party should withdraw to another room, in order to prove whether
the patient could describe what they were doing.

‘ After the lapse of a few minutes, I desired the patient to look
into the room in question and to tell me what she saw. After a
short pause she said, ‘‘I see a gentleman and a lady in the room;
the gentleman has got a bonnet on his head.”” Another pause; she
then exclaimed, ‘‘Oh! now the gentleman has got upon the table
with a candle in his hand.”

‘Soon after this my friends returned to us, and I asked them
what they had been doing. Their account agreed in every parti-
cular with the patient’s, except as to the time. It appeared that
the gentleman had actually put on a bonnet on first entering the
room, but took it off again immediately; and after some considerable
delay, at length got on the table with the candle in his hand. I per-
fectly remember that, on comparing notes, we found there must have
been a lapse of nearly five minutes from the moment my friend re-
moved the bonnet from his head and the moment my servant declared
she saw it on him.’”


*,* M. Adolphe Didier at present resides at No. 26, Charlotte Street, Fitzroy
Square.—Zoist.


XI. A very recent and remarkable Clairvoyant Dream. Com-
municated by Mr. Charles Herbert Cottrell to Dr.
Elliotson.


* Now I think it is not unlikely,—it certainly is not impossible,—that our
minds may have, even now, faculties which lie dormant at present (as the power
of sight does in a blind man).’-—4 View of the Scripture Revelation concerning
a Future State, laid before his parishioners by a country pastor (now the Most
Rev. Richard Whately, D.D., Lord Archbishop of Dublin) ; lect. v., p. 124.


“ Hawley Lodge, Barnet, Feb. 25, 1853.

“ Srr,—I send you the following very curious fact, which
I think you may like to put into The Zoist. The accompany-
ing paper is drawn up by our physician at Colney Hatch,
and the matter came before me as a visiting justice of that
Asylum, so that I can verify it of my own knowledge. It is,
however, necessary to add some explanation.

“The patient in question was eating his dinner, when a
piece of meat got into his throat, and although Mr. Tyerman
was immediately called to his assistance—did everything that
surgical aid could effect, even to making an external opening
in the throat, he failed to save his life.

“You will see that it is but an ordinary case of a dream


80 Clairvoyant Dreaming.


coming true, as the phrase is: but the woman’s conviction of
its truth was such that she came from Poplar some eight miles
to see if the dream were true, and, had it been a visiting day,
she would have been in the Asylum at the moment of the
event occurring.
“ Your obedient servant,
“ Cuartes Herspert Corrre.t.


“Tt seemed to make a great impression on Mr. Wakley
at the inquest.”


Particulars with reference to Mrs. Simmers’s presentiments of
the sudden death of her husband.


Jan. 25, 1853. An hour or two after his decease Mrs.
Simmers came to see me, and stated that during the previ-
ous night (Monday), she awoke terrified several times under
an impression that her husband was by her side in the act of
dying from suffocation whilst taking food, making a gurgling
noise in the throat.

The conviction that some fatality had happened to him
induced her to rise early and call upon her landlady to ac-
quaint her with the circumstances.

She then came to the Asylum upon an unusual day of the
week (Tuesday); Monday and Thursday, the usual visiting
days, being the days on which she had always previously
called to visit her husband: and requested the porter at the
gate to send a messenger to her husband’s ward and make
enquiries as to his state, having also related to the porter
(Haslett) her above described convictions. The messenger
returned with a favourable report of the patient: but in the
interval occupied by his return the fatal accident occurred.
Mrs. Summer’s having, however, received a favourable mes-
sage left the lodge to return home, but, being late for the
train, received at the station intelligence of the facts. Her
landlady (besides the porter Haslett) has corroborated Mrs.
Simmers’s statements.

D. F. Tyerman.

Mrs. Simmers’s address is 15, James Street, Poplar New
Town.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.

I am inclined to believe that clairvoyance independent of
mesmerism occurs more frequently in sleep than in the wak-
ing state. References to all the instances of clairvoyance
recorded in The Zoist up to October, 1851, will be found in
No. XXXV., p. 234. Among tlie examples of clairvoyance


Clairvoyant Dreams. 81


without mesmerism in a dream, are that of Goethe’s grand-
father, No. XX., p. 344: of Gasparus Van Sparr, No. XXI.,
p. 54: of a friend of Dr. Davey, No. XXXI., p. 328.

Clairvoyance in dreams is frequently not a copy, but
allegorical, figurative. In my note on clairvoyance in No.
XXIV., p. 375, I said :—


“If clairvoyance takes place in dreaming, it may give rise to
imagery; and so commonly was this known in ancient times that
professed interpreters of dreams were consulted. When I reflect
upon the unquestionable unconscious working of the brain, upon its
unconscious reception of knowledge from without—upon its uncon-
scious acting upon this knowledge, upon its unconscious and irre-
sistible willing,* I can conceive that a clairvoyant may not under-
stand his clairvoyance: and another sagacious person, perhaps
another clairvoyant, may be required to interpret for him.”


These facts all presented themselves to my own observa-
tion: and, as in ordinary clairvoyance in the waking or sleep-
waking state the clairvoyant information is occasionally given
with a degree of hallucination,—the fancy of an imaginary
being or book (No. XXIV., p. 337) communicating it, so
such appearances sometimes take place and communicate the
information in clairvoyant dreaming.


‘Certain excitement of various portions of the brain, if not of
other divisions of the nervous system, gives the appearance of un-
existing or absent beings and inanimate objects, gives the impression
of unreal sounds, tastes, smells, and feelings,—to use the term feelings
in the signification of all sensations included in the generic word
touch. Any of these phenomena may occur singly, or in combina-
tion with one or more of the others, or with different diseases of the
nervous system. A madman may believe their reality, as he does
the reality of all his fancies; and so may a person not mad but ig-


* “Though I have always contended that what appears the attraction of parts
is an act of the will, I confessed that if I stiffened Miss Barber’s arm in her waking
state, and drew it by tractive passes, the movements of the arm were excited
unconsciously, and to her astonishment, p. 221. But they do not occur, unless
she knows of my tractive passes: and I had a patient, Miss Emma Melhuish,
who did anything that I said she would, though she did not if I requested or com-
manded. ‘Whatever movement I said would occur of any part, it did occur.’ I
asked her how all this happened; and she replied, in the gentle voice which had
always characterized her mesmeric sleep-waking, ‘that she did not know,—that
she heard what was said, and that she knew her arm went up, but could not tell
why,—that she did not try to lift it up,—she could not help it,—and when it was
up she could not put it down again ; but, when I said it would go down, it did.
No. IV., p. 434. That will was exerted, was proved by seeing being required in
Miss Barber’s case, and hearing in Emma’s case, though the willing of both was
unconscious. But the fact in Miss Melhuish’s case was an experimentum crucis;
for, as no tractive pass was made, there could be no physical attraction,—
nothing comparable to magnetic attraction. The brain heard and willed—and
this was all. See No. V., p. 70.”

VOL, XI. G


Unreal Appearances.


norant—unacquainted with their true nature, which is diseased
nervous action. The ignorant suppose such appearances of beings
to be supernatural beings or real souls of terrestrial men separated
from the body for the moment. However, the appearance of their
clothes, of books, and of all the other inanimate objects, is not to
be so explained,—not by supernatural clothes, books, trees, &c., &c.,
nor by separated souls of clothes, of books, trees, &c.: and these
appearances may be produced by narcotic poisons, blows on the head,
indigestible food, &c., &c., and be dispelled by emetics, bleeding,
&e., &c. Clairvoyance is sometimes, but not necessarily, attended
by this sort of hallucination—by an appearance or impression of some
unreal being or inanimate object, which seems to make the commu-
nication. In the highest form of the sleep-waking of the elder
Okey, when she had a degree of clairvoyance and presented such an
extatic appearance as no one could assume, she fancied her commu-
nications, whether true clairvoyance or illusion is not the present
question, were made by a beautiful negro. If a question was asked
her, she was observed to whisper as if to some one with her—then
to pause, as if receiving an answer,—and then to answer the ques-
tion. This idea I traced to her having seen a handsome young New
Zealand Chief, brought to the hospital by Mr. Gibbon Wakefield to
witness her phenomena. Her sister Jane at one time fell into an
analogous state without any true clairvoyance, and she fancied she
saw a gentleman. Subsequent reading informed me that these deli-
rious ideas were often recorded by authors who have described the
cases of clairvoyants that fell under their own observation. At the
very time the two Okeys were in University College Hospital, a young
lady was in an analogous condition at Neufchatel under Dr. Castell,
and subsequently at Aix in Savoy under the care of Dr. Despise,
senior, who has detailed her most interesting case.

“It was not till the following year that I met with the work,
presented indeed to me by Dr. Despine, and found that the imposi-
tions of the Okeys, as the deeply learned British medical journalists,
Mr. Wakley, Dr. Conolly, Dr. Forbes, Dr. James Johnson, and
professors and practitioners termed them, had been performing at the
same time, in a little Swiss town. Miss Estelle was but 11 years
old, five years per than Elizabeth Okey, and yet devised almost
the same set of phenomena. Of course Estelle and the Okeys had
laid their heads together and had daily correspondence by post.
Estelle’s clairvoyant communications were generally made with the
appearance of a good angel whose name was Angeline. Like the
Okeys she would address the imaginary being in a whisper, wait for
an answer, and, after appearing to receive it, speak again and declare
it. Metals and crystals had peculiar effects on her. She saw glo-
bules of light, and blue and red lights: could be sent to sleep by
electricity: and had the power of inducing her own somnambulism.
Socrates appears to have been a clairvoyant, but to have had one
tinge of insanity with it. He fancied that a certain being attended


him. This hallucination justifies Mr. Lelut in pronouncing him so
far a monomaniac. °


Ancient division of Dreams. 83


**As monomaniacal delusion is only a casual accompaniment of
clairvoyance, so it sometimes ceases to attend it, The Okeys lost it
while still exhibiting as much approximation to clairvoyance, if such
it should be termed, as ever. They afterwards were satisfied that it
had been an illusion, and explained it by saying that a degree of
delirium had been at one time united with one of their mesmeric
conditions. The peculiar modes of detection mentioned at pp. 338—
40, as employed by Mr. Parsons’s youth, appear to me to be the
result of an insane condition: and his mode of telling the time by
an imaginary dial, p. 338, to be the result of at least eccentricity.
I conceive that Frank had an extraordinary faculty of judging of time,
but went through certain unnecessary processes, which, however, he
sometimes made necessary, and yet not always, for he sometimes
judged accurately without them (p. 355 and perhaps 353).”


Ancient writings are full of examples of clairvoyant
dreaming, in which the information was given by the imagi-
nary figure of a being.

These observations, made by ourselves in the dreams of
ordinary sleep and in sleep-waking, are precisely those which
were made by the ancients. Dr. Potter, Archbishop of Can-
terbury, in his Archeologia Greca, when treating of divina-
tion by dreams,-says that dreams of a predicting kind, “ com-
monly call’d Divine,” were of three sorts. “The first was
Xpnyatiswos, when the Gods and Spirits in their own, or
under an assumed Form, conversed with Men in their
Sleep :” as when the Form of Nestor advised Agamemnon
in his sleep to give the Trojans battle. ‘The second is
Opaya, wherein the Images of Things which are to happen
are plainly represented in their own Shapes and Likeness ;
and this is by some call’d Qcwpnyuartixos :” as when Alexander
the Great dreamt that he was to be murdered by Cassander.
“The third Species, call’d Oveipos, is that in which future
Events are revealed by Types and Figures; whence it is
named AApyopixds, an allegory, being, according to Hera-
clides of Pontus, a Figure by which one Thing is express’d,
and another signify’d :” as when Hecuba dreamed that she
had conceived a firebrand.

The ancients carefully distinguished between these divine
dreams and the common, usually futile and wild, (though
sometimes intellectual, consistent, and more rarely highly
intellectual,) to which we all are subject* from mere cerebral
excitement, and which are induced by strong intellectual or
emotional action in the brain in the waking state not properly


* See my observations upon dreaming, and instances of their occasional in-
tellectual character, in my Human Physiology, p. 663, &c., &c.


G2


84 Appearances in Mesmerised Water.


subsiding, or by the common causes of the excitement of
every other organ—imbibed or externally applied stimulus,
sympathy with the stomach or some other organ disordered,
&c., &c. “The Ways, by which dreams were suppos’d usually
to come,” “ were two: one for delusive Dreams, which pass’d
through a Gate of Ivory; another for the true, which pass’d
through a Gate of Horn.”
‘¢ Sunt gemine Somni porte, quarum altera fertur
Cornea, qua veris facilis datur exitus umbris :
Altera candenti perfecta nitens elephanto,


Sed falsa ad coelum mittunt insomnia manes.’’
Virgil, ZEneid. vi., 893.


“The Time in which true dreams were expected, was
Nu«ros aporyos,”—morning milking time.
HoNnyos,
‘« Namque sub auroram jam dormitante lucerna


Tempore quo cerni somnia vera solent.’’
Ovid, Epist. xix., p. 195.


“The Reason of which Opinion was this, viz., they thought all
the remainder of the meat upon their stomachs might by that Time
be pretty well digested, and gone; for till then, Dreams were be-
liev’d rather to proceed from the Fumes of the last Night’s supper,
than any Divine or Supernatural Cause : and therefore Pliny tells us, a
Dream is never true presently after eating or drinking: and Artemi-
dorus further observes, that small credit is to be given to a Morning
Dream, if you have eaten too plentifully the Night before ; because
all the crudities cannot then be carried off.

“For that Reason they who desired a prophetic Dream, us’d to
take a special Care of their Diet, so as to eat nothing hard of Di-
gestion, as particular Beans, or raw Fruit. Some, that they might
be sure to be free from Fumes, fasted one Day before, and abstain’d
from Wine for three.”


The observations respecting the connexion between the
time and the clairvoyant character of a dream resolve them-
selves, I presume, all into the greater or less liability of the
brain at one period than another to be excited in a common
way by the causes which excite all other organs.


XII. A Confirmation of the Observations upon Mesmerised
Water detailed in No. XL., p. 425. By the Rev. Jer-
rERY Exins. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


“You are to give full credit to Bruce. We put him to a severer trial than
travellers in such remote countries have experienced. General Baird brought his
work from India, and I opened it in the presence of a native of Abyssinia and
several English, for two days successively : examining the Abyssinian on all


Appearances in Mesmerised Water. 85


points. He knew the plants, and named them from the plates alone, and in all
things strictly confirmed what Bruce had written. All the French travellers in
Upper Egypt give praise and credit to his work : so do the captains of the ships
in the Red Sea, and the officers of the Indian army, who were so far up the Nile
as the cataracts. Indeed, it is a most valuable acquisition. He is not only ac-
curate in general facts, but in all the minute circumstances deduced from them.’’
—Letter to the Rev. R. Malthus by the Rev. E. D. Clark, Professor of Mine-
ralogy in the University of Cambridge. Life and Remains of the Rev. E. D. Clark,
LL.D., &e., by Dr. Otter, late Bishop of Chichester. p. 492.


Sampford, Braintree, Jan. 22, 1853.

My dear Sir,—As I can confirm the statement in the last
number of The Zoist relating to the effects produced on water
by mesmerising, I am willing to add my testimony if required.

On being told at the Infirmary that the matron could
perceive a change in the water when mesmerised, I said 1
should like to try if I could see anything myself. Accord-
ingly we both watched the water together, I having previously
told her not to tell me what she saw : when we both exclaimed
at once that a change had taken place. After Mr. Capern
had pointed his fingers over the water for a few seconds, there
appeared a dancing light on the surface (like what is seen
over a corn-field on a hot day): then the water was put into
an undulating motion, which began to increase, and after-
wards a nebulous form like an inverted cone slowly descended
from the surface of the water towards the bottom of the
glass. I have made these observations at the Infirmary three
or four times. The other day when I was watching the
matron mesmerising some water for a patient, I distinctly
saw the undulating motion.

I can confirm another statement in the same article of
The Zoist, and I learnt from the writer of it that the girl
alluded to who saw living insects in the water before mes-
merising, and saw them dead after mesmerising, is the same
person who once in my presence at the Infirmary declared
that she perceived appearances precisely the same.

If you deem this account of mine worthy of insertion in
The Zoist, 1 shall be happy to contribute to so excellent and
useful a work.

I remain, my dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
JerrERY EKINs.


J. Elliotson, Esq., M.D.


( 86 )


XIII. Spirit Rapping.


*—— pulsat pede—
Horativs, lib. i., carm. iv., 13.


ee pee a ee


=


Rarrine sounds, ascribed to unseen spiritual beings, have
attracted the attention of a great number of persons in
America within the last few years, and are now beginning to
attract some attention here.

It is pretended that tapping, rapping, or pecking sounds
are made by departed spirits, who favour the living inhabit-
ants of this world with their presence and their communica-
tions, to please certain among us who are styled Mediums, and
are in fact go-betweens to the spirits and those of us who wish
to witness the proofs of the presence of the spirits and gain
information from these people of another world. The Me-
dium causes the visit of the spirits and induces them to
answer questions, proposed by individuals of the company,
by rapping, or not rapping, in order to signify Yes or No; and
by rapping when the enquiring individual, in passing his
finger over the several letters of the alphabet, passes it over
those which make up the word signifying the information, or
over the numerals which represent the number of any nu-
merical matters about which an enquiry is made.

A philosopher would be justified in rejecting all this doc-
trine at once. We have no proof of the existence of any
spirits as distinct beings in nature; they are merely imagin-
ary beings,—“ bottomless fancies,’—the offspring of bygone
times,—of ignorance, when men personified every power in
nature, and fancied that power could exist alone, detached,
inherent in nothing. We have no proof of the existence of
anything in nature but matter and its properties: and to
regard the existence of power without matter, however fine
and subtle, in which it is inherent, and of which it in truth
forms a part, according to the actual composition, &c., of the
substance, is impossible to a strong, deep-thinking mind.
We have no proof, or ground of belief, of anything else.
These spirits, fancied, bottomless, unproved and unprovable,
nay, inconceivable, a philosopher is justified in at once re-
jecting as arrant nonsense. Of God, who must be super-
natural and above all nature,—beyond nature, we can con-
ceive and comprehend nothing, and therefore we exclude him
from our consideration of his works. If the philosopher*


* See No. XXXIX., pp. 313—15.


Unphilosophic and unchristian. 87


should be a Christian, he would still be justified in rejecting
this doctrine, because he not only sees clearly that we, bodies
with properties as we are, perish by nature into complete
disintegration and dispersion, like all other organizations,
when we die, but looks forward on the promises of the
New Testament, and on them only, to a future existence—
to fyture life and immortality, as a miracle, as a gift, super-
added to us, and revealed by the Gospel: and believes that
we shall exist again as bodies—rise with bodies—but not till
the judgment day. Even if he believes in these inconceiv-
able spirits, already existing before the last trump, he can-
not believe that they can be called up from their abodes of
bliss, where God had placed them, or from any abodes, at the
pleasure of a public exhibitor, making money of them when-
ever an audience will collect and pay. The idea is outrageous
and revolting.*

Disregarding, however, all considerations of improbability
= impossibility, of horror and disgust, let us examine the
acts.

After a certain number of persons have agreed to pay the
Medium a stipulated sum for spiritual truths, they sit at a
table with her: a table is always insisted upon by the spirits ;
and this is very odd, as there are no tables or chairs in their
own country. Sooner or later they arrive, sometimes not
till half an hour has elapsed, and then expectation is the
more highly worked up, and so much the less time is left for
rigorous examination. There is heard a faint rap at the
table: so faint perhaps that the Medium says, “ Hush—stop:
Iheardarap.” All listen: it is repeated: one hears it : and
then another also hears it; and so on, till all agree that the
rapping has begun and the spirits have certainly arrived. All
are now amazed, and all are attentive. The gentlemen be-
come grave; the ladies pale ; and all are satisfied that there
is something in it. The sound is like the pecking of a bird ;


+


* A “Medium” tells her audiences that she has come to England because
‘* the spirits’? would give her no rest till she had made them known in England.
According to her own account, she wishes to make no profit by the expedition,
but merely to clear her expenses: and for this purpose she allows the spirits to
manifest themselves in England, at a guinea for individual examination, or half
a guinea each for a party. Though brought over by a man, who engages her on
speculation, as Tom Thumb or the Wonderful Pig or the Industrious Fleas were
engaged for the season by a speculator, she cannot have now made less than two
or three hundred pounds, and ought therefore no longer to make such charges as
rich people only can afford to pay; but, if her object is to publish a great truth,
a great spiritual truth, should, in fulfilment of her mission, admit the more nu-
merous and humble classes at a low rate, or without money and without price, to
witness these new revelations.


88 Mode of consulting the Spirits.


like a slight striking of the edge of a finger-nail upon a hard
substance ; and sometimes the sound is of a stronger hitting :
all may be well imitated by striking the edge of a finger-nail
upon a table with various degrees of force. The idea of any
thing peculiar, awful, unearthly, in the sound, is ridiculous.
There are slight raps from little children, strong ones from
gentlemen spirits, and soft raps from lady spirits.

If the spirits do not give the raps, and thus signify their
arrival at the party, the Medium may begin to rap with her
finger-nails on the table, and ask, “ Are there any spirits
here to-night?” “ Will the spirits have the kindness to rap?”
*‘ Will the spirits oblige me by manifesting themselves imme-
diately >” At last they are pretty sure to rap, and thus
signify “ Yes:” quite sure if you have paid for them; for, if
they once failed, this would be talked about, and people
would not go and pay onachance. You are informed that
the spirits are those of departed persons, and that, if you
employ the word death or die they will not answer: but that
you must express your meaning by asking when they went
into the spirit world: when they left this world, &c., &c.:
Though they stand up for this etiquette as becomes spirited
people, they do not take offence at rudeness; for you are
told that while waiting for their raps you may chat and laugh
as much as you please. You are desired to think on the name
of some departed person, and take a printed or written al-
phabet and move your fingers over letter after letter: and on
hearing a rap you are to observe what letter your finger is
over: and then you begin again, and so on till no rapping is
heard. You consider what words the letters so distinguished
by rapping make; and this is the answer to the question
you may propose either aloud or mentally. You receive a
series of numbers also from 1 to 0, and proceed in the same
way when your question relates to numbers that you did in
the case of letters.

Let it not be thought, however, that this is always very
plain, A rap often comes before your finger is over a letter
or number, sometimes after you have left a letter or number:
and this makes so much confusion that you are desired to
ask the question again: and the Medium requests the spirit
to be so good as to repeat the rap if another trial is made.
“ Will the spirit be so good (or so kind) as to rap once more
if it was the letter that was meant; and so on. Sometimes
it is all nonsense: and frequently, if not nonsense, quite
wrong.

This is always done at a table. The Medium says a circle
is the favourite arrangement of the spirits, and that the greater


Raps quite right. 89


part of a dozen persons is better than a smaller number.
The petticoated Medium has her feet under the table; and is
near enough to reach a leg of it, and of course can always on
emergency reach a leg of her own chair. The name of the
departed person mentioned, or silently thought of, is often
spelt out by the rappings either quite correctly, or tolerably
so: and the enquirer is thunderstruck : and the rest of the
party are aghast at hearing him say that “ indeed the name is
quite correct.” The Medium keeps a sharp look out at your
_ or your hand, or both, and listens anxiously if you
speak.

Questions are then asked regarding the history of the
deceased, and perhaps answered with equal and wonderful
accuracy. The company becomes excited, and the excite-
ment increases. Enquiries are made without the alphabet:
questions are asked aloud, and the spirits blandly requested
by the Medium to be so good, to be so kind, as to tap if the
answer is affirmative: no tap being negative.

A lady will now ask how many children she has? Seven
taps.—“ Quite right.” “ Tlow many boys?” “ Four.”—“ Quite
right.” “ How many children has my mother had?” “ Thir-
teen.” —“ Quite right.” When was my mother’s birthday ?
—“ It was Michaelmas-day.” ‘ When was my own ?—the first
of May?” No rap. “The first of April.” Rap.—* Quite
right.” “ When did my mother leave this world?” (not die,
observe, as there would be no rap to such vulgar language.)
“Last Lady-day.” “Where was my brother buried ?”—
“ Kensal Green.” “ What is inscribed on his tomb ?”—*“ He
died in peace.” The lady now throws down her card of let-
ters and numerals, and in great agitation declares that every
answer was “ most frightfully” correct. One gentleman asks
about a certain pegson, and the answer is given by spelling out
the names of another person with whom he had been inti-
mate, but not of the individual he thought of: and this may
happen again, before the right one is spelt out.

Then an old gentleman who has said little, but who has
observed a great deal, and in his various observations has
detected the Medium in two or three statements which, if
placed in juxta-position, would lead to considerable embar-
rassment, now takes the alphabet. Instead of asking for any
particular person, he asks the spirit if it wishes to speak to
him, whereupon he hears a tap of assent. He then asks for
the name of the communicant. He receives the answer of
“ Swithesy,” puts it down silently, looks pleased, and asks
where he met him ?—“Irrenghn,” is the reply. ‘“ When?”
—“1790.” “When did my sister Ann leave this world ?”—


90 Raps quite wrong.


“1835.” “Where did my friend S—— enter the spirit-
world ?”—“ Calais.”

All are now impatient to hear the result. Whereupon
the old gentleman informs the company that all the answers
were wrong. He had never known any one of the name of
Swithesy: he never was at a place called Irrenghn (if there
be such a place): he was born in 1792, consequently could
not have met Swithesy in 1790. His sister is now alive:
his friend S died at Dover, though at the time he was
questioning he resolved it should be Calais, allowed his mind
to dwell on this as he moved his fingers upon the letters, and
got that place for the answer.

A gentleman took the alphabet, and thought of a de-
parted relative: the Medium asks if the spirit is present that
the gentleman thinks of: a rapping declares, “ Yes.” Then
she asks if the spirit will “be so kind” as to answer the gen-
tleman’s questions, and again a ready rap promises it will.
The first letter of the surname is rapped out correctly, and the
second: the third letter was a repetition of the second, and
not essential to the pronunciation of the word, and was
omitted, but the next was rapped out: the fourth, fifth, and
sixth rapped out: in passing along the alphabet for the rest
of the letters, the rapping made all confusion. The Christian
name came out perfectly right. The place where the body now
lies is doubted by some—is one of two places, but which
of the two is a matter of doubt. England began to be rapped
out: but was not rapped out satisfactorily: and, on a doubt
being expressed by the enquirer whether England was the
place, was rapped out, which to the enquirer’s mind
is probably the place. He then mentioned the surname ; that
it had been spelt incorrectly as to the third letter—a single
letter being rapped out instead of a doukle one; and as to
the last letters, that those indicated were confused: and he
mentioned a year as that in which his relative died; but
through inadvertence did not mention the right year, making
it two years earlier—not fifty, but forty-eight.

After a week this gentleman had a second interview with
the Medium. Thought of the same relative: whose spirit
promptly rapped to signify its presence and perfect willingness
to answer questions. The surname and Christian name were
given most accurately: and the double letter given instead
of the erroneous single one given at the former interview.
The spirit was certainly not a lying spirit, but spake the truth
and fulfilled its promises. Besides, it and all the other spirits
are now in bliss and therefore in a state of Grace. Great
things were therefore to be expected from it. The spirit was


Spirit very ignorant. 91


now asked the year in which it went to the spirit world? It
answered 1848, the year told by the gentleman to the com-
pany on the former evening, whereas it “went to the spirit
world” in 1850,—a sad want of memory in a spirit “ made
perfect.”

It was then asked what was its age when it went to the
spirit world? It replied twenty-seven, whereas his age was
forty. It was asked by what cause it left this world? Now
it had left this world through a short attack of delirium tre-
mens in a foreign land, but it replied, “ Dropsy.” ‘ Dropsy is
not so often an original disease as the effect of some disease :
You must have had some other disease: what disease, there-
fore, caused the dropsy ?”—“ Defness.” ‘“ But deafness
would not cause dropsy:. what caused it?”—*Dispepsy.”
“Why dyspepsia could not cause dropsy—what did cause
it?”—“ Disentary.” “Well, but there must have been some
other cause: dysentery does not produce dropsy ?”—“ Disi-
pation.”

The gentleman had graduated at a University and was a
Fellow of a Medical College. He had therefore forgot his
spelling as well as his age and the date of his death. This
Medium, however, was very illiterate, and pronounced many
words in common conversation as though she had never
learnt to spell, and so the poor ghost caught her ignorance
and spelt badly like her.

He now took a letter from his pocket, and the spirit pre-
sent was asked if it ‘“ would be so kind” as to tell the name
of the writer. It at once knocked assent, but made a most
terrible miss: neither surname nor Christian name was rapped
right ; and words as different from the right were rapped out
as Jeremy Didler are from Isaac Newton. And why ? because
he held the alphabet under the table, so that Medium could
not see it in his hand, and he kept his eyes fixed on one spot.

A gentleman thought of his brother, whose Christian
name was Colmer. His brother rapped and delared himself
present, but persisted that his own Christian name was Charles.
The C having been guessed right, the most probable name
was Charles. He maintained that his surname was Symonds,
though it had but one syllable, which one syllable the Me-
dium had imperfectly heard when the gentleman was intro-
duced to her before the sitting, and which, being unusual, she
mistook for Symonds.

A lady wished to have some spirit rap his presence to her.
The spirits were asked by the Medium “ to be so kind :” and
were so kind as to begin some very brisk raps. For the raps
may be gentle, or strong, slow, or rapid ; just as you may at


LE OT EE ER


92 Medium laughs at the Spirits.


your own pleasure rap in common life. “Oh,” said the Me-
dium, “that is a man-spirit by the loudness of the rap.” It
was prevailed upon to give its name, and its name came out
by the rap and alphabet, “Thomas a.” The company thought
it must be Thomas A Becket: but no, it was Thomas a Paine.
Doubts were entertained whether it was the real Thomas
Paine—there were other Thomas Paines in the world besides
the Tom Paine, whose name, moreover, was not Thomas 4
Paine, though Mrs. Medium knew no better. It was there-
fore asked by the lady whether it was “the T. P. who wrote
against the Bible ?”—“ Yes.” ‘ Was it not very wrong ?”—
“Yes.” “ Are you not very sorry now ?”—“ Yes.” “ Would
you do so again ?”—-No rap—meaning “No.” “Are you
happy now ?”—“ Yes.” ‘Were you unhappy for a time
only ?”—“ Yes.” It seems that all spirits are happy after
a short period of unhappiness: so that the day of judgment
is not so awful a matter, and is not still to come to the ma-
jority in the spirit community.

A gentleman wished to know if any one was present who
in life had known him?—*“ Yes.” The Christian and sur-
names were spelt of a lady of whom he had never heard and
who had resided in a place where he had never been.

Another gentleman now takes the alphabet. The rapping
is loud and continuous in answer to the enquiry whether a
spirit will speak to him. But in the midst of the rapping
the enquirer places his head under the table, and that moment
the rapping ceases. He raises it, and the rapping recum-
mences. He looks under again, and there is the like cessa-
tion.

Not only will spirits rap, but sometimes push about the
table. Therefore another gentleman asks for a sign in the
fact of the movement of the table. Suddenly the Medium
exclaims, “‘ Bless me! the table has moved.” All eyes are
turned to where the Medium is looking: and certainly there
has been an alteration of position. Suddenly, another lurch !
But one person now keeps his eyes fixed so as to command
the whole space underneath the table. All further movement
ceased while he thus commanded a view.

The above instances are merely samples of what occurs
daily at various spiritual séances.

The successful answers by the spirits are the result of
great natural keenness, increased by much practice; for
people do not become mediums in a minute—but gradually.
The Medium by keen practice is enabled to discover in the
features certain shades of indication that prompt her to
make the sounds at particular-moments. ‘Then, if there


How to stop the rapping. 93


be a doubt upon which letter the rap took place, the enquirer
repeats the letters aloud, and thus the Medium gets a fur-
ther clue from the intonation as to the exact letters the en-
quirer wants to form his words. If any one who has been
taken in by this cunning trick will put his questions men-
tally, place an opake substance as a screen between himself
and the Medium, and observe rigid silence, he will quickly
find the spirits not sharp enough to penetrate the obstruc-
tion: and this trial will satisfy the most credulous as to
the real nature of a spirit’s sagacity. Even without a screen,
if he preserves a wooden, inexpressive countenance, holds his
tongue, and keeps his fingers an equal time on every letter,
he will not be answered right : and he may produce all kinds
of blunders at pleasure if he dwells on wrong letters, and
acts a treacherous part with his features.

If the raps give a name different from that which the
enquirer was thinking of, but still one of a person he has
been acquainted with, we are persuaded that the thing begins
with some chance letter or letters, and his imagination is ex-
cited to the recollection of the person, and so by his features
and voice, &c., he gives the Medium all the information she
requires in order to be right ; just as in common cases.

As to the raps, they are successfully made with the foot
against a leg of the table or the chair. Place the sole of one


of your boots or shoes with one side bent downwards (one
foot being crossed over the other, if you please), so that the
upper edge-shall touch the leg of the table or chair; and
then a very slight movement of it backwards or forwards will
give you the precise rappist sound: and you may give any
intensity you think proper. Striking the inner edges of the
two soles together will also give a tapping sound.


94 How to rap.


Insist upon the Medium standing upright or sitting with
her feet apart, and not under the table, nor touching any
thing but the ground, her petticoats being raised enough
to expose the whole foot, and you will have no rappings:
provided she have no confederate.

As to the movement of the table, the Medium sits with
her feet under it, and you see that her knees are far too
low to touch it. But she afterwards quietly crosses her knees,
and the upper thigh touches it; and by a very slight turning
movement, invisible to the rest who sit round the table, and
not requiring effort enough to disturb a feature, the table
is put in motion at pleasure. Insist upon the spirits moving
the table while she is placed beyond the possibility of con-
tact with it, and you will have no movement: unless she
have a confederate.


it EEE PAE ALLEL PERLE LIER LADLE LLL


we


—- l yy Td ul ) WH
WBA WY c
WY WY Y=

y my)


eS VE


: i ”


It is a pity that the spirits will not dispense with tables
and are so fond of petticoated Mediums. Why should not the
party sit in a circle in the middle of the room, without a
table, but with a piece of wood on the floor in the middle for
the spirits to rap upon; the Medium’s feet being fully ex-
posed and parted ?

Why the spirits should be endued with the power of pro-
phecy we know not. But they are, and will often prophesy
largely. The Duke of Wellington, a week ago, was called
up and obeyed; and, when questioned, foretold remarkable
things which are to happen on the first of August next. They
may prophesy safely with American Mediums, as these will


be off with the money in their pockets before the period for
fulfilment arrives. :


How to move a table. 95


It is thought by some persons that the Medium must be
“naturally clairvoyant” in order to be able to read off the
thoughts in the mind of the enquirer so accurately. This
supposition, however, can easily be disposed of. Take for in-
stance the case of the interrogator wilfully, but covertly, lead-
ing the Medium on a wrong scent by lingering or by looking
at particular letters, and getting the manifestations according
to his outward indications, not in accordance with his inner-
most thoughts. The old gentleman who knew his friend died
at Dover, but purposely “looked” and “acted” Calais, got
the latter place for his answer. Again. Request a person
sitting opposite to you at a séance, who does not know what
word you have written on a piece of paper, to ask the spirit for
that word: and you will-not get it. If the Medium were
clairvoyant she could have rapped the answer as easily as if
the enquirer knew. If spirits rapped, they could. Conse-
quently this simple experiment “ kills two birds with one
stone ;’” completely upsets two hypotheses—the clairvoyant
and the spiritual.

It is possible that some excitable persons fancy they see
and hear what they do not. The facts of what is absurdly
called electro-biology prove what may be done by ima-
gination.

Then there is the electrical hypothesis for the rappings
and the movements. The little “flibberty gibbets” are
thought to let off small charges of electricity for rapping,
and stronger charges for the heavier work of moving tables,
&c. Indeed, a Medium informed us that the spirits informed
her that they were taught the use of electricity for communi-
cation with mortals by Bensamin Franxuix. The Medium
assured us also on the same evening that the rappings had
been heard ever since the creation. How the two statements
are to be reconciled we leave to her and the spirits.

Those who do not discern the trick, and yet do not
believe in the agency of spirits, think that the Medium is
electrical. The supposition is without proof or probability,
and superfluous.


At a late rapping séance Mr. G. H. Lewes* wrote upon a
piece of paper the following question, “Js the Medium an
impostor ?”” An unequivocal “Yes” was the answer. The
question was repeated, and again the spirits assured the com-
pany that the Medium was an impostor. Which should be


* Leader Newspaper, March 12, 1853.


96 A gross imposture.


believed, the spirits or the Medium? “ Will the spirits be
so kind as to be so good as to oblige us” by rapping which ?


We write of that only which we have witnessed: on real
electric phenomena we give no opinion.


Anything approaching to this imposture in impious auda-
city we have never witnessed. It tampers with the holiest and
most sacred feelings of which our nature is susceptible; de-
Judes a person into the belief that he is holding converse
with those whom he loved on earth, when he is only the
secret sport and victim of the most mendacious trickery.

We have felt it an imperative duty boldly to raise our
voice in condemnation of this vile and unblushing imposture.
In so doing we shall doubtless excite the temporary enmity
of many who are at present believers in the supernatural
character of what they have seen and heard. The only advice
to those friends whose self-love may be somewhat ruffled by
our rejection, as utterly false, of what they have submissively
received as true, is, “TEST IT!” “ Test it rigidly, in the
“ manner we have indicated. If you do not speedily come
“ to the same conclusion with us, we shall be compelled to
“ acknowledge that we have very much under-rated your
“ capacity or very much over-estimdted our own.” Then


shall we be compelled to exclaim with Othello, “O thou in-
visible spirit! Jf thou hast no name to be known by, let us
call thee Devi.”


N. E. E. N.


( 97 )


BOOKS RECEIVED.


The Generations gathered and gathering ; or, the Scripture doctrine concern-
ing Man’s Death. By J. Panton Han, minister of Cooper’s Hall Congregational
Church, Bristol.

We recommend this very able little work to our readers ; as the true Christian
doctrine of a future state appears so little comprehended.


The Key to the Mystery ; or, the Book of Revelations translated. By Edward
Richer, of Naples. Bedford: 1853.


The Exposition of Life and Immortality. No. 1. March, 1853. Edinburgh.
This pamphlet is the work of an enlightened intellect.


Sights and Sounds ; or, the Mystery of the Day : comprising an entire history
of the American Spirit Manifestations. By Henry Spicer, Esq. London:
1853.


This would be an interesting book were the matter solid. Before the truth of
the subject is known, a person may read it nearly through with pleasure: but it
fatigues at last. To make it larger and pleasanter the author has introduced a
quantity of entertaining American matter in the middle totally unconnected with
the subject. Mr. Spicer does not commit himself to professing his belief of what
he writes: and he is a wise man.


Memoirs of a Metaphysician. By Francis Duke, Esq. London: 1853.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


Haydn's History of Dates.—‘‘ A Reader of The Zoist’’ will find that we pub-
lished in No, XXXVI., p. 398, the absurdity and ignorance exhibited by Mr.
Haydn upon mesmerism.


Dr. Davey’s Lunatic Asylum.— A Relative” is assured that one of the very
best physicians under whom his insane cousin can be placed is Dr. Davey, of
Northwood, near Bristol. He is one of the most conscientious, benevolent, in-
dependent, sound-headed, intelligent, and well-informed men in the medical pro-
fession : few of those who treat insanity specially, approach him in these excellent
qualities.

VOL. XI. H


98 Notices to Correspondents.


The Rev. Thomas Millington.—* An Indignant Inhabitant of Northampton ”’
may congratulate the Rev. Mr. Millington upon having met with his reward in
being presented to the living, though small, of Woodhouse Eaves, near Lough-
borough, where he will communicate the blessing of mesmerism, and he is so happy
as to have a rational unprejudiced medical man in his village. We wish some
of our readers would send him pupils. He could take five. He has been tra-
velling tutor in the families of Lords Gainsborough, Shaftesbury, Crofton, and
others. He has a delightful house and grounds in a healthy situation, every way
suitable for educational purposes.


Mr. James.—We have to apologize to Mr. James (see our last number, p.
427) for having mentioned him as being “ of the Society of Friends.’”” The error
was occasioned by the circumstance of Mr. James’s letter commencing ‘‘ John
James to H. U. Janson,"’ and concluding with the word ‘‘farewell.”” We were
not aware that this is the mode adopted by ‘‘ The Phonetic Society,”” of which °
Mr. J. isa member. The object of this rapidly increasing body is to effect a
reform in the present mode of orthography; and, also, to introduce to public
notice a greatly improved system of short-hand writing, calculated to be of great
practical importance, not only to the reporter, but also for general use, in epis-
tolary correspondence.


Mr. James, we are informed, is a member of the Established Church.


Messrs. Jackson and Davey.—These two excellent and able men, the former
so full of general information and so philosophic a mesmerist, and the latter so
good and true an experimenter, having fulfilled their mission faithfully through
Wales and Ireland, have now passed to Scotland, and are at present in Edinburgh.
We trust that the public of the Modern Athens will listen to them and support
all their efforts ; notwithstanding an impostor has preceded them, and certain doc-
tors, in properly denouncing the impostor, aim, contrary to the dictates of their
own despised consciences, but from lamentable motives, to injure mesmerism,
which in their hearts they know to be true,


The Dublin Mesmeric Institution has had its annual meeting. We have re-
ferred to it at p. 26, and lament that we have not room to report the speeches.
The Archbishop of Dublin nobly took the chair, and uttered his sentiments.


Dr. Esdaile has been giving two capital lectures on mesmerism at Perth, to
aid the funds of a literary institution in that city. We trust they will be printed.


We have two or three articles left, which the authors will allow us to postpone
till July. The earlier communications are sent us the better.
arrive very late: but should be sent a month before the time of publication.


In general they


( 99 )


LONDON MESMERIC INFIRMARY,
No. 1a, FITZROY SQUARE.


NEW DONORS SINCE DECEMBER.


Armytage, Mrs., Gaussin, Miesenbury (by Dr. Ashburner) ......
Byrne, Miss E., 25, Charlotte-street, Portland-place............--
Collected by the Misses Brine ....

Davies, J. Silvester, Esq., Pembroke College, | Oxford

Espie, Mrs., Blythe Hill, Sydenham (by Mr. Barth) ...
Featherstonaugh, D., Esq., Ealing

Friend, a (by Mr. Capern)


Ishan, Sir Charles, Bart., seaniion Hall, Mane: ‘08

Janson, H. U., Esq., Exeter (besides a former donation of £2 20, and
an annual subscription of £5) .......... : ee

Lyle, W. G., Esq., 17, initiate, (in addition to a former
donation of £10) cimmee

Nottage, G. S., Esq., 67, Upper eee street .

Stringer, Mrs., Ventnor, Isle of Wight


NEW SUBSCRIBERS SINCE DECEMBER.


Abadurn, —, Esq., Midderton Hall, Carmarthenshire (by Dr. Ash-
ins ‘aaeuk an

Bailliére, Miss, 219, en a

Bettinson, Thomas, Esq., 21, Charles-street, ‘St. John’ 8 | Wood (Mrs.
Bettinson having derived benefit at the Infirmary)

E., Mrs., (by Dr. Ashburner) . eer

Ellis, A. J., Esq. (in addition to his bneie iain of £2) .

Espie, Robert, Esq., Surgeon R.N., Blythe Hill, Sydenham (by Mr.
Barth) ..


Holtop, L., ees: oy 4, ‘Ree is nena -square.. 60s seeeion
Ishan, Sir Charles, Bart., Lamport Hall, einen... PE ey nr
Kinnard, —, Esq., Iron Works, Falkirk

Langhorne, Mrs., Kingston, Surrey... ...... 0. ee ee ee cece cece ene
Paget, Lady ones

Sandby, Mrs., Flixton ...... ‘

Saunders, S. D., Esq., Penrose Cottage, Clifton es


m= © CO = OO —& 0


100 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


Smith, Mrs. G., Champion-hill ; Pere
Taylor, C., N., Esq., 4, Ampton-place, Gray’ . Yea
Todhunter, Miss, 19, Highbury-terrace, Islington ..........
Travers, Miss H., Champion-hill ..

Woods, S., Esq., Walthamstow


The Committee of Gentlemen and Ladies congratulate the public on the esta-
blishment of this most useful charity in a spacious and handsome mansion in
Fitzroy Square : and earnestly entreat all who know the power of mesmerism in
curing and alleviating diseases, both medical and surgical, and in assuaging and
preventing pain, to step forward and support this invaluable institution. Ample
room now exists for mesmerising a much greater number of patients than before :
and they purpose devoting one of the floors of the building with its five rooms to
the mesmerisation of those who cannot afford the common fee of half a guinea or
a guinea a week to a mesmeriser, but would not object to a weekly expense of
five shillings.

Subscribers and Visitors introduced by Members of the Committee are allowed
to visit the Infirmary between two and four o'clock in the afternoon.


Fine Crystals may be purchased at the Infirmary at a moderate price.


Those Subscribers who have not yet paid their subscriptions are earnestly
requested to forward them without delay to Mr. Capern at the Infirmary.


THE


ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
Of the Institution will take place at


WILLIS’S ROOMS, KING STREET,


8ST. JAMES’s,
On WEDNESDAY, MAY 25, 1853,
At Two o’Clock precisely.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. XLII.


JULY, 1853.


I. Popular Letters on the Odic Force, and on Magnetism. By
Baron RetcHEensacu. ‘Translated by William Gregory,
M.D., F.R.S.E., Professor of Chemistry in the University
of Edinburgh.


INTRODUCTORY NOTICE BY THE TRANSLATOR.


Tue following letters appeared in Summer, 1852, in the Augs-
burg Gazette (Allgemeine Zeitung), a paper in which many
interesting series of letters have appeared on various branches
of science. The present state of public opinion on the subject
of mesmerism is such that it appears to me probable that these
letters may prove very useful.

The medical profession has, within the last two or three
years, found it necessary to admit a very large part of the
long and obstinately rejected phenomena of mesmerism ; viz.,
all those phenomena which depend on suggestion. These, so
long as they were described by mesmerists as occurring in
the mesmeric sleep, were scornfully rejected, and it is only
since they have been publicly exhibited as occurring in the
waking state, and absurdly called electro-biological, that they
have been admitted. Yet they were just as true, and as fully
demonstrated by the mesmerists before, had the evidence but
met with a fair reception.

But those who now admit the suggestive phenomena forget
the past and, still neglecting or despising investigation, ascribe,
without hesitation, all mesmeric phenomena whatever, so far
as they admit these, to the influence of suggestion ; and either
deny or disregard all the evidence which tends to prove the
existence of a transferable influence, capable of acting at a dis-
tance, and of passing through various media—opaque or other-

VOL. Xt. 1


102 Introduction


wise. The writers now alluded to still reject, precisely as they
once did the phenomena of suggeStion, all the alleged facts of
action at a distance, of sympathy without suggestion, of vision
at a distance, or lucid vision generally ; and rather than admit
such facts, which imply such a transferable influence as I have
above alluded to, ascribe all the alleged facts to imposture and
collusion, exactly as they did a few years ago in reference to
the phenomena of suggestion. They pronounce the very idea
of such a force or influence te be unphysiological, unphiloso-
phical and absurd, and begin their researches (?!) with as-
suming, @ priori, the principle that no such influence or force
exists or can exist.

Now against this mode of reasoning, a priori, in opposition
to alleged facts, observed by competent persons of good cha-
racter, I protest, in the name of logic and science, as altogether
inadmissible. I maintain that we know little or nothing of
the laws of nature in such matters, and certainly nothing to
justify such an assumption. Nor can we ever learn anything
of the laws of nature save by observation and deduction from
observed facts ; in no case by a priori assertions,

I maintain, further, that there exists a mass of evidence
in favour of the existence of a force or influence, in all proba-
bility imponderable, but quite distinct from all the known
imponderables—such as heat, light, electricity, magnetism,
&c. ; and that the facts observed by mesmerists, in which sug-
gestion has no share, can only be accounted for by the sup-
position of some such force. But I hold, that even if we
could not account for them at all in this or any other way,
these facts exist as truly as do those of suggestion, and to
deny them does not annihilate them. They remain, and will
ultimately compel recognition.

I will go further, and say that we have no more nor better
evidence of the existence of the forces or influences which we
assume to be the causes of heat, light, &c. (but of the true
nature of which we know nothing, except that they appear
to be imponderable), than we do of the supposed mesmeric
force or influence. When we are able to answer the question,
“ What is light, or heat, or electricity?” but not till then,
we shall be able to say what is the true nature of the mesmeric
influence. At present, of all these forces and many more we
know only the effects, but not the essence. We have ascer-
tained by observation some of the laws which regulate them,
but still not their essence. And there is no reason whatever
to suppose that the admitted list of imponderable natural
forces is incapable of additions being made to it, from the
same source, namely, observation.


by Dr. Gregory. 103


Be this as it may, it is on this point at present, that the
mesmeric controversy hinges. Those who assume that we
know all the forces and laws of nature refuse to admit a new
influence or imponderable ; as if electricity itself did not date,
at the very earliest, from the 17th century only; and as if
magnetism as a science, and above all, electro-magnetism,
were not of still more recent origin. Those, again, who ap-
peal to observation, maintain that the facts observed demon-
strate the existence of a new imponderable, or force, or in-
fluence as plainly as do other facts the existence of the causes
of heat, light, electricity, magnetism (ordinary), chemical at-
traction, gravitation, cohesion and any other forces which
may belong to this category. And if it be unphilosophical to
talk of the mesmeric fluid, be it remembered that this is done
only in the same sense in which we speak of the electric fluid
or the magnetic fluid, a mode of expression which arose from
the resemblance of some of the phenomena to the motion of
currents of fluid matter.

Up to a recent period, all the evidence in favour of the
existence of a mesmeric force or influence was derived from
experiments made on persons in the state of mesmeric sleep
or somnambulism. But in 1842, Reichenbach adduced a
vast body of facts, altogether independent of the mesmeric
state or processes. He studied the phenomena precisely as
those of all the other departments of physical science are
studied ; and, precisely as is done in all other cases, he gave
aname to the new force, because he found it to differ from
all known forces.

The letters which follow contain a brief and popular ac-
count of his researches, and are, in my opinion, admirably
calculated to shew the utter futility of the a priori argument
against the existence of this force. It is for this reason that
I think they will be useful at the present time, when so much
misapprehension prevails as to the extent and bearing of his
researches. None of the writers who have opposed his views
have given proof of having even carefully read his work. Their
arguments are addressed to superficial and erroneous notions
of it ; and I have no hesitation in stating my conviction, after
a very careful study of his writings, and many experiments on
the subject of them, that no scientific work whatever, known
to me, deserves to rank higher in all the qualities which be-
long to an investigation conducted on the true Baconian prin-
ciples. I have met with no argument which even touches his
conclusions. But in conclusion I would remind the reader
that while Baron Reichenbach speaks of a force or influence
as the cause of the phenomena he has observed, ny is not to

1


104 Sensitives.


be understood as using these terms in any other sense than
that in which we daily use them in reference to the known
and admitted imponderables. As we speak of a magnetic or
electric influence or force, so, and not otherwise, does he
speak of the od force or the odic force,—meaning by this the
unknown cause of certain observed phenomena, which is pre-
cisely what we mean when we speak of the electric force.

Evidently then, the important point is the phenomena,
and not the name given to the supposed cause of them. And
the reader will find in these letters abundant proof of the ex-
istence of peculiar phenomena, and also, if he considers the
subject fairly, equally abundant proof that suggestion has
nothing whatever to do with them. The precautions taken
to exclude suggestion, however, can only be fully understood
by studying Baron Reichenbach’s great work, of which the
first volume has been translated both by Dr. Ashburner and
by myself.

Even the present letters, however, contain sufficient proof
to satisfy such as can judge of scientific evidence, that sug-
gestion cannot explain the facts; and this is the conclusion
to which all have come, who have investigated these pheno-
mena, and which agrees perfectly with the conclusion arrived
at by the independent researches of mesmerists on persons in
the mesmeric state, it being borne in mind that all the obser-


vations of Reichenbach were made on persons in the ordinary
or waking condition.


WILLIAM GREGORY.


Letter I.
Sensilives.


Have you never, my dear friend, met with individual per-
sons exhibiting the strange peculiarity of a marked aversion
to everything yellow? Yet a lemon, an orange with its fiery
hue, or a mass of bright gold, surely presents a charming
spectacle! What can there be unpleasant in it? If you ask
these persons which colour is most pleasing to them, all, with
one voice, will answer, blue. The azure of the sky is lovely,
and has a grateful influence ; but when sunset encases it in a
frame of gold, surely the lovely becomes still lovelier,—nay,
splendid. Had I to choose between inhabiting a room painted
straw yellow or one painted light blue, I should probably
prefer the former. But all the haters of yellow to whom I
have said this, laughed me to scorn and bewailed my bad
taste.


Let me invert my question, and ask, Have you ever met


Sensitives. 105


with any one, to whom blue is disagreeable? Certainly not.
No one has ever disliked blue. Whence, then, in certain
persons, so great and universal an agreement in the dislike to
yellow and the preference for blue ?

We know that blue and reddish yellow stand in a peculiar
relation to each other. They are complementary colours ; that
is, each, added to the other, makes up white ; and they form a
kind of polar contrast to each other. Does something more
lie here concealed than the mere action of these colours on
our sense of vision? Is there not an unknown and more
deeply seated difference than the simple optical difference of
colour, which all perceive? And does there exist among men
a distinction as far as concerns the perception of this sup-
posed difference, so that some are able to perceive what others
cannot? Are there, so to speak, men with a double sense ?
This would be a strange thing. Let us endeavour to pursue
it further.

A young girl has no objection to look in her mirror; nay,
perhaps even men are to be found who delight in its pleasing
reflection. Who can blame them, if a true image of God’s
fair masterpiece smiles on them from its surface, and awakes
the presentiment of the conquests which await them? There
is indeed nothing in the world more magnificent or more bliss-
ful than the contemplation of a beautiful ipsemet ego. But
what if it should prove that there are fair maidens, stately
matrons, and handsome men, who abhor the mirror? who
turn from it, and cannot endure to look at their own image in
it? Seriously, there are such persons, and indeed they are
far from rare, in whom the looking-glass excites a peculiar
sensation of dread, as if alukewarm, unpleasant aura breathed
upon them, so that they cannot endure the aspect of the
mirror calmly even for a minute. It not only reflects their
image, but affects them besides with an inexpressibly painful
impression, stronger in some persons, weaker in others, and
in others again only so far perceptible as to cause an unde-
fined aversion to the mirror. What is this? Whence comes
it? Why do only certain persons perceive this unpleasant
sensation, and not all?

You have travelled much, and it is impossible that you
should not have met with persons in stage coaches, omnibuses,
and railway carriages, who everywhere with the most urgent
selfwill insisted on opening the carriage windows. They cared
not for storm, rain, thorough draughts, nor icy cold; they
regarded not the sufferings of their rheumatic fellow-travellers,
and behaved, in short, as you thought, with intolerable selfish-
ness. You have no doubt met with such, and regarded their


106 Peculiarities of


conduct as the result of ill breeding. But let me beg of you
to suspend your judgment for a little, at least till a few of
my letters have passed under your eyes. Possibly you may
acquire the conviction, that in a small and crowded space
influences as yet unknown are at work, strong enough to be
absolutely insupportable to certain members of the party,
while others do not in the least perceive their effects.

Is there no one among your friends who has the fancy of
never sitting in a row between others at table, in the theatre,
in church, or in society, but who always chooses a special seat
for himself, or occupies the corner seat if possible? When
you see such an one, mark him well. He is our man, and
we shall soon become better acquainted with him.

You have surely observed that there are ladies who fre-
quently, although otherwise healthy, become ill or faint in
church : even in a corner seat they suffer, and must often be
carried out fainting. If you will observe, you will find that
it is always the same persons, that is, only certain persons,
who are thus affected. Such persons are quite unable long
to endure sitting in the nave of a church, and yet they are
perfectly healthy.

Your physician will tell you that to sleep well and to enjoy
good health, you ought to lie on your right side. If you ask
why, and he is honest, he will say that he cannot tell. He
only knows from experience that many persons cannot sleep
at all if they lie on the left side. The cause is to him quite
unknown. If you examine more closely, you will find that
all men do not require to lie on the right side; that many
also sleep on the left, so that there are plenty of people to
whom it is a matter of indifference on which side they lie,
and who are equally refreshed either way. But you will also
find, that those who can only sleep on the right side are
a small number of persons; in whom, however, this pe-
culiarity is so strongly marked, that they lie for hours, nay,
for half the night, on the left side, without being able to fall
asleep, while as soon as they turn round to the right side they
fall asleep instantly. This is strange; but you may observe
it everywhere.

How many persons are there who cannot, without a sense
of nausea, eat from a spoon of packfong, new silver, German
silver, argentan, or whatever name may be given to the alloys
now so common as substitutes for silver! Yet others cannot
perceive any difference between the use of these alloys and
that of silver! How many are there, who cannot taste coffee,
tea or chocolate, if made in brass or copper vessels, which to
most people is a matter of indifference! How many persons


Sensitives. 107


dislike warm, and particularly overboiled food, or fat, or
sweet things, and infinitely prefer cold, simple, above all
slightly acid nourishment! There are not a few who have
such a passion for salad, that they may be heard to say they
would readily sacrifice all other food for salad alone; while
others cannot even conceive how salad should yield such un-
limited delight.

There are persons who cannot endure that any should
stand close behind them. They avoid all crowds or mobs,
fairs or markets. Others dislike shaking hands, and to them
it is intolerable if their hand be held long in that of another ;
they escape, or tear away their hand. Many cannot endure
the heat of an iron stove, but relish that of a brick stove co-
vered with earthenware.

I could tell you many more strange peculiarities observed in
certain men. But what are we to say of them? Are they fan-
cies, the result of bad education; or bad habits, perhaps de-
pending on local circumstances affecting health? It may
appear so to those who only look at the surface; and this ap-
pearance has too often misled us, and caused us to be unjust
to these persons. If these strange peculiarities indeed occurred
singly, or scattered, accidentally, among all men, we might be
justified in paying little attention to them. But a remarkable
fact, hitherto regarded as unworthy of notice, alters the
question essentially. All the above-named peculiarities of
these persons occur, not singly, but always combined or asso-
ciated in the same person. You will find, if you look, in one
and the same person, most or all of these singularities toge-
ther ; and never, no, not in a single case, is one of them found
alone. He who is a foe to yellow, shuns the mirror; he who
loves the corner seat forces open the carriage windows ; those
who can sleep on only their right side faint in church; those
who dislike brass, copper, or German silver, delight in cold
simple food, and despise fat and sweets; they are devoted to
salad, &c. &c. &c. And this goes on everywhere, in the same
person, in an unbroken succession, from dislike of yellow to
dislike of sweets; from the love of blue to the passion for
salad. There is a solidarity, so to speak, of these strange
likings and dislikings, in those who exhibit them. Experience
demonstrates, everywhere around us, that he who has one of
these peculiarities, as a general rule, has all the others also.

Hence it is very clear that they stand in an unmistakable
connection with each other; and if this be so, it can only
happen because all may be traced back to one fundamental
connecting element, to a hidden source, common to all, and
from which they all flow. Now if this source be found in


108 More striking peculiarities


some men and not in others, it is obvious that from this point
of view there are really two kinds of people ; ordinary people
who possess none of all these forms of excitability, and people
who are peculiarly excitable and are affected in the way above
explained by every apparently slight circumstance. These
last we may properly call “ Sensitives,’ for they are in
truth frequently more excitable and sensitive than the sensi-
tive plant. They are so, in virtue of their innermost nature,
which they can neither lay aside nor control at will; and
whenever we have regarded their peculiarities as mere fancies,
or as selfish rudeness and ill-breeding, we have certainly done
these persons injustice. They have enough to suffer from
their peculiar and hitherto unrecognized sensitiveness in a
society where no regard is paid to it, and are entitled to more
consideration and forbearance than they have ever yet expe-
rienced. Their number is far from small; and we shall soon
see how deeply these things, of which I have to-day only
attempted to give you the first superficial notions, penetrate,
in every direction, into the intercourse of human beings.


Lerrer II.


You have no doubt been able, making use of the marks
I pointed out in my last letter, to discover among your ac-
quaintance some who belong to the class I have named seu-
sitives. It is not at all difficult to find them, for they are
everywhere numerous. And if you do not at once find such
as are perfectly healthy, you have only to enquire for such as
have disturbed sleep, often throw off the bedclothes while
asleep, speak, or even rise in their sleep, are much plagued
with sick head-ache or migraine of short duration, or suffer
frequently from transient pain of stomach; or complain of
nervousness, and nervous changes of humour; who avoid
large societies, and either confine themselves to a few friends,
or love solitude. With few exceptions, all such persons are
more or less sensitive.

But all these things are only the trivial sides of the matter.
When we apply to it the touchstone of science, facts of far
higher interest come into view.

Procure a natural crystal, as large as may be attainable,
such as a crystal of selenite (gypsum), 10 or 12 inches long,
a large crystal of heavy spar, or one of the rock crystals of
St. Gothard, about a foot in length. Lay it horizontally
across the corner of a table, or the arm of a chair, so that


of Sensitives. 109


both ends project freely, and desire a sensitive to place the
hollow of his left hand near the ends of the crystal succes-
sively at a distance of 6, 4, or 3 inches. Before the lapse of
half a minute, he will tell you, and this without any ques-
tion or prompting whatever, and without his having previously
the remotest idea what he is to expect, that from the upper,
free, or pointed end of the crystal (that which in its natural
position projected into the air), a delicate cool aura breathes
on his hand; while from the opposite end (the broken end,
by which it was originally attached), a something tepid reaches
the hand. He will find the former sensation, the coolness,
pleasant and refreshing ; the latter, or the tepid feeling, dis-
agreeable, and accompanied by an offensive, almost nauseous
sensation, which, in a short time, will affect the whole arm,
as with a sense of fatigue.

When I first made this observation, it was as new as it
was puzzling. No one would believe it. I have, however,
repeated it with hundreds of sensitives in Vienna, it has been
repeated and confirmed in England, Scotland,* and France,


* I have myself frequently made this simple experiment with
persons of moderate sensitiveness. It is, notwithstanding its sim-
plicity, a fundamental one, and enables us at the outset to dismiss
the notion that these perceptions are caused by suggestion. In the
first place, although many persons in the mesmeric sleep may be
made to see, or fancy they see, anything directly and forcibly sug-
gested to them, and although the same thing may be done with
many others in the ordinary state, or at least in that modification
of the ordinary state which has been absurdly called the biological
state, yet in the experiments of the author and in my own, no
attempt was made to produce either of these states. The subjects
were strictly in their usual state. Secondly, not only no direct sug-
gestion was made, but the greatest care was taken to avoid even
indirect suggestion. No questions were asked ; the subject was never
told what he was likely to feel, but was simply desired to approach
his hand to the crystal. If sensitive, he invariably described, spon-
taneously, his own sensations. And all who perceived anything,
perceived exactly the same sensations in kind, although varying in
degree. Many were illiterate; some educated ; but all were igno-
rant of what they were to perceive, and yet they all agreed. Now
I maintain that this agreement demonstrates that the sensations
described were due to a real objectice cause, and were not mere sub-
jective feelings. A writer in the North British Review has endea-
voured to shew that these sensations are purely subjective ; but he
has not explained how this can be reconciled to the fact that all have
the same sensations when they make the experiment in the same
way, while all observe the sensations to be reversed, if made to use


110 Peculiarities


and any one may test it, for sensitives are to be found every
where. If they hold the hand near other parts of the crystal,
such as the lateral edges, they perceive here also, at one
place the tepid, at another the cool sensation, but at all such
points incomparably weaker than at the two ends, which are
in polar opposition or contrast to each other. Of all this,
non-sensitives perceive nothing.

Since these opposite sensations are excited without con-
tact with the crystal, at the distance of several inches, nay,
in highly sensitive persons at the distance of several feet, it
was obvious, that from these, so to speak, semi-organized
minerals, something proceeds, flows out, or is radiated ; some-


the right hand instead of the left; and all this, without any further
suggestion than the general idea that when they are asked to ap-
proach the hand to the crystal, they are probably supposed likely
to feel or perceive something. That two persons who never met, one
in Vienna, the other in London, should thus agree in all the details
of their sensations, if these were merely subjective, that is, fancies,
appears to me, if not impossible, in the highest degree improbable.
In no other mental functions do we observe any such identity of
manifestation in the fancies of different persons. But that hundreds
should thus agree, unless the sensations be caused by something
which has a real objective or outward existence, appears to me the
wildest and most preposterous assumption that ever had birth in a
fanciful brain. Can any reason be given why, if these sensations be
only subjective, the next subject who shall be tried should not asso-
ciate the cool sensation with that end of the crystal which in all our
experiments has been found associated with the opposite tepid sen-
sation? It is obvious, that persons who only fancied sensations of
which they had never heard, must, according to the law of proba-
bilities, differ at least as often as, probably far oftener than, they
agree. But as in fact they never do differ, any more than people
do who observe the warmth of a fire and the coldness of ice, the
conclusion is, in my humble opinion, unavoidable, that the cause of
the new sensations is as real as the causes of heat and cold.

It would, I think, be interesting to know what Professor de
Morgan, our great authority on the doctrine of chances, would say
to the North British reviewer’s doctrine of the uniform agreement
of hundreds of different persons in their subjective feelings, or fan-
cies, when asked to make certain trials, and told nothing of the
expected result, and therefore only able to guess that something is
to be felt. The learned Professor would confer a benefit on science
if he would state the chances in favour of, or rather against, such a
perfect agreement, say in 100 persons, with respect to only one phe-
nomenon. The result would be both curious and instructive. We


shall see further on some striking illustrations of the above argu-
ment.—W. G.


of Feeling. lll


thing as yet unknown to physical science; and which, al-
though we cannot see it (any more than we can heat, elec-
tricity, or magnetism, W. G.), yet makes its presence known
by its action on the corporeal system. Now as sensitives are
able to do, that is, to perceive, so much more, in the way of
sensation than other men, it occurred to me that they might
possibly excel us, with reference to certain points, in their
powers of vision; and might perhaps be able to see some-
thing connected with these strange emanations in the dark.
To test this, one dark night, in May, 1844, I took a very
large rock crystal to the house of a highly sensitive young
woman, Miss Angelica Sturmann. Her physician, Professor
Lippich, so favourably known to pathologists, was accidentally

resent. We produced total darkness in two rooms, in one
of which I laid the crystal in a place unknown to every one
else. After remaining some time in the other room, in order
to accustom her eyes to the darkness, we led the subject into
the room where the crystal was. After a very short interval,
she pointed out the spot where it lay. She told me that the
whole mass of the crystal glowed, through and through, in a
delicate light, and that over its point (or naturally free end)
a light flowed upwards, of the size of a hand, blue, and in a
continual undulatory motion, with occasional scintillations.
It had the form of a tulip, and lost itself above in a delicate
luminous vapour. When I turned the crystal upside down,
she saw a dull, reddish yellow smoke rise from the opposite
or broken end of the crystal. You may imagine what delight
her statement gave me. This was the first of thousands of
similar observations, which from that time forth till now I
have made with crystals, varying the experiment in every
possible way, and in which, by the aid of a large number of
senitives, the fact has been ascertained beyond a doubt, that
the sensations allied to touch, produced by crystals, are asso-
ciated with luminous phenomena, which keep pace with the
others, exhibit, as blue and reddish yellow, a polar contrast,
and are only perceived by the sensitive.*


* This experiment I have also frequently repeated, and always
with the same results in kind, varying in degree, according to the
grade of sensitiveness. To it the same remarks apply as those made
on the cool and warm sensations in the preceding note. Granting
that Miss Sturmann, having guessed that she was thought likely to
see something in the dark room, did really see what she described,
but only as subjective ideas, that is, fancies or dreams, is it con-
ceivable that the next subject, not knowing what Miss Sturmann
had fancied, should fancy exactly the same things in kind, yet dif-


112 Absolute darkness requisite.


Should you wish to repeat these experiments, I must
warn you, that it is only in absolute darkness that you can
expect to succeed. The light from crystals is so delicate, so
extremely feeble, that if but a trace of any other light be
perceptible in any part of the room, this suffices to dazzle the
sensitive; that is, to blunt, for the time, his capacity of per-
ceiving the stimulus of so weak a light. Moreover, few per-
sons are so highly sensitive as Miss Sturmann, or are able to
perceive this delicate light after so short a period passed in
darkness. With sensitives of the middling degree, from one
to two hours must generally be spent in absolute darkness,
before their eyes are freed from the stimulus of day-light or
lamp-light, and sufficiently prepared for the perception of the
light of crystals. Nay, I have had many cases, where persons
of feeble sensitiveness, after three hours in the dark, were
still unable to see anything, and yet in the course of the
fourth hour succeeded in seeing the light from crystals very


ferent in degree? Who does not see, that if the light were entirely
subjective, there is no reason whatever why that from the point of
the crystal should not be, to the second subject, green, red, orange,

ellow, or white, as well as blue? Yet it is invariably blue; that
is, blue invariably predominates at that end, and reddish yellow at -
the other, in the statements, not only of the second but of the two
hundredth subject. Moreover, why should the new subject see the
undulating motion, the sparks, the luminous vapour or smoke
above, and why should he see more light at the point than at the
broken end, &c., &c.? We shall find, by and bye, that with the
most highly sensitive, the light at both ends is described as com-
posed of all the prismatic colours, blue however always predominat-
ing at the one end, and reddish yellow at the other. And in the
minutest details of the arrangement of the colours, nay, in facts
quite unexpected connected with them, and in all the changes pro-
duced by change of form in the poles of magnets, (which, as we
shall see, are also luminous,) these highly sensitive subjects are
still found, without concert, and without the shadow of direct or
specific suggestion, to agree as perfectly as they do in the general
facts. To my mind, this is utterly irreconcilable with the idea of
the exclusively subjective nature of the phenomena, and indeed with
any view but that which admits the existence of an external, a real,
an objective cause of these phenomena. I beg most particularly to
call the attention of the reader to this point, because it is the turn-
ing-point of the whole controversy ; and I beg him, in reflecting on
it, to bear in mind, that all direct suggestion, and all questions, are
avoided, so that, as I formerly stated, the subject can, at the utmost,
only guess that something is to be seen, and can have nothing to
guide him as to what that something is, unless there be an objective
reality concerned.—W. G.


Conditions not to be neglected. 113


well, and in convincing themselves of the objective reality of
the phenomena*

You are probably impatient to learn what all this means,
and to what part of physics or physiology these phenomena
belong, with reference to their objective and subjective na-
ture. They are not heat, although they produce sensations
resembling those of cool and tepid; for here there is no ima-
ginable source of heat; and if there were, it would be per-
ceptible not only by sensitives, but by others, or at least by


* Here I would remark, that, as so happens in all branches of
science, we may learn much from apparent failures. If the doctrine
of the exclusively subjective nature of the phenomena be true, or if
they depend on involuntary suggestion (I have shewn that all direct
suggestion is avoided), there is no conceivable reason why the fan-
cies or visions should not at once appear. Where suggestion is em-
ployed, whether intentionally or accidentally, we never observe this
delay in the results. If this were otherwise, biological or rather
suggestive phenomena could not be publicly exhibited, as they are.
Indeed, one of the most striking facts about these suggestive phe-
nomena is, the instantaneous efficacy of the suggestion, whether it
be oral or pantomimic.

I would further observe, that to my certain knowledge, many
of those who have attempted to repeat Reichenbach’s experiments
have utterly neglected the conditions indispensable to success. I
have seen such experiments tried in a room where the daylight
entered at twenty chinks, and in another where lamps were burning
in the next room and the door was opened every minute. The ex-
perimenters obviously had not even read Reichenbach’s work, in
which all the necessary precautions are fully detailed, but had only
a vague general idea that he had stated that crystals, magnets, &c.,
were luminous in the dark. I have seen the crystals and magnets
held in the hands or on the knees of the experimenter, which, ac-
cording to Reichenbach, extinguishes the light. I have seen these
objects held at 6, 8, or 10 feet from the subject, while the author
states 40 inches to be the average distance at which the light is best
seen, and mentions that in many cases the distance was much less.
I have seen a man sitting close to the subject on each side, which
again, according to our author, interferes with his sensitiveness,
and the experimenters, in spite of all these mistakes, have expected
the result in a few minutes, without even an approach to absolute
darkness. When I pointed out some of these causes of failure, I
was told that if there were truth in the statements of Reichenbach,
the light must be visible in spite of these little blunders. I greatly
doubt whether one of Reichenbach’s opponents has even studied his
account of the conditions to be observed, far less actually observed
them. I, however, have done so, and have obtained the same
results, pro tanto, as he did.—W. G.


114 Sensitives to the Sun


a delicate thermoscope. They are not electricity, for there
is no exciter, no source for the perpetual current which here
flows, if it be electrical; and electrical conduction has no
influence on them. They cannot be magnetism or diamag-
netism, because crystals are not magnetic, and the diamag-
netism of crystals does not always act in the same direction,
but often in various, and even opposite directions, which is
never the case in our phenomena. Common light they are
not, because, although light is associated with them, mere
light never causes cool or tepid sensations, &c. &c.

What then are these phenomena? If you must positively
know, you compel me to answer, that I cannot tell. I per-
ceive the evidences of the existence of a dynamide (imponder-
able force) for which I cannot find a place under any of the
known imponderables. Unless I have formed a very errone-
ous conclusion from the facts observed, its true position will
be in the middle of Magnetism, Electricity, and Heat. But
it cannot be identified with any one of these, and in this
state of matters, I have, for the present, given to it the name
of Od (pronounced ode), or of the Od force or Odic force.
The etymology of this word I shall give further on.


Letter III.
The Sun, the Moon, the Prismatic Colours.


You are now acquainted with what I call “ sensitives,”
and with the element or imponderable to which their sensi-
tiveness refers, and which I have named “od,” or the “ odic
force.” But we have only as yet touched a mere point of
the hem of the ample garment of this force, in which all
nature is wrapped. For this remarkable influence not only
gushes forth from the poles of crystals, but flows also from
many other sources in the universe with equal or even supe-
rior energy. Let me direct your attention to the heavenly
bodies, and first of all to the sun. Place a sensitive in the
shade, and put into his left hand an empty barometer tube
or any other glass rod, or even a rod of wood. Let him now
hold the rod in the sunshine, while his hand and body remain
in the shade. You will soon hear, from this simple experi-
ment, something that will surprise you. For you will na-
turally expect that the subject will feel the rod becoming
warm ; surely the rays of the sun can do nothing but warm
it. But, on the contrary, he will tell you exactly the reverse.


even intermediately. 115


The sensitive (left) hand will perceive various sensations, but
the result will be, a decided feeling of coolness. If he draws
back the rod into the shade, this coolness will disappear, and
he will feel it become warm ; on again holding it in the sun-
shine, it will again become cool, and he can thus alternate
and compare the accuracy of his sensations. There are
therefore circumstances, exceedingly simple, but hitherto un-
observed, under which the direct rays of the sun not only
do not produce warmth, but most unexpectedly even excite
a feeling of cold. And of this coolness, the sensitives will
say, that it entirely resembles in its mode of action that
possessed by the point or upper end of the crystal. Now if
this coolness be of the nature of od, it must in some way be
capable of assuming the form of a luminous emanation in
the dark. This you will find to be the case if you will
repeat the following experiment of mine. I brought one end
of a copper wire into the dark chamber, the other end being
in a well-lighted room. I then placed this latter end in the
sunshine, and I had hardly done so, when the sensitive in
the dark chamber saw that part of the wire which was in the
dark begin to be luminous, and from the end of it a small
flame rose, about the size of a finger. The rays of the sun
therefore poured into the wire odic influence, which the sen-
sitives in the dark saw flowing out in the form of light.

But you may go a step further. Let the sun’s rays fall
on a good prism, and cause the coloured spectrum to fall on
the nearest white wall. Now let the sensitive with the glass
rod, held in the left hand, try the different colours of the
spectrum or ires one after another. If he holds it in the air
so as only to absorb the blue or the violet ray, he will per-
ceive a strong and most agreeable coolness, much cooler and
purer than from the entire sunshine. But if he holds the
rod in the yellow, or still more in the red ray, this pleasing
coolness will instantly vanish, and a most disagreeable tepid
feeling will soon oppress the whole arm. You may allow
the sensitive, without the rod, simply to hold the finger
of the left hand in the different colours, the result will still
be the same. I only used the rod to exclude the action of
the heating rays on the hand by means of a bad conductor.
These effects of the decomposed sunlight will be found ex-
actly similar to those of the crystalline poles. From this you
will see that odic force of both the kinds observed in crystals
is contained in the rays of the sun. It flows to us from this
luminary at every moment of the day along with light and
heat, in incalculable quantity, and constitutes a new and
powerful agent, to be added to those already detected in the


116 Blue pleasant, reddish yellow unpleasant.


rays of the sun, and the full bearing of which we cannot at
present even conceive.* .

And now permit me to request you to look back for a
moment to the lovers of blue and the haters of yellow of my
first letter.

Have we not seen, that that pole of crystals, which gives
out a grateful coolness, also emits a blue light? and do we
not find here, in a totally different manner, that the blue
ray of the sunlight yields a most delightful refreshing cool-
ness? On the other hand, do not the reddish yellow light
of the opposite crystalline pole, and the yellow and red rays
of the spectrum, excite unpleasant tepid sensations in sensi-
tives? You observe that in these two cases, so far apart, it
is always blue that excites agreeable and reddish yellow that
causes disagreeable feelings. You have thus the first indica-
tion, that may induce you to hesitate before passing a hasty
judgment on what might be supposed the caprices of certain
persons, who are, in truth, sensitives. You see that in the
blue and yellow of the colours we use, there must be some-
thing more hidden than the mere optical action of these
colours on the retina; that a deep-seated instinct for an
unknown, subtle something, here guides the feelings, and
consequently the judgment, of our sensitives; and that this
subject is worthy of the utmost intensity of our attention.

But even without reference to colours, let me mention
another easy experiment, which I have often made, in order
to distinguish the odic state of different parts of the solar
rays. Polarize the light by letting it fall, in the usual way,
at an angle of 35° on a bundle of glass plates. Then let the
sensitive place the end of the rod, held in his left hand, al-
ternately on the transmitted and in the reflected ray. You
will invariably hear, that the former yields to the hand through
the rod odic coolness ; the latter, the unpleasant tepid sensa-
tion so often described.t


* Scientific men have been compelled, of late years, to admit
more than one new constituent of the sun’s rays. We had first the
_ calorific rays, then the chemical, now better known as the photo-
graphic, rays, both invisible. Why should we wonder at the discovery
of another element in the sun’s rays, invisible to the ordinary eye,
and in daylight, like these, but visible to sensitives in the dark, and
acting on the sensitive nerve, as the photographic rays do on the
sensitive plate or paper? And who shall say that even this exhausts
the list 7—W. G.
+ These experiments, as well as that which follows, are good ex-
amples of the kind of experiments alluded to in a preceding note,


Inexplicable by Imagination. 117


If you feel inclined, you may puzzle the chemists a little.
Take two exactly similar glasses of water; place one in the


in which I hold it to be impossible for a certain number of persons,
when simply asked, separately, to describe what they see or feel,
(but without any suggestion whatever, beyond the unavoidable one,
inherent to the experiment, namely, that they may, suppose they
are expected to see or feel something,) should agree exactly in their
descriptions, (as the writer in the North British Review seems to
think they would do,) unless their sensations and perceptions had a
real, external, objective cause.

A subject is brought into the dark chamber, and, after some
time, the experimenter places a crystal, previously concealed, in a
certain position, of course unknown to the subject. He, the sub-
ject, declares that he sees a light at a certain point, which is found
to be the natural acumination or free end of the crystal. When the
other end (unknown to him) is exposed in the same place, he speaks
of a light also, but different from the former. The first was bluish,
the second reddish. The first gave to his left hand a sensation of
pleasing coolness ; the second, an unpleasant tepid feeling. The
experiment is repeated, always in the dark, many times, and he
never contradicts himself, but always finds bluish light and coolness
at one end of the crystal, reddish light and tepidity at the other,
although he has no means of knowing which end is presented to him.
Next day, a second subject is tried, and the very same results are
obtained, although this subject knows nothing of what the other
has said. And the trial is repeated with numerous subjects, and
uniformly with the same results.

Now the writer in the North British seems to think that such
agreement is possible, even although the sensations or perceptions
are entirely subjective or imaginary.

I maintain on the contrary, that no two persons, describing ima-
ginary, subjective sensations, and free from all communication or
suggestion, could agree in the above details. For there is no con-
ceivable reason, unless the phenomena be objective, why the second
should imagine himself to perceive blue light and coolness at the
same end of the crystal as the first did, rather than at the other
end. Nor is there any reason why he should associate blue with
coolness and not with tepidity ; nor why he should think of blue
and red, as his predecessor did, rather than of green and yellow.
If we confine ourselves to the few details above alluded to, everyone —
will see that two persons, separately describing imaginary sensations,
would be sure to differ on some of those points, and could not agree
on all, unless by mere hazard.

Now it is here that the doctrine of probabilities applies. Grant-
ing, for the sake of argument, that two persons could, by mere
hazard, agree in the above details, does any one believe that 10, 20,
or 100 persons, unknown to each other, could possibly thus agree ?
I have the authority of Professor de Morgan, surely a sufficient
VOL. XI. K


118 Taste given by the Od force.


reflected, the other in the transmitted rays. At the end of
six or eight minutes cause a sensitive to taste both. He


one, for saying, that, in a case far less complex than the above,
namely, where there is but one point, on which the answer may
be “tyes” or “no,” the chances against 100 persons agreeing in
giving the same answer, by mere hazard, (and if they describe an
imaginary, not a real object, they can only agree by hazard,) are
about 12680000 27 ciphers to 1; that is, more than a
million of millions of millions of millions, of millions to | against
such a result.

This inconceivable number represents the chances against 100
persons, without communication or suggestion, agreeing in their
answer to such a simple question as this: ‘“‘ Do you see anything at
present?”’ (in the dark room.) It exactly represents the chances
against the whole 100 answering, “ Yes, I see a light,” by mere
hazard, or, what is the same thing, by mere fancy.

But if this calculation of chances be embodied in a number so
vast that we cannot even form a conception of it, what must be the
extent of figures required to express the chances against these 100
subjects agreeing in declaring that they see at one time blue light,
accompanied with grateful coolness sensible to the left hand, and at
another red light, with an unpleasant tepid sensation! when it ap-
pears, although unknown to them, that the former observations in-
variably apply to one end of the crystal, the latter to the other end.
Here we have not a simple yes or no in reference to one phenomenon,
but two phenomena, the fight and the sensation, connected with a
certain point or points in the crystal, which makes a third pheno-
menon, and this twice over, once at each end. So that we have at
least six phenomena, observed to occur invariably in the same order,
by 100 persons. And since the whole phenomena are uniformly
reversed, when the right hand is used instead of the left, the actual
number of facts in question is twelve, in regard to which there is a
perfect agreement. Let the reader reflect whether such an agreement
be even conceivable, in reference to unknown sensations, if purely
subjective. But if the causes of the two lights, and of the two
sensations, be truly objective and external, and moreover connected,
by some natural law of polarity, with the opposite ends of the
erystal, and also with the two hands, then nothing is more pro-
bable than such a perfect agreement as I have mentioned.

I am much within the mark, when I say that the author has
had upwards of 200 subjects, who have agreed invariably, not only
in regard to the phenomena above mentioned, but also in regard to
a very large number of others, without one example of inconsistency
in their statements. The only point in which they differ is that of
the degree or intensity of the light or of the sensations, &c., ac-
cording to the degree of their sensitiveness. One may see only a
faint luminous vapour where another sees a flame six or eight inches
high. One may see a blue flame of small size, while another may


Moon’s Light. 119


will at once tell you, that the former tastes cool and slightly
acidulous, but that the latter is tepid and has a sort of bit-
terness. Or place a glass of water in the blue light of the
spectrum, and another in the reddish yellow; or place one
in contact with the free end of a large rock crystal, the other
at the opposite end, formerly attached to the rock, now
broken. In all these cases you may be quite sure, that the
former will taste acidulous and very agreeable, the latter,
bitterish, harsh, and even nauseous. The subject will gladly
drain the one, if you allow him; but if you compel him to
drink the other, you may meet with what happened to me,
namely, that he soon afterwards is attacked with violent
vomiting. Now give the two glasses of water to the che-


see a large flame, exhibiting all the prismatic colours; but still, in
the former case, both will agree in the bluish colour of the light,
and in the latter, while one sees only blue light, the other sees a
rainbow in which blue predominates over all the other tints. And
so with the red at the opposite pole. Not one sensitive has ever
seen red predominating, or red alone, when the others have seen
blue in the same way. And i none of them have known what the
others saw, nor, if they had known it, could they possibly know,
in the dark chamber, which end of the crystal was presented to
themselves at any given time. And if both ends are presented, one
at a time, for a hundred times in succession, not alternately, but
according to any arbitrary succession, they never contradict them-
selves, although it is the operator alone who knows which end he is
presenting, either by its form, or by a mark attached to it. To
the accuracy of all this I can myself testify, as I have tried similar
experiments with several sensitives, although with a far less number
than the author.

I cannot avoid once more urging on the reader the utter impos-
sibility of any such agreement as the above in the statements of
persons describing imaginary phenomena, when the experiments are
performed with due caution, as those of the author most certainly
have been. It is not every one who can make an experiment worthy
of being recorded, and there are few who can properly appreciate
the experiments of others. I cannot too strongly express my con-
viction that those who suppose the author to have neglected any
precautions against suggestion or any means of ensuring a genuine
and trustworthy result, either have not studied the details of his
method, or are quite incapable of judging of the value of scien-
tific evidence. It is certain that no one of his opponents or critics
has yet been able to detect a flaw in his mode of procedure, while
most of their criticisms abundantly prove that they have neither
carefully studied nor even unders it. Let the reader only exa-
mine that method carefully, and I am sure he will admit that it is
unexceptionable.—W. G.


J


x 2


120 Od and Magnetism.


mists; and let them detect the acid and bitter principles in
them, if they can.

You may now try the moon’s light, as you have done that
of the sun; and you will obtain analogous results, but in
part reversed. If the sensitive places the end of the glass
rod in the full light of the moon, the rod being in his left
hand, he will experience not a cool, but a tepid, sensation.
And he will find a glass of water which has stood in the
moonlight more tepid and nauseous than one which has stood
in the shade. Every one knows how great an influence the
moon exerts on many persons. Now those who are thus
affected, are without exception sensitive, and commonly very
much so. And since the moon can be shewn to produce
effects due to odic influences, while its action on the insane
agrees with that of other sources of od, the moon is, asa
luminary which gives out odic force, of great significance and
importance to mankind.

With the solar and lunar rays, then, we receive so abun-
dant a supply of this force, that we can use it conveniently
for many simple experiments. How vast the influence ex-
erted by the odic force, not only on man, but on the whole
animal and vegetable creation, must be, I shall presently
shew you. Od, according to what we have already seen, is
evidently a cosmic dynamide, that is, a universally diffused
imponderable force, which radiates from one heavenly body
to another, and, like heat and light, enwraps the universe.


Lerrer IV.
Magnetism.


These letters relate to the odic force and to magnetism ;
but you may ask, “why to magnetism? what has magnetism
to do with the matter?’ Now I am almost inclined to say,
in answer, “little or nothing.” But it has pleased the world
to apply the term “magnetic” to a number of phenomena
connected with our subject ; and for the present I must con-
form to this nomenclature. The inducement to do so is
derived from the fact, that ordinary magnetisra carries along
with it odic force, just as we have seen that the sun’s rays
and the moonlight do; as we see this force emanating
from crystals, and from many other sources, which have
nothing whatever in common with magnetism, as generally
understood. Let us now cast a glance on the mutual rela-
tions of od and magnetism.


Absolute darkness required. 121


Lay a good bar magnet across the corner of a table, as
you did the crystal, so that both ends project freely : place
the table so that the bar comes to lie in the plane of the mag-
netic meridian, like the needle of the compass, with the
north pole towards the north, and the south pole towards the
south. Now bring a sensitive near it, and let him bring the
hollow of his left hand gradually near, first to one pole and
then to the other, at the distance of from 4 to 6 inches. You
will now hear from him precisely the same statements as in
the case of the crystal; namely, that one pole, that which
points to the north, sends a cool aura to the hand; while the
other, pointing to the south, gives out an unpleasant tepid
aura. You may now place a glass of water at each pole, and
let the subject taste it after six or eight minutes. He will
tell you that the glass at the northward pole tastes fresh and
cool, the other warm and nauseous; and if you once more
annoy the chemists by insisting on an explanation of this
fact, they will get angry, and in order to escape from their
embarrassment, they will unhesitatingly deny the plain and
simple observation, and will assert that it is not true. You
may smile at the manner in which these learned authorities
now and then expose their own weakness; for a natural
truth cannot be changed into untruth by a denial not founded
on investigation. These learned sceptics will soon be com-
pelled, in spite of their opposition, to adopt a more rational
view.

You will readily understand, that the same expectations
which led me to try the crystals in the dark, occurred to me
in reference to magnets also. I made the first trial with
Mdlle. Maria Nowotny in Vienna (April, 1844), and I have
since that time repeated it hundreds of times with other sen-
sitives in the dark chamber. It was to me a pleasing satis-
faction to see my expectations confirmed, and to hear my
subjects declare, that at each end of the bar a flame burned,
bright and fiery, smoking and emitting sparks, blue at the
northward, yellowish red at the southward pole. But you
should make for yourself this very easy experiment, and vary
it, by placing the bar vertically with the southward pole up-
wards; you will then hear that the flame increases, and if
the magnet be very strong, that it reaches nearly to the roof
of the room, and there causes a round illuminated space on
the ceiling, 1, 2, or 3 feet in diameter; so bright, that if the
subject be highly sensitive, he will be able by its means to
describe any pattern that may be there painted. But I must
warn you to neglect none of the precautions which I have
already pointed out for the purpose of ensuring absolute dark-


122 Luminous emanations.


ness, nor that of preparing the eyes of the subject by keeping
him one, two, or three hours in that darkness. For if this
be neglected, he will see nothing, you will labour in vain,
and the accuracy of my statements will be in danger of most
unmerited suspicion.

The luminous appearance will appear still more beautiful
if you employ a horse-shoe magnet, placed vertically with
its poles upwards. I have one of nine plates, with a sup-
porting power of 100 pounds, from each pole of which all
sensitives see a delicate light flowing. The two lights do not
attract, nor in any way interfere with, one another, as the
maguetic forces of the two poles do, but rise quietly in
parallel lines, exhibiting a multitude of white luminous
points, and form together a pillar of light of the height of
a man, which all who saw it describe as strikingly beautiful.
It rises to the ceiling, and there forms a round luminous
spot nearly six feet in diameter. When this experiment has
continued some time, the whole room gradually becomes
visible. If such a magnet be placed on a table, the flaming
emanation illuminates the surface of the table and the objects
on it to the extent of a yard all round. When the hand is
placed between the flame and the table, a distinct shadow
appears. If a flat body, such as a board, or a plate of glass
or of metal, be held horizontally in the flame, the flame
bends round and flows under it, like any ordinary flame,
when a pan is held in it. When we blow or breathe on the
flame, it flickers, exactly like that of ataper. If a current
of air occur, or the magnet be moved, the flame bends to
the side towards which the air moves, like a torch in motion.
Its light may be condensed into the focus of a lens or burn-
ing glass. This phenomenon is therefore very material, and
has many properties in common with ordinary flame. If two
such flames meet, they neither attract nor repel each other,
but mutually penetrate each other, and both proceed unim-
peded, if of equal intensity. But if one be stronger, that
is, have more projectile force, as it were, than the other,
the former divides the latter, which passes round it on both
sides. The same thing happens when a rod is held in the
flame ; it splits or divides the flame, which again unites be-
yond the obstacle. And just as crystals were seen by sensi-
tives to be luminous through their whole substance with a


delicate light, so does the steel of the magnet appear as in a


whitish glow throughout. The very same phenomena are
observed in electro-magnets.*


* The luminous phenomena connected with magnets are to be


Od, Magnetism, &c., may be of common origin. 123


The properties just described, as you may easily perceive,
exhibit no parallelism with ordinary magnetism, but are pe-
culiarly and distinctively odic. If we compare a crystal of
gypsum and a bar magnet of about equal weights, we find
that the odic emanations of the similar or homologous poles
are not essentially different either in regard to the light they
give forth, or the sensations they excite; nay, the crystal
is even more powerful than the magnet; its coolness and te-
pidity are more marked, its light more intense. But the
crystal has no magnetism, in the ordinary sense: that is,
it has no action on the needle, and does not attract iron
filings. We have here, therefore, at one view, od and mag-
netism coupled together in the magnet, and od alone in the
crystal; the od in both cases of equal power. We cannot
therefore possibly regard od as merely an accompaniment of
magnetism, or as one of the properties of magnetism, or as
magnetism itself. In the crystal it appears entirely separated
from magnetism, and I shall adduce hereafter a number of
equally striking examples where od occurs in the highest in-
tensity, while not a trace of ordinary magnetism is present.
Od must therefore be regarded as an independent dynamide
or imponderable force, which occurs along with magnetism,
as it occurs also in connection with crystals, with the solar
rays, and with many other natural phenomena, to be after-
wards noticed. We know the great resemblance between
magnetism and electricity; we know, that the one occurs
so much associated with the others and vice versd, that we
are tempted to consider them identical. This is the case also
with light and heat; one of which calls forth the other, and
which at every moment are mutually converted one into the
other. Yet we have not yet been able to detect the common
source from which both proceed. So is it with od. We
suspect, indeed, that all these imponderable phenomena are
ultimately derived from one common origin; but so long as
we are unable to demonstrate this community of origin, so
long have we no alternative but to treat of electricity, mag-
netism, light, heat, &c., &c., as so many separate groups of
phenomena. And since we see that the varied phenomena
of od cannot be ranged under any of the known imponder-
ables, we have here also no alternative but to collect them
separately, and to arrange them as an additional group of
the same kind.


found, with all the necessary evidence, fully detailed in my late
work, Researches on the Dynamedes of Magnetism, Electricity, $c.,
in their relations to the Vital Force. Brunswick. Vieweg, 1850.


124 Fierce opposition to Od.


That these odic phenomena are in no degree inferior,
either in extent or in importance, to those other groups of
phenomena which have already been naturalized in the
realms of science, the letters which are to follow will satis-
factorily demonstrate.


Note by the Editor.—From the time that the researches of the
author first appeared, I have been firmly convinced both of the ac-
curacy of his observations and the soundness of his arguments
above developed, by which he establishes the claim of od to a place
among the imponderables. It is difficult to see why there should
be so fierce an opposition to this conclusion. One would think, to
hear the remarks of sceptics, that they were quite familiar with the
nature and essence of the admitted imponderables, and yet it may
safely be said that of these points we know absolutely nothing. We
cannot tell whether heat, light, electricity, &c., be forms of matter
or forms of motion; whether they be fluids, or merely forces. We
know nothing of them, except their effects on matter, or on our
senses, and from these we have deduced a few of the laws which
regulate them. And we know, if not to the same extent, yet the
same kind of facts in reference to od. Many persons are shocked
at the idea of such a force acting at a distance, although invisible.
But does not light, does not magnetism, act at a distance? and is
magnetism visible any more than od? Again, people will not admit
that this new force should be able to pass through a stone wall.
But magnetism and heat do so, and the passage of light through
glass is not less wonderful.

The true origin of the general disinclination to admit the exist-
ence of the supposed new imponderable, influence, or force, appears
to be this ; that people cannot make up their minds to believe in the
existence of an agency, the effects of which are not at once obvious
to every one. Now it is true, that in the present state of our know-
ledge, the number of those who can, in one way or other, perceive
the odic influence, is limited. But even as it is, this number is
very considerable, amounting, according to the author’s experience,
to about one-third or one-fourth part of mankind ; that is, in Europe.
The experience of Dr. Esdaile in India tends to prove that the na-
tives of that country are much more uniformly sensitive to mesmeric
influence, which seems to be identical with the odic, than Europeans
are; and it is probable that if men lived a perfectly natural life, all
would be found sensitive. At all events, this is but a question of
degree. There are degrees of electricity altogether imperceptible to
the average human nerve, which yet act powerfully on the galvano-
scope ; and when we shall have obtained, either a sufficiently delicate
odoscope or odometer, or the power of concentrating and accumulating
the odic, as we do the electric, force, the existence of the former
may be demonstrated to all. Indeed, we may say that this has
been done already, by the magnetoscope of Mr. Rutter, as modified
by Dr. Leger. This instrument is set in motion by an influence
proceeding from the finger, while, by-a simple and ingenious con-


Animal Magnetism. 125


trivance, we have the clearest proof that the motion is not caused
by involuntary jerks or impulses from the muscles of the experi-
menter. It cannot be doubted that many improvements will yet be
made in reference to this matter. But even should this not take
place, yet I hold, that the statements of the sensitive, compared
and controlled as has been explained by the author, and illustrated
in the preceding note, are, in a scientific point of view, as satis-
factory as if we ourselves were sensitive and experienced the sensa-
tions described. Among the author’s subjects were several scientific
men, and these had the evidence of their own senses to the facts.
But how many facts in physics, astronomy, mechanics, chemistry,
physiology, anatomy, &c., &c., are daily received without hesitation
by thousands who never saw one of them, and know nothing of
them but by the statements of others, and therefore nothing more
than we do of the odic phenomena from the statements of sensitives?
Moreover, the reader of these letters will perceive that it is far from
improbable that there are many things, perceived by all, which may
he found to depend on the odic force, when we come to know more
about it. In order to investigate with success natural phenomena,
perceptible to others, but not to ourselves, all that is necessary is,
that the experimenter should know how to conduct his experiments
so as to get at the truth; and this the author has done, if ever man
did so. We shall no doubt ere long have a sensitive who will devote
himself to the study of these phenomena, and will speak from his
own sensations. But this, although desirable, is not indispensable,
because nine-tenths of our knowledge are derived from the reports of
observers, and not from our own personal observation.

All these considerations are, I humbly conceive, sufficient to
justify the author in admitting a new agency of the same class as
the known imponderables ; while neither he nor any one else can
say what is the real nature even of the best known of the admitted
agencies of this class.—W. G.


Letter V.


Animal Magnetism.


Of late we have again been hearing much of that strange
and wonderful thing, which, more than eighty years ago,
was, by Mesmer, named animal magnetism. Our fathers
and grandfathers rejected it, and supposed it dead; but it
always reappears, and will not die. What is the explanation
of this extraordinary tenacity of life? Is it to be explained
by “lies, imposture, and superstition,” in which gentle terms
a celebrated physiologist of Berlin has characterized, and, as
he supposed, finally extinguished it?* Let us see, whether


* Dr. Dubois-Reymond.—Zois¢.


126 All living things luminous to Sensitives.


those have acted well and rationally, who knew of no better
course of conduct than to adopt and reverence that opinion
and others like it.

Let us at once, without preface, take the bull by the
horns. Place a subject of moderate or of very high sensi-
tiveness in the (absolutely) dark chamber, and take with you
also a cat, a bird, a butterfly, if you can get one, and some
plants in blossom. After the lapse of an hour or two, you
will hear strange things from your subject. The flowers will
come out of the darkness and become visible. At first they
will be described as a diffused grey vapour or mist, seen
coming out of the black of the general darkness. Presently
brighter parts will appear. At last these will separate dis-
tinctly, the individual flowers will become visible, and by
degrees more and more luminous. When I placed before the
late distinguished botanist, Professor Endlicher, who was of
average sensitiveness, a plant under the above circumstances,
he cried out with astonishment and almost with terror, “ It
is a blue flower; it is a Gloxinia.” It was, in fact, Gloxinia
speciosa; var: cerulea, which he thus saw in total darkness,
and the form and colour of which he was able to distinguish.
Now we cannot see without light ; light must therefore have
been present, and that in no small amount, since it sufficed
to shew not only the form but the colour of the flower. And
whence came this light? It came, in truth, from the plant
itself; the plant was luminous. Pistils, stamens, anthers,
corollz, and stem, all exhibited a delicate light; even the
leaves were visible, though dimmer. The whole appeared in
a soft glow, which was brightest in the organs of fructifica-
tion, and brighter in the stem than in the leaves. The but-
terfly, the bird, the cat, all will become visible in the dark-
ness; some parts of them will become luminous, and will
move about as they move. But you will soon be told by the
sensitive that he sees yourself. You will at first appear to
him as a whitish shapeless man of snow ; next like an armed
figure with a high helmet ; and finally, terrible, in the form
of a luminous giant. Now tell the sensitive to look at his
own person. He will be astonished to find himself luminous ;
not only his arms, legs, and breast, but the whole body will
be visible, shining through the clothes. Direct his attention
to his hands. They will first resemble a grey smoke, then a
dark outline on a feebly luminous ground ; at last the fingers
will appear, and will exhibit the appearance they have when
held before the flame of a lamp; that is, they will be trans-
lucent. The hand will seem longer than it really is ; because
from each finger proceeds a luminous prolongation, which,


The two sides feel respectively warm and cool. 127


according to circumstances, may be as long as the finger, or
only half the length. The hand will thus appear, in conse-
quence of these fiery appendages, to have twice its usual
length. The last joints of the fingers will be the brightest,
and in these, the roots of the nails will exhibit the most
intense light.

When the first surprise at these hitherto concealed phe-
nomena has subsided, and you enquire as to the colour of
the light, you will be again surprised to hear that this is not
the same in different parts of the body; that the right hand
shews bluish, the left yellowish-red light, and that therefore
the former are less bright than the latter; that the same
difference occurs between the feet ; that the whole right side
of your face appears darker and more bluish than the left;
nay, that the whole left side of your person appears bluish
and darker, the whole left side yellowish red and decidedly
brighter. You will at once perceive that you have here stum-
bled on the same contrast of colours which occurred to you
in the light from crystals, in that of the sun, and in the
flames of magnets.

Shall we find the parallelism between coolness and blue
light, tepidity and reddish light, which was observed in all
the preceding experiments, also here in the light from the
human body? You may think this doubtful, and yet, if it
were not so, the nature of the latter light would be enigma-
tical. I made the following experiment with the carpenter,
Bollmann, in Vienna, aged 50, a good average sensitive
(August, 1845). I placed my right hand in his left, so that
our fingers crossed, but hardly touched each other. After
the lapse of a minute, I replaced my right hand by my left.
I thus alternated the hands several times, and I soon found
that the subject felt the right hand, which gave bluish light,
cooler than the left, which gave reddish light, the latter ap-
pearing to him much warmer. I had found what I sought.
I repeated the experiment with more than a hundred other
sensitives, and obtained the same result in every case. I
next extended the comparison to the feet, the two sides of
the body, the cheeks, ears, eyes, nostrils, and even the two
sides of the tongue,—and this with a hundred variations. I
invariably obtained the same answers; namely, that the left
hand of the sensitive felt the whole right side of other per-
sons, whether male or female, cool, and the whole left side
warm. Thus you perceive that man is polarized laterally
from right to left, exactly and with the same signs as a
crystal is between the poles of its principal axis, or the
magnet between north and south, and the solar light between


128 How to write an article


blue and reddish yellow. And since the effects and their
signs are the same, we are entitled to conclude that the
causes are the same. This means, that the human body
gives out od, and this, in the same two forms which we have
found in all other sources of od. I have caused sensitives to
try cats, fowls, ducks, dogs, horses, and cattle in the same
way; and all yielded the same results. Plants, examined
from the root to the leaves, shewed themselves subject to the
same laws.—Thus the whole of living organized nature shines
in odic light, and overflows with odic influence: and when
you regard this comprehensive and wide-spread fact in its
bearing on universal nature, a new day will dawn for you in
reference to that which has been hitherto so improperly
named animal magnetism. I shall now attempt, aided by
the light of theory, to make with you a rapid excursion into
this obscure and confused territory. I have just furnished
you with the key of the gate which leads to it.


(These Letters will be continued in the next Number.)


Il. How to write an article upon Anesthesia and Anesthetic
Agents ; or, hints for British and Foreign Medical Re-


viewers. By Anti-Grorioso.


** It is seldom given to individual men to emancipate their minds from bond-
age to the prejudices of their profession. To professional assemblages that free-
dom of mind is always unknown and unattainable.”—Sir J. Srepuens, Lectures
on the History of France, vol. ii., p. 354.

“As Hobbes has well observed: were it for the profit of a governing body,
that the three angles of a triangle should not be equal to two right angles, the
doctrine that they were, would, by that body, inevitably be denounced as false
and pernicious. The most curious examples of this truth are to be found in the
history of medicine. For this, on the one hand, is nothing less than a history
of variations ; and on the other, only a still more marvellous history of how
every successive variation has, by medical bodies, been first furiously denounced,
and then bigotedly adopted.”—Sir Witt1am Hamitton, Discussions on Phi-
losophy, p. 638.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


April 25th, 1853.

S1r,—Bishop Berkeley asks in one of his “Queries,”
“whether it is not natural to wish for a benevolent phy-
sician?” The answer is so obvious, that to a reader, who
does not understand the ironical nature of the good Bishop’s
writings, the question might appear like an absurdity. But
there is more in that query than meets the ear on its first
hearing. The question had its rise from the large experience


upon Anesthesia and Anesthetic Agents. 129


of Berkeley in the ways of this world. Though Pope has
said of him in one of his memorable lines, that he had
“ every virtue under heaven,” his virtues, nevertheless, were
not in such an unsophisticated condition as to interfere with
his thorough appreciation of human conduct. He had, in
fact, extensive knowledge of the world. And when he asks,
whether it is not natural to wish for a benevolent physician,
he knew too well what a tendency routine and professional
bigotry have to warp the holiest feelings of the medical heart.

Many of your readers will remember the angry discussion
that took place at the meeting of the Medical and Chirurgical
Society after the account was read “of a case of successful
amputation of the thigh during the mesmeric state without
the knowledge of the patient,” which operation took place in
the district hospital of Wellow, Nottinghamshire. The pa-
tient was a labourer named James Wombell. He had suf-
fered for nearly five years from neglected disease of the left
knee, the interior of the joint of which was found after the
amputation extensively ulcerated. The slightest motion of
the joint was attended by the most excruciating agony: and
he had not slept more than two hours in seventy. At the
time of the operation the patient’s sleep was most profound:
his countenance never changed for a moment: his frame
rested in perfect stillness: not a muscle was seen to twitch:
and to the end of the operation, he lay like a statue. We
are so familiar at this time with operations of the same insen-
sible character, that it is unnecessary to enter more into
detail. It may be as well, however, to add, that the mes-
meriser, the surgeons, and the witnesses were all parties of
high character and respectability, and that nothing was want-
ing towards verifying the truth of the report.*

After the paper was finished, Mr. Coulson, a surgeon
practising in the city, asserted that the paper ought never to
have been read, for the only point of interest was the non-
expression of pain, and that was a common thing, and he
had no doubt the man had been érained to it. He also ob-
served to a gentleman who was present, that it was all “ stuff.”
Dr. Moore, a physician-accoucheur, then living in Saville Row,
immediately followed, observing, that such a statement ought
to have been accompanied by affidavits, and asked if “ affidavits
before the Lord Mayor or some other magistrate had been
made.” Insensibility to pain was at that day so incredible a
thing, that a physician calls loudly for affidavits in confirma-


* See Elliotson’s Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations without Pain, pub-
lished fen years ago.


130 Ignorant incredulity of the Profession.


tion of the evidence. Mr. Blake, a young surgeon, next
said that Wombell “shammed,’ Mr. Alcock, another sur-
geon, followed in the same line of argument. Dr. James
Johnson then said that he would not have believed the facts
mentioned in the paper, had he witnessed them himself.
Another doctor, named Truman, followed in the same strain
with the preceding speakers. Dr. Marshall Hall considered
the case to be one of imposition, because the poor man’s
sound leg did not start or contract while the diseased leg was
amputated!!! Admirable physiologist ! and provoking chlo-
roform! Dr. George Burrows expressed his doubts of the
reality of the case, because of the man saying he fancied he
heard something in his sleep. Sir Benjamin Brodie used the
argument of the other surgeons, and stated other reasons,
which, out of respect for the character of this distinguished
operator, we will not now repeat. Mr. Bransby Cooper
asked for the rationale of the facts: and found a difficulty in
admitting them. Mr. Liston wished to know if the interest-
ing patient had been able to read with the back of his neck !
Mr. Arnott found some difficulties in the case. All the oppo-
nents of mesmerism were, in short, vituperative and incre-
dulous ; and all shewed their ignorance of physiology and of
facts connected with their own profession.

It is scarcely needful to remind the readers of The Zoist
of the numerous train of successful surgical operations, during
the mesmeric state, which followed Wombell’s case; of Dr.
Esdaile’s gigantic and triumphant proceedings in India; of
what took place at Leicester, at Cherbourg in France, at
Torquay, at Upwell Isle, at Exeter, and in the United States ;
and in short, of the extended application of mesmeric insen-
sibility in aid of the surgeon’s knife.*

In 1846 and 1847 a marvellous change came over the
spirit of the medical profession. The scales fell from their
eyes in a most peculiar way. Insensibility to pain was sud-
denly metamorphosed into a fact, that could be called in
question no longer. The merciful discovery burst upon the
world, that by the vapour of ether, and by the application of
chloroform, surgical operations could be undergone without
any suffering, as, it had been alleged, was the case under the
mesmeric sleep ; and so that controversy was at an end, The
statements of the mesmerists were in truth verified to the
very letter. And although, in consequence of the rapid
action of chloroform upon the human frame, the application


* See the last number of The Zoist for an epitome of these operations. See
also Sandby’s Mesmerism and its Opponents, Second Edition, p. 51.


Its sudden and amusing change. 131


of this agent, in spite of the dangers that attend it, has to a
certain degree superseded in practice the employment of mes-
merism in regard to surgical operations, still the great historic
fact yet remains, that hundreds of painless operations through
the agency of mesmerism have been performed in America,
the West Indies, the East Indies, France, and Ireland, and
Great Britain; and that tumors exceeding a hundred weight
have been removed, and that the operations have terminated
most successfully. There remains, too, this fact, that whereas
in many instances the use of chloroform has proved fatal, and
that with patients liable to affections of the heart or of the
lungs or of the brain, or whose system has been depressed by
long-continued illness, medical men are fearful of recurring
to the aid of this anesthetic, mesmerism has in no single
instance been found productive of fatal consequences, and
that for surgical operations with those patients for whom the
use of chloroform is dreaded, mesmerism is the very agent
which a merciful provision of nature offers to our use. The
records of the operations in the Indian hospitals prove the
accuracy of this assertion; and to Dr. Esdaile’s two admir-
able volumes we appeal in proof.*

Posterity will, one day, ask, what did a high-minded
liberal profession say to these facts? What course did they,
as a body, or as individuals, pursue? What resolutions did
the College of Surgeons adopt? What orations did the
College of Physicians hear? What expressions of shame or
of regret did the Medical and Chirurgical Society enter upon
their minutes? Of what character were the articles which
appeared in medical and scientific journals? What said the
Lancet? What said the Medical Times? To what did the
editor of the Quarterly Medical Review at length give utter-
ance? Did all these parties speak out like men? Did they
own that they had been wrong? Did they take mesmerism
by the hand, and confess that they had been hasty in their
judgments, and unjust in their accusations? Or, alas! for
human nature, and philosophical character, did they sneak
into a base and secure silence, and in their writings, their
orations, their reviews and their lectures, did they, with a
cowardice which no language can adequately stigmatize, did
they forget what they had uttered, and suppress the truth ?

Not being a medical man, and not entering into medical
society, I am, of course, not qualified to answer all the above


* If the reader wishes for a literary treat, he is recommended to turn to one
of the best papers that Dr. Elliotson ever wrote, On the art of suddenly restor-
ing the Moral Feelings, &c., Zoist, Vol. V., p. 44.


132 Dishonesty of the British and


questions: chance, however, has furnished me with a reply
on one point; and it is not impossible that this very point
may be as instructive as any, and may even throw a light of
no uncertain character upon the other questions connected
with this enquiry.

The other day accident put into my hands a recent volume
of the British and Foreign Medical Review. In that great
organ of professional opinion I found two long and most ela-
borate articles upon Anesthesia and Anesthetic Agents. The
first part was published in No. 17, for January, 1852, and
the second in No. 18, for April of the same year. The
reader will not unnaturally feel somewhat curious to learn
what the reviewer said of the mesmeric painless operations.
We will offer, therefore, a brief resumé of the contents of
these two lengthy articles.

The writer begins with a short reference to former days.
“The practice of anesthesia appears to have existed in very
remote times” (p. 159). Dioscorides and Pliny mention that
the “root of the mandrake had the power of rendering pa-
tients insensible to the pain of surgical operations.” —*“ In
the middle ages the vapours of plants were used for the like
purpose.”—“ A king of Poland was rendered insensible during
a surgical operation.”* The reviewer unfortunately does not
inform us whether the Coulsons, Coplands, and Moores of
those dark ages ridiculed these facts as preposterous fables,
and called for affidavits in their support; or whether the
Sir Benjamin Brodie at the Court of Poland made no secret
of his opinion, that the royal patient had been shamming, and
that his pretence of insensibility was a “ disgraceful humbug.”
Perhaps this species of philosophic language is one of the
honourable characteristics of modern surgery.

But the reviewer proceeds with his history, and presents
us next with a paragraph, which for the falsehood it promul-
gates,—for the truth which it conceals, and for the slighting
tone with which it slurs over important facts that tell against
his own statement, is almost unparalleled for its dishonesty.
We will give the passage: and the reader shall judge for
himself.


** But the art of inducing anesthesia had so completely fallen
into desuetude, that the announcement of the application of vapours
for this purpose, as recently made from America, deserves the entire
merit of a discovery. It is true that it was known how compression
of the limb may induce insensibility below the part compressed :


* A far better history of anesthetic agents will be found in the sixth volume
of The Zoist, p. 42. -


Foreign Medical Review. 133


and insensibility to pain during the mesmeric sleep had been much
canvassed”’ (p. 159).


The reviewer, it will be observed, has the assurance here
to assert, that at the time in which the vapour of ether was
first employed in surgery, “the art of inducing anesthesia
had so completely fallen into desuetude, that the announce-
ment (of insensible operations) deserves the entire merit of
a discovery! !” Can a more impudent or mendacious state-
ment be well imagined? According to Dr. Johnson, this
magniloquent phrase of “ desuetude,” means “ discontinuance
of practice or of habit.” At the very time, however, that
this discovery respecting painless operations was made in
America, at that time there had taken place very recently,
during the mesmeric sleep, eight amputations, about thirty
miscellaneous operations, some of which were rather of a
serious character, nearly two hundred extractions of teeth,
and Dr. Esdaile, in addition, had just published his volume
on mesmerism, containing a narrative of what had occurred
in India. In that volume he mentions more than seventy
anzesthetic operations, of which fourteen consisted in the
removal of scrotal tumors, some weighing nearly 80 lbs. ;
seven were operations for hydrocele, five were toe-nails cut
out by the roots ; to say nothing of sundry amputations and
excisions, and applications of cautery and of muriatic acid.
And this state of things the reviewer describes as one, in
which anesthesia had completely fallen into discontinuance !
And the review, in which this statement makes its appear-
ance, is the great quarterly authority of the medical pro-
fession! To make amends, however, for this wholesale con-
cealment of the truth, the reviewer adds, with an exquisite
consideration for appearances that is beyond all praise, that
“ insensibility to pain during the mesmeric state had been much
canvassed.” These few words contain the only allusion to
mesmerism that I can find in these two elaborated articles.
Mesmeric insensibility had been much canvassed! Verily,
the phrase is happily picked and appropriate. As Holofernes,
the learned schoolmaster, observes, “the word is well culled,
chose: sweet and apt.” By it, we are led to infer that the
subject had been the occasion of some discussion ; but that
anything had been done, or that more than three hundred
operations had been the result, is the last thing that the
reader would surmise from it. A passage of more flagrant
dishonesty, both from the falsehood which it enunciates, and
from the facts which it hides, has been seldom compressed


into as few words. I do not know who may be the editor of
VOL. XI. L


134 Hypocrisy of the Reviewer.


this quarterly medical journal, yet I cannot but regard the
admission of such a paragraph into his review without any
explanatory or illustrative comments, as discreditable to his
moral character.

Having thus all but ignored the existence of mesmerism,
and having completely ignored the existence of Dr. Esdaile’s
magnificent feats in India, which in themselves constitute an
era in surgery, the reviewer proceeds to examine the history
of the ether-discovery in America,—refers to Drs. Jackson
and Morton, the alleged discoverers,—mentions the applica-
tion of chloroform,—and describes the introduction and re-
ception of both agents in England. Upon this branch of his
exposition I have nothing to observe.

At p. 179 is a long and scientific discussion upon anzs-
thetic agents in general: a copious list is given, and their
comparative merits analyzed: but mesmerism is not even
alluded to !


Oh, word of fear !
Distasteful to the doctor’s ear !


But it is unnecessary to weary the readers of The Zoist with
a more detailed examination of the review. It is sufficient
to say that the writer finishes the second article, “ by hoping
that anesthesia will be carried to the furthest extent of which
it is susceptible,” i.¢e., we presume, by suppressing the use
of mesmerism in those operations in which medical men
dare not employ chloroform. “ Let us do,” exclaims again
this model of all benevolence, ‘‘ what we can to mitigate
human suffering ;” in other words, let us not permit the
name of mesmerism to be mentioned in the presence of any
suffering patients for whom all the resources of medicine
have been tried and found wanting; but rather let us drive
from the sick room and from the wards of the hospital the
first presumptuous philanthropist who shall suggest its intro-
duction amongst us. This, we believe, is the present prac-
tical commentary at the College of Surgeons, in illustration
of “doing all that they can in mitigation of human suf-
fering !”

Hypocritical language like the above is revolting to one’s
moral sense: and yet, perhaps, we should make allowance
for the professional atmosphere in which the writer is forced
to dwell, and not expect too high a tone of integrity. The
medical mind has within the last few years become so vitiated
and debased, that, on certain questions, where the feelings
of the College step in, many members of the body often
proceed in a course of a most unworthy and disingenuous


Medical moral tone has fallen. 135


nature, and are yet quite unconscious at the time that there
is anything out of rule in their conduct. The air which they
habitually breathe is so poisoned by misrepresentation, that
its virus enters into their system imperceptibly, and they
know not what they say, or what they do. It is melancholy
to watch the shifts and the evasions to which many have often
recourse in order to escape from an acquaintance with an
unwelcome reality; for to some persons ignorance, if it be
but profitable, is far more attractive than the richest sources
of information. Dugald Stewart, in his life of Dr. Reid
(p. 462), speaks of “ the half-informed multitude who follow
the medical trade :” it is a coarse expression; and yet the
temper with which numbers, even some in the very highest
practice, pursue their calling, smacks far more of the shop-
keeper, than of the man of science. I cannot help fearing
that this is more the case than it used to be. In early life,
I was acquainted with professional men, who, with their high
sense of honour, would no more have dreamed of suppressing
a truth,—of distorting a fact, or of maligning a brother prac-
titioner, than of purloining a fee or of forging a deed. Mais
nous avous changé: and certain magnates, who haunt the
classic regions of Brook Street and Saville Row, are less nice
than were their predecessors ; and the infection spreads below.
And nothing more marks the animus which pervades the
literary section of the profession, than the omissions to which
I have directed your attention in these two ponderous papers
on anesthesia.

But I have now a curious fact for your consideration.
You may remember that, in my letter upon The Fire-away
Style of Philosophy, I mentioned that upon my once waking
up from a mesmeric sleep, I found a MS. in my own hand-
writing lying on the table by my side, which it was thought
that I must have composed in the sleep-waking condition.*
Something of a similar kind has again occurred. Upon the
evening of the day in which I had been reading the two arti-
cles in the British and Foreign Medical Reviéw, while my
mind was full of the subject, I fell fast asleep near my desk,
and upon awakening I found a manuscript lying before me,
of which the ink was not yet dry. Whether its contents had
been actually written by myself while asleep; or whether a
friend had stolen upon me unawares and imitated my hand-
writing most “ abominably ;” or whether one of Mrs. Hayden’s


* See Zoist, Vol. IX., p. 67, for a notice upon Miss Martineau’s and Mr.
Atkinson’s work, The Laws of Man’s Nature, &c., with a singular parody upon
their manner of corresponding.

L2


136 A wonderful Dream,


spirits had stepped in, and “ been so kind as to be so good as
to oblige me” by his assistance, (for upon waking up I had
an indistinct recollection of having heard some strange sounds
like a “rapping,”) I pretend not to say: at any rate the
little document struck me as being so much to the purpose,
that I have ventured to copy it for your perusal: and it ought
to be added that this heading was placed at the top,—“ Article
for the next number of the Medical Journal,’ the name
being left a blank.


Upon Anesthesia and Anesthetic Agents, and upon the blunders
and prejudices of Medical Men.


‘* He has no more knowledge in Hibocrates and Galen,—and he is a knave
besides ; a cowardly knave, as you would desires to be acquainted withal.””—
Merry Wives.


‘* It is a sleepy language ; and thou speak’st
Out of thy sleep : what is it thou didst say ?
This is a strange repose, to be asleep
With eyes wide open: standing, speaking, writing,
And yet so fast asleep.’’
The Tempest.


There was once a time, and that no distant time either, when
if any one had ventured to hint at the possibility of a painless sur-
gical operation, he must have been prepared to pass through every
species of contumely and ridicule. There was once a time, and that
no distant time either, when, if the report of such an alleged marvel
had been read before any learned or scientific association, the re-
porter must have made up his mind beforehand to be hooted down in
the first place, and hunted out of the room in the second. The
hospitals would have been up in arms against him. The surgeons
would have screamed in concert against such nonsense, and expressed
themselves as insulted by its communication. Sir Benjamin Brodie,
our infallible authority on such topics, would have argued most ably
upon the details, and proved their utter impossibility. Mr. Lawrence
would have smiled in sarcastic silence. Our virtuous Coulson would
have been shocked at such wickedness and imposture. Our humane
Bransby Cooper would have shuddered at such delusions. Sneers
and scornful gibings would have been the order of the day at each
chirurgical re-union; and the unhappy operator, in punishment for
his offences, would have been tabooed out of every surgical society.

We cannot but remember the feelings of prejudice and incre-
dulity with which almost every member of our profession received
the first tidings of a painless operation having taken place during
the mesmeric sleep. We cannot look back without something like
repentance and remorse, at the attitude which we almost all of us
assumed at the first communication of such an event. The evidence,
we must now allow, was unimpeachable; the statements clear and
technically accurate; the first narrative, too, was re-affirmed and
corroborated by many subsequent transactions of a similar nature ;


or a doing by a Spirit. 137


and though the facts were nothing more than those which are now
constantly occurring every week within every hospital, we not merely
received the intelligence with scepticism and disdain, but we dis-
missed the high-minded and talented men, who presumed to express
their belief in such prodigies, not only with insult, but we erased
every record of the proceedings both from our memories and from
our minutes.

The discovery of the peculiar manner in which chloroform acts
upon the human system, has changed:the aspect of the whole ques-
tion. The facts and the phenomena which the mesmerists related,
and which we derided, are now rehearsed every day before our eyes :
we see that their statements were accurately correct in the minutest
detail; we see that there was neither exaggeration nor mistake in
their accounts of those operations; and we ourselves endorse their
reports with our own hands.

It strikes us that the time has at length arrived, when it becomes
desirable to furnish our younger medical brethren with a cireum-
stantial history of anzesthesia, and with a description of our various
anzesthetic agents : and this, therefore, we propose to execute in our
present article. But before we enter upon our task, there is one
act of justice, which we are eager to perform, and by which we
hope to relieve our minds. We feel,—and we speak it publicly and
openly without reservation on any point,—that it is due to the mes-
meric body, more especially to its leading professional members, to
offer them all an authoritative expression of apology and regret, for
the manner in which we had all at first received their truthful and
now demonstrated communications. No false shame on our part shall
keep us any longer silent on this topic. We feel that no language
however humble, no posture however respectful, can adequately
represent the amende which it is our bounden duty to offer for the
incredulity and the insults, with which we are shocked at remember-
ing that we received the primary reports of painless surgical ope-
rations. In publishing through the pages of our journal this guasi-
authoritative amende to the mesmeric world, we are persuaded that
we are but echoing the feelings of the whole profession. The College
of Surgeons and the College of Physicians are, we know, impatient
to record their deep regret at their unworthy and obtuse behaviour.
The President of the latter body, with his face beaming with intel-
lect and spirituality, nods, we well know, approvingly upon our
intentions, being always ready to act with justice to an injured
party.* Dr. Seymour, whose regard for the comfort of his patients
is proverbial, and who doubtless has long regretted the foolish evi-
dence which he gave before a Committee of the House of Commons,
will, we are assured, join in our language cordially.t Dr. Francis


* See, par exemple, The Zoist, Vol. V1., p. 404.

+ Among the other luminous remarks offered by our distinguished cotem-
porary on his examination before the House of Commons’ Committee, was this
logical opinion, ‘‘ 1 consider that in patronizing a mesmeric hospital a person of
rank shewed a great disregard to the acquirements of the College of Physicians,
to common sense, and to everything else.” Vol. V., p. 370; Vol. VI., p. 96.


138 Doctors are penitent


Hawkins, also, who called the mesmerists ‘‘ impostors,” must equally,
we feel certain, repent his ignorant and inconsiderate language.*
Our thundering wiseacre, Dr. John Arthur Wilson, who in another
Harveian Oration hoped to extinguish mesmerism for ever, cannot
but join cordially with us in retraction of his scurrilous falsehoods.+
Dr. Copland, too, feels, we are sure, that he committed himself
again by another blunder, when he spoke of mesmerism as one of
the impostures of the day.t Dr. Alderson, also, must unite most
heartily with us in the language of recantation, and be sensible that
when he included mesmerism among the ‘‘ speciosa miracula of em-
piricism,” he was simply doing that of which his friends know that
he is often guilty, viz., expressing a grandiloquent opinion upon sub-
jects of which he knows nothing.§ Dr. Henry Holland (we beg his
pardon, Sir Henry: for the newly-entitled are tenacious of their
fresh honours, especially when there is no very patent motive for
them) smirks with assenting smile to all that we have said of misap-
prehension and precipitancy of conclusion, and blandly admits that
in his polite anxiety to please everybody, he has unfortunately pleased
nobody whose opinion is worth having.) Dr. Ranking, we have
strong reason to suspect, wishes with ourselves, that several of his
unlucky observations in regard to mesmerism could be erased from
his journal. His coarse colleague at Norwich has also, like our-
selves, learnt that he has burnt his fingers.** Dr. Fraser, of the


* “ Prestigiatores, quos vocant, mesmerici,” Harveian Oration for 1848. Is
this decent language, Dr. Hawkins, to be applied to men who employed the
agency of mesmerism for the prevention of pain in surgical operations? Are
they impostors, slanderer? Zoist, Vol. VI., pp. 213, 233.

+ Don Pomposo referred in his exquisitely classic diction ‘‘ to the heavenly
gift (chloroform) vouchsafed for the relief of man and the prevention of pain.”
Good Pomposo forgot, in his eagerness to insult ‘‘ mesmerising bishops and arch-
bishops,’’ that mesmerism was also a heavenly gift vouchsafed for the prevention
of pain. See The Zoist, Vol. VIII., p. 271, for a most happy castigation of this
shallow spouter in Latin.

t See Dr. Copland’s Dictionary of Practical Medicine. When Dr. C. is
asked, if Dr. Esdaile’s operations in India are proofs of ‘‘imposture,’’ he con-
tinues to shift the subject of conversation most ingeniously.

§ Dr. Alderson, in a lecture before the London College of Physicians, had
the ludicrous impudence to say, that ‘‘ we may search in vain for one single well-
attested practical benefit’’ derived from mesmerism. Has Dr. Alderson heard of
Dr. Esdaile ? Zoist, Vol. X., pp. 278-9.

|| See Zoist, Vol. X., p. 386, for a successful criticism of Dr. Holland’s
Chapters of Mental Physiology.” It is there shewn that Dr. Holland suppressed
(ignore, *‘ the wise it call: suppress! joh, a fico for the phrase’’) all reference to
the facts that overturn his hypothesis respecting mesmerism.

{ Dr. Ranking is co-editor of the Provincial Medical Journal, and has some-
what hastily committed himself to a few imprudences about mesmerism. Mr.
Walshe, of Worcester, the other editor, ought to know better. Dr. Ranking is
now a resident at Norwich,—as we understand: why did he shift his quarters ?

** Who is the coarse colleague at Norwich? Perhaps, the man ‘‘ what’’ per-
forms the zoological phenomenon of ‘ bristling up like a mad bull,” every time
that he hears of a cure effected by mesmerism. We understand that the Society
in the Regent’s Park is desirous of importing another specimen of these curious
animals for the amusement of visitors. They have a fierce aspect on the first ap-


and will do justice. 139


London Hospital, doubtless deplores his juvenile indiscretion and
errors of judgment.* ll of us, in short, feel persuaded that we
have exposed ourselves to ultimate disgrace by the opposition which
we have shewn to mesmerism; and for the hasty way in which we
originally denied the possibility of painless surgical operations, we
still further admit that every apology and reparation is due that lies
within our power.

But the atonement, which we wish to offer, would be incomplete,
if we did not add some expressions of regret at the treatment which
a distinguished member of our own body has received from too many
amongst us. To Dr. Elliotson, we are painfully aware, the most
apologetic language is strictly due, more especially as the question
of painless operations was not the first subject on which his judg-
ment and his facts were wrongfully disputed by his medical brethren.
When the stethoscope was invented, Dr. Elliotson was among the
very first physicians who advocated auscultation by its use: but the
heads of his profession sneered both at him and at the instrument.
Dr. Elliotson, however, was right; for now there is scarcely an
apothecary of any position who does not carry his stethoscope in his
pocket. Again, Dr. Elliotson was the man who established the
really good effects of hydrocyanic acid: his opinion, however, was
scouted; but he was right again here: for this medicine now is an
acknowledged item in the pharmacopeia. Again, Dr. Elliotson
established the value of quinine: but his opinion was depreciated ;
however, he was right again for a third time; and quinine is ha-
bitually recognized as one of our most important remedies. Upon a
fourth occasion, Dr. Elliotson asserted the possibility and the pro-
priety of painless surgical operations: however, for the fourth time
was he discredited and decried: but for a fourth time has he been
proved right ; for painless surgical operations are now as common, as
is the use of the stethoscope, of hydrocyanic acid, and of quinine.
The recollection of these facts ought to make us both humble and
ashamed ; for they prove, what the friends, who know him best,
have always asserted, that Dr. Elliotson is the most cautious, the
most accurate, the most safe and certain of observers; and this
question, therefore, cannot but present itself to the minds of all of
us,—if the correctness of Dr. Elliotson’s judgments has been suc-
cessfully tested upon these occasions, is there not a reasonable pro-


proach: but a little determination soon tames them, and they shew themselves to
be hart-stricken. Zoist, Vol. X., pp. 84, 92, 410, 412, 414, 425.

* Dr. Fraser is the young physician, who is so exceedingly occupied in his
professional duties, that he has only time to read one side of a question. Con-
sequently, he falls innocently into the most egregious blunders, and utters, what
would be called with men less busily engaged, unblushing falsehoods. See Tenth
Volume of The Zoist, p. 72, for most wholesome correction administered to the
young delinquent.

+ We might add a great deal more about his papers on iron, creosote,
glanders, his clinical lectures, his Human Physiology, and his Lectures on the
Practice of Medicine.


140 Antimesmeric glory.


bability that he is also correct in his other statements upon the phe-
nomena of mesmerism ?


Having thrown out these hints as a warning to the younger
members of the profession, we will now proceed


Here the manuscript unfortunately ended: but, whatever
may be the source from which it proceeded, it contains so
many just and pertinent observations, that I have been
tempted to forward it to you: And let me add, moreover,
that it is at the service of the editor of any medical review,
who is in need of a good opening upon the subject of anzs-
thetic operations. The different facts, however, that have
been thus brought forward, prove the truth of what Sir W.
Hamilton has stated in one of the mottoes of this letter, that
the “history of medicine is the history of variations,” and
that these “successive variations have, by medical bodies,
been first furiously denounced and then bigotedly adopted.”
And is not this fact a lesson for the adversaries of mesmerism ?

T remain, your humble servant,
Antt-GLorioso.


III. Instances of the power of Mesmerism over Neuralgia,
Diarrhea, Constipation, Sick head-ache, Chronic Inflam-


mation of the Eyes, and Debility of the young Female Con-
stitution. By Wii.1aM Lioyp, of the Society of Friends,
Fulford, Yorkshire.


“*It was during Mr. Clark’s attendance at the University Hospital that Dr.’
Elliotson first introduced the mesmeric experiments. Mr. Clark was a firm
opponent of these ansurpiTiEs from the first : and formed one of the Committee
which exposed the Okey rravup at Mr. Wakley’s house in 1837.’’—Medical
Circular and General Medical Advertiser. London, April 20, 1853. Memoirs
of J. F. Clark, surgeon.*


* The Medical Circular is a weekly medical pamphlet, edited by a surgeon
in Farringdon Street. It gives memoirs of living medical men, who supply all
the interesting details of themselves; and Mr. Clark, there can be no doubt,
wrote the above glorious particulars of his noble self. As so many Clarks are
doctors, and we are anxious that the immortality conferred by such sagacity and
intrepidity as Mr. Clark has manifested for sixteen years should be bestowed
upon the real little personage, we consider it incumbent upon us to inform the
world that this gentleman practises the various branches of the healing art at No.
23, Gerrard Street, Soho, left-hand side from Princes Street: and that he has
for nearly twenty years gained no inconsiderable proportion of his livelihood by
being Mr. Wakley’s most obedient reporter of cases at the different hospitals,
forming his medical thoughts and habits upon the model of his great master and
patron, who could put him into a side pocket and bite off the dear little Rufus’s
head at one’ munch if he were naughty enough to say, what his intimate friends
say for him, that he really believes in the truth of mesmerism though he dares
not let this transpire.—Zoist. .


Various Diseases cured. 141


Fulford, 5th month 4th, 1853.

Respected Friend, Dr. Elliotson.—If the following cases,

in the absence of more important matter, should be deemed

suitable for insertion in the philanthropic pages of The Zoist,
thou will oblige me by forwarding them for that purpose.
I am, with sincere esteem, thy Friend,

WituraM Lioyp.


Neuralgia.

Sarah Owens, aged about 20, Walmgate, York, had been
for two years subject to occasional attacks of extreme pain on
one side of her head and face; to such a degree that she said
it sometimes almost deprived her of her senses. I acci-
dentally became acquainted with it, as I one day called at
her mother’s where she happened to be staying at the time.
She had then been suffering with it three months. I offered
to make her a few local passes, which she accepted, and which
had the desired effect. Upon occasional inquiries afterwards,
I found it had entirely left her; and upon my calling on her
a few weeks ago, when more than twelve months had elapsed,
she told me that she had had zo return of it ever since.


Diarrhea.


As I one day stood by the board of Thomas Bulmer,


tailor, Fulford, he said to me, “I’m almost purged to death.”
I queried, “ why should I not relieve thee of thy malady?
Vl try if thou like.” He said he had no objection, so I
brought him near the fire, and made mesmeric movements
before him for about twenty minutes, from which time he had
no further trace of the diarrhoea, and his bowels became
perfectly regular.


Inveterate Constipation.

Thomas Dale, an old man and paralytic, was troubled
with inveterate constipation, insomuch that no movement of
the bowels could be obtained, but by the adminstration of
castor oil; but, by the occasional application of local passes,
the castor oil was entirely laid aside. But after a few months
he had another paralytic fit, from which he did not recover.


Sick Head-ache.

Mrs. Jones, Fulford, had been subject for about twelve
months to very severe attacks of sick head-ache, as often as
three times a week. I mesmerised her four times, when she
was so far cured as that she had but one fit of it during the
four months she subsequently remained at Fulford.


142 Various Diseases cured.


Inflammation of the Eyes.

The eyes of a neighbour of mine, an artist, had been in
a state of inflammation for siz weeks, during which time he had
been under medical advice, but still the malady was extreme ;
and he was greatly discouraged. I offered to mesmerise him ;
he accepted the offer, and in four days his eyes were well, and
have continued so ever since, a period of nearly a year and
a half. -

Inflammation of the Eyes.

Another neighbour had a female friend with her two little
children visiting her. The eldest child, a little girl 6 years
of age, had weakness of the eyes, insomuch that she could
not face the light, or bear to look up. She had been pre-
scribed for by a surgeon of good practice in York, and for
three weeks subjected to a course of medicine and ointment,
but without its producing any amendment. I first mesmerised
her on an evening, but, from the great restlessness of the
child, I anticipated no beneficial result from this first attempt.
Yet the next morning her mother was so surprised at the
degree of improvement, that she wished a continuation of the
treatment; this was adopted for a week, when it was no
longer requisite.

N.B. There was no mesmeric sleep produced in any of
the foregoing cases, except in Mrs Jones, and that but very
slight.


Debility of the young Female Constitution.

A. L., aged 18, daughter of J. L., York, had been in a
languishing condition for siz months, suffering strong palpi-
tations of the heart, severe pain in the chest, loss of appetite,
depression of spirits, and restless nights. I mesmerised her
for about seven weeks, every day for about half the time, and
every other the remainder; from which period, now over four
years, she has been comparatively robust, and equal to the
performance of all the duties of life; a considerable portion
of her time she is engaged in a retail shop, from seven in the
morning till nine in the evening, In addition to the before-
mentioned maladies, she had an enlargement of the neck,
that was much reduced under the treatment, and has since
nearly disappeared.


To ConrTRIBUTORsS.


My dear Friends and Brethren,—For I feel in fraternity
with all who like myself are conscientiously engaged in the
promotion of mesmerism. Allow me very respectfully to in-
treat you, as far as circumstances will allow, to be diligent


Tobacco brought to us by the Devil. 143


in imparting the genial influence to such of the afflicted as
may come under your notice; this done in all our various
localities, and we may confidently hope that mesmerism will
prevail and become popular. Permit me also to suggest the
necessity of sending cases for insertion in The Zoist; for,
until the principle becomes more universally resorted to, its
pages should increasingly teem with the achievements of mes-
merism. It also appears to me very desirable that we should
watch opportunity for reporting cures in diseases, not hitherto
recognized as curable, by mesmerism. I possess five volumes
of The Zoist, V1. to X. inclusive, but in none of the indexes
do I find a cure of diarrhea reported; and if any of my
friends can report a cure of either diabetes or piles, they will
oblige me and serve the cause by so doing.
I am, very respectfully, your Friend,

Wiuuram Lioyp.

Fulford, near York, 5th month 5th, 1853.


IV. Mesmeric Notes and Cases. Cure of Ear-ache: general
Debility and Hypochondriasis: and Tooth-ache. By
R. E. Cane, Trinity College, Dublin.


“The Abbé Nisseno says, P. 1, 1. 3, cap. 5: ‘* Tobacco appears to have been
brought from the Indies to Spain and other countries of the old world by the
anxiety of the devil.’’ ‘* Tabaca demonis sollicitudine ex Indiis in Hispanias
aliasque mundi superioris oras invecta videtur.’’—La Physique Occulte. Paris,
1752. p. 326.


A.tuoucGH the knowledge of mesmeric phenomena has of late
years become to a great extent lucid and systematized, still
there are many parts of it, especially those touching on the
relation existing between operator and subject, that are yet
very indistinct, and which we can only hope to explain by
collecting and comparing the observations of individual ope-
rators. I do not see that we have as yet advanced much
towards even the principal question of this art: why particular
magnetizers produce better marked effects with particular
subjects than others? And any probable attempt to elucidate
it must depend on the facts observed by mesmerists in general,
as to the temperament, size of head, of body, &c., as exist-
ing in themselves and their patients. It is generally under-
stood that a large, active head, will, ceteris paribus, influence
a small inert one; but we can scarcely call the rule general,
and the exceptions are perfectly unexplained. Temperament
is an important condition; I have myself generally succeeded
best with those of sanguine-lymphatic or sanguine tempera-


] 4d Cure of Ear-ache.


ment, my own being principally fibro-nervous, but unfortu-
nately sufficient time is not at my disposal to permit of such
extensive experiments as would render deductions from them
worthy of consideration. I can only throw out the general
suggestion, that when operator and subject have little of the
same temperament in common, perhaps, ceteris paribus,
most effect is produced. The mental disposition of both
parties, also, when most effect is produced, is worth exami-
nation. Large Adhesiveness in the subject, I have always
found a material assistance; other relations of the kind I
have been speaking of, which I have not sufficient facts even
to touch on, are those under which clairvoyance, prevision,
&c., are produced and the qualities which are essential to the
production of medico-mesmeric effects, &c. These are all very
striking phenomena, and ones which it is important should be
accurately understood ; in our wonder at the things themselves,
we have hitherto neglected the very arduous task of inquiring
into the conditions of their occurrence; but it is to be hoped
that the pages of The Zoist will bear speedy evidence of
careful and accurate observations with this view.


Ear-ache.

The first article in your April number is very gratifying ;
more especially as it shows the attention paid to, and progress
made in, the practice of mesmerism as a remedial agent—by
far its most important phase. I find a few slight instances of
this nature in my case book that may be interesting.

1. A country woman was brought to me, suffering excru-
ciating pain in the ear. Her account was that a shell of
barley had got into it, while she was engaged in reaping ; but
on examination I could find no such thing in it. It was ex-
tensively swelled and torn inside, however, from the efforts
of her neighbours to extract the imaginary barley with a long
pin. She was “roaring with pain.” I told her to sit quiet,
and made downward passes with one hand over the affected
ear, without giving her any notification of what I was doing,
or what effect I expected. Occasionally I made full soothing
passes on the head and shoulders. In a few minutes she said
she was “getting weak,” and that the pain in her ear was
converted into an itching; and in about a quarter of an hour
she complained no more, and lay back in the chair half asleep.
She continued without pain for about half an hour longer,
when I dismissed her with directions to come back if the pain
returned. I have heard no more of her since. It was evident
she had no idea whatever of mesmerism ; the effect was pro-
duced entirely independent of herself. Her countenance and


General Debility, Hypochondriasis, and Tooth-ache. 145


personnel were evidence sufficient against her relief being the
effect of “ imagination.”


General Debility and Hypochondriasis.

2. A married woman, the mother of a family, had been
under the care of several of the principal medical men in
Kilkenny for lowness of spirits, loss of appetite, and general
debility, at intervals, during many years. To use her own
expression she “ had swallowed a ton of medicine, and she was
no better of it.”’ She was at last recommended by Mr. Hogan
who introduced her to me, to try the effect of mesmerism.
She had a peculiar cast of countenance I have often seen in
epileptic and chlorotic patients ; and was in a pitiable state of
nervousness. On one of the first trials, the shaking of a bell
wire which passed through the room I was operating in, put
her into an agony of terror; and for a long time she was
“afraid” of the fixed gaze to look toward me while I was
attempting to influence her. I commenced to mesmerise her
daily, for a quarter or half an hour each time, (she could not
bear longer, such was her debility) and gradually she became
less nervous, and “ more light hearted” as she expressed it ;
her strength and appetite increased; and her frame grew
stronger. She also became free from “frightful dreams,”
which used to annoy her greatly. After about twenty-four
operations she stated that she would never ask to be better
than she was, and all her old symptoms had disappeared. I
directed her to come to me about every two or three days,
but after a while she omitted coming, possibly through
“Satanic” agency. J never succeeded in inducing sleep in this
case; nor any effect beyond a strong drowsiness; pointing at
the eyes had the most powerful effect. I also used mes-
merised water; the first dose of which, she complained, made
her feel very uneasy, as if “she didn’t know whether she
was sick or well; I had not led her to expect any effect from
it. After the first time it produced no further uneasiness.
Also, on particular occasions, when she complained of more
debility or low spiritedness than ordinary, I used passes along
the spine; and attempted excitations of the organs of Hope
and Mirthfulness. In this case the temperament appeared
to be lymphatic-fibrous.


Tooth-ache.

3. M. J. P., a rather susceptible subject, asked me in
July of last year to make a few passes for a severe swelled
jaw and tooth-ache. After a few moments he said the great
“anguish” was gone; and shortly he complained no more,


146 Mesmerised Water.


though no effect was perceptible on the swelling. The tooth
has not been spontaneously painful since; I mean, it has
given no annoyance but when pieces of bread, &c., get into
it. He attributes this entirely to my interference.


In these three exertions of magnetic influence at least,
my obtuseness cannot detect anything savouring in the
slightest of the “Satanic ;” or if there be, Satanic agency is
a power we ought to feel very grateful to, and Satan quite a
respectable individual, after all.


In connection with Mr. Ekins’s and other gentlemen’s
observations on mesmerised water, I may state an experi-
ment performed on a little brother of mine with it. I was
trying to render him clairvoyant, or rather to see if I could
produce any such effect; and to this end I directed him to
gaze in a glass of the water, having suggested to him a
person to think of. After a while he saw light in the water,
and commenced to describe insects, ships, trees, figures, &c.,
but altogether unconnectedly. He was gazing fixedly into
the water, and evidently under a sort of impression that what
he saw was real. When those effects had gone on for some
time, I blindfolded him, and removed the glass, but the in-
duced (dreaming ?) state continued, and he was still describ-
ing cows, &c. I then commenced making passes over his
face, outside the cloth, when he suddenly cried out, “Oh!
I see a great deal of lightning coming every way ;” but this
effect did not last. In this case the effects, except perhaps
the last, were evidently due to a strong imagination, or pos-
sibly what we call submesmerism ; we should be careful to
distinguish such from the true effects of mesmerised water,
which, unless in the case of some clairvoyants, does not
seem to influence the special senses by its own virtue at all.
The only facts relative to it that I am inclined to accept as
fully and definitely proved yet, are its internal curative
effects.


Mr. Cottrell’s case of clairvoyant dreaming is very curi-
ous. There is some reason for thinking such cases are not
so uncommon as is generally supposed; and it is probable
that in all or most of them, the subject could be brought
into the more constant clairvoyant state by mesmeric opera-
tions.* The following case of this sleeping clairvoyance was


* In No. XLL., p. 80, &c., see Dr. Elliotson’s observations upon clair-
voyant dreaming, with abundant references, at the end of Mr. Cottrell’s case.


Dreaming Clairvoyance. 147


related to me by J. P., who afterwards became to some ex-
tent mesmerically clairvoyant in my hands. When a child,
he lost a small pocket-pistol, which formed a constant com-
panion of his, and felt its loss deeply. Unavailing search
was made, but at last he dreamed it was in an old clothes-
trunk, in a servant’s room; where accordingly it was found
next day, to his great delight. I may hereafter give a de-
tailed account of one of his mesmeric clairvoyances; the
object of the present instance is to shew the concurrence of
lucidity in the artificial and induced sleep in the same person.
Such a concurrence, if constant, would be of material aid to
mesmerists seeking subjects exhibiting clairvoyant pheno-
mena. Some mesmeric dreams, to which we are not justified
in attributing the term clairvoyant, closely resemble this class
of phenomena. They are occasionally so clear and distinct
that one might be tempted to think them instances of such
prevision or retrovision as those given in the latter part of
Dr. Gregory’s Letters, but that we cannot see any circum-
stances to which they refer. M. J. P. on one occasion while
I was attempting to induce the magnetic sleep, fell into a
state of this kind. He breathed heavily, and appeared asleep,
but assured me he was not; and began to describe with great
minuteness, as if he was at that time looking at it, a sort of
wooden framework extending along one end of the room, and
the dead body of a female dressed in black, with long black
hair, thrown carelessly across it. This vision made a con-
siderable impression on him; he has since frequently referred
to it in conversation. It exceeded in intensity and vraisem-
blance any of those dreams I have met with; but, for the
present at least, we must consider it a mere dream.

In some cases it is difficult to explain why sleep is not
produced after varied trials, although from the commence-
ment the patient has been very strongly affected in other
ways. Many of the mesmeric books give instances of this
kind ; the best I have seen was in the case of J.o’R. On
the second trial he spoke of feeling “as if he was in heaven,”


He considers that clairvoyance is more common in sleep than in the waking state :
and gives from Archbishop Potter’s Archevlogia Greca the observations made by
the Greeks upon the subject, and perfectly harmonizing with our own. Mr.
W. W. Lloyd, in the last of his learned articles (Nos. X., XI., XIX.), quotes
a passage in the Eumenides of Aischylus. The shade of Clytemnestra upbraids
the Furies with sleeping instead of avenging her :—‘‘ View my wounds with thy
heart, for the sleeping mind even of mortals is brightened with eyes (is clair-
voyant), while by daylight it has no foresight of fate.’’


Evdovaa yap ppv Supaow Naprpvverac’
év yuépa & warp arpooxores Bpotiv.—104. 5.
—Zoist.


148 Effects sometimes never increase.


and saw a great deal of sparkling light about him; he felt a
“dry heat” from my hands, and was unable to endure the
light of the candle. But after several trials the effect did
not increase; indeed, if it at all changed, it was lessened,
and I had to discontinue. At the same time the process had
one good effect; J. o’R. stated that his spirits had been
livelier and better since I commenced operating. An inci-
dent occurred on one of these occasions which goes somewhat
to prove that the “dry heat” he felt was proportioned to the
magnetic effect produced. I began to mesmerise him one
evening, when I was much heated and rather fatigued. As
might be expected, very little effect was produced this time ;
and when I had finished, a bystander, Mr. H., said, “I did’nt
expect you to do much to-night ; you were too hot.” ‘“ Hot!”
said J. o’R., “I felt you much colder than usual.”


I believe The Zoist may fairly congratulate itself on having
“put down” “ELEecTRO-BioLocy ;”* I congratulate myself
on having dealt a blow, however feeble, in the battle against
it. “ Spiritual-rappings” is the next humbug to be quashed:
and, after your article,t and that in Dickens’s Household
Words, 1 do not think it can survive long. I had, since my
last communication to Dr. Elliotson,t another case of “ elec-
tro-biological” results brought about where mesmerical ones
were expected ; and where I am perfectly certain I could have
produced the same effects without any preparation, mental or
otherwise, merely by the influence of a very positive and
energetic manner over a mind of weak character and calibre.

With this I shall conclude a rather desultory record,
which, I hope, has not trespassed too far on the time and
space of The Zoist.


R. E. Cane.


V. On a preservative and curative treatment of Asiatic Cholera
with Metals : followed by an account of a particular system
of application of Metals, intended to popularize the new
properties discovered in them by means of Magnetism. By
Dr. Bure, of Paris. Translated by Dr. Elliotson.


One day in April, 1852, I had to visit an important copper
foundry in Paris, at No. 22 in the Rue Gravilliers, and learnt
accidentally in conversation that all the workmen and inmates


* Nos. XXXIII., XXXVI.—Zoist. + No. XLI.—Zoist.
t No. XXXVIIT.—Zoist.


Factories visited. 149


of the establishment have escaped the cholera both in 1832
and 1849. I began to wonder whether metals had other pro-
perties besides those which I ascribed to them in 1849 in
consequence of my experiments with metallic armatures upon
cholera patients.* However, I was beginning to forget these,
when, a month later, the same observations presented them-
selves to me again with a sort of tenacity, and particularly in
three other copper foundries, at No. 20, 46, and 35 in the
same street, where 400 or 500 workmen and inmates had es-
caped equally with those at No. 22.

This novel and remarkable immunity being far from as-
cribable to the healthiness of the quarters, or even to the
state of the houses, all four of which looked as miserable ex-
ternally as foundries in general, to the mode of living of the
inhabitants, or to the rate of mortality of the adjoining houses,
I could not consider it accidental, and did not rest till I ren-
dered at least very probable the remarkable properties which
I at first had only suspected in copper.

In order to arrive at this important result, I devoted my-
self to an extensive investigation, of which the following are
the principal results.

I. I visited in Paris alone nearly 400 houses,—all kinds of
factories of metals, from the humble workshop containing
from 4 to 10 workmen only to the large establishments in
which, as in that of Messrs. Pail and Pavé, there are hun-
dreds ; from the factories of castors in the Faubourg St. Antoine
to the forges of Grenelles, and from the iron foundries of the
Faubourg St. Marteau and St. Jaques, the type foundries in
the Rue de Vaugirard, and the factories of Messrs. Payonse,
Calla, Gonin, and Farcoux, at La Villette, La Chapelle, and
at St. Ouen.

I put myself in communication with the presidents, trea-
surers, or secretaries of workmen’s associations, with the
heads of journeymen locksmiths, shoeing smiths, boiler makers,
&c., and very frequently visited the workmen themselves at
their public houses or lodgings.

At the same time I wrote to the departments, to the pro-
prietors, managers and medical attendants of our chief fac-
tories, foundries, flattening and wire-drawing mills, to the
mayors and magistrates of the towns, where, as at / Aigle
and Villedieu, the population is nearly all employed in metals,
requesting information upon the course of the two epidemics
in their localities. I applied also to the Swedish and Russian


* See Dr. Burgq’s two former articles on the metal-cure in Nos. XXXVIII.,
XXXIX.—Zoist.


VOL. XI. M


150 Factories in Paris.


ambassadors, Professor Huss of Stockholm, and the Count of
Montferraud, architect of the Emperor at St. Petersburg and
director of the mines of copper and malachite belonging to
his highness Prince Anatole de Demidoff in Siberia, to the
larger metallurgic establishments of Europe, the cutlery fac-
tories of Sheffield, the iron works of Wales, the boiler fac-
tories of Birmingham, &c.; and, after many months of such
inquiries, after having searched the valuable statistical docu-
ments published by the Cholera Commission in 1832, I have
felt justified in announcing my discovery to the principal aca-
demies and learned societies of Europe, in the form of certain
propositions or conclusions, which I will detail after having
communicated the most important facts of this extensive
examination.


Different factories in copper, bronze, and brass.
Paris.


1. Factories of surgical instruments. 600 workmen; 3
only died in the two epidemics. In 1832, M. Sax, who was
not at that time established in Paris, noticed the same im-
munity among the numerous workmen of Brussels.

2. Copper turners for opticians. From 300 to 400 work-
men ; 2 died in the two epidemics.

3. Makers of castors in the Faubourg St. Antoine. 200
workmen or masters; 3 died in the two epidemics.

4. Bronze manufactory. From 7000 to 8000 workmen ;
15 at the utmost died in the last epidemic. I could learn
nothing respecting the first.

M. Eck, president of a society called Du bon Accord, con-
sisting exclusively of workmen, chasers, gold setters, and
turners in bronze, declares that among 300 members one only
died in the two epidemics.

5. Engravers, working jewellers, makers of medals, of but-
tons, copper turners, makers of tubes, of lamps, of penholders,
copper polishers, &c. Mortality very inconsiderable in every
workshop which I could visit,—scarcely 5 in 1000.

The different passages opening into the Rue de Gravilliers
—the Passage de Rome, the Impasse de la Marmite, the Pas-
sage Barron, &c., which are full of factories, experienced in
the two epidemics a comparatively insignificant mortality, es-
pecially if we consider the mode of living among the inhabi-
tants ; scarcely 5 in 1000.

6. Copper foundries. 50 establishments scattered through
Paris. 1200 or 1300 workmen; imperfect information res-
pecting 1832: but in 1849 only eight died, among whom was
1 drunkard, excessively addicted to brandy, 1 apprentice, 2


Factories in the Country. 151


persons previously out of health, and 1 seized on a sudden
away from the foundry. This very remarkable fact was too
common wherever I could ascertain the particulars of every
workman, not to be highly significant.

7. Boiler makers. 500 or 600 workmen or masters ; 3 or
4 only died in 1849. The mortality equally slight in 1832:
but there was no precise information. Many persons in this
occupation informed me positively, or nearly so, that I should
not find cholera patients in the boiler factories, because copper
kills the cholera.

The great copper establishment (to distinguish it from the
iron manufactory at Chaillot) belonging to M. Cail and Co.
at Grenoble, had 600 workmen of all kinds in 1849: 2 died,
one having been the worst kind of drunkard, and the other
having just been committing debauches at Paris; and yet, in
the last epidemic especially, the cholera committed great ra-
vages at Grenoble, and raged so particularly in the houses
around M. Cail’s manufactory, that the inhabitants were de-
cimated and obliged to quit the neighbourhood, though many,
and among the rest a cluster of 5 houses on the bank of the
Seine, were apparently in the most favourable circumstances.
What is more, M. Poli’s forge, situated at least 300 metres
distant from M. Cail’s boiler manufactory, lost 6 workmen
out of 70.


DEPARTMENTS.
Copper foundries, file makers, &c.


1. At St. Denis, M. David. 100 workmen; 1 died.

2. At Essonne, M. Reveilhac. 70 workmen; none died.

3. At Romilly, a joint stock company, 500 workmen, 2
died and they were drunkards.

4. At ’Aigle, M. Monchel. 600 workmen distributed in
3 great establishments; none died. The cholera never found
its way into l’Aigle in 1832, but in 1849 it prevailed there.

5. At Givet, MM. Estivan Brothers. 400 workmen; none
died.

6. Imphy (Liévre). 800 workmen in 1832; none died.
The same establishment removed to Havre in 1849; none
died. It was very remarkable that in 1832 there were also at
Imphy flattening and wire-drawing iron mills, which, united
with the flattening copper mills, employed from 300 to 400
men; and no one died. In 1849, they worked at iron only,
and the workmen were fewer; 4 died. And a similar and
equally important fact is, that at No. 109, Rwe de Bac, in
1832, in the extensive lead foundry, 18 died both among

M 2


152 Foreign Countries.


workmen and inhabitants. In 1849, when a small copper
foundry had been added to the lead foundry, 2 only died.

At Ville Dieu, in the department of La Manche, where
much copper is manufactured, the cholera never appeared.


Fore1en Countries.

At Birmingham, where all the copper boilers of England
are manufactured, and in those parts of Wales where, as at
Swansea, the copper of Australia, Sweden, and Russia is re-
fined, the number of victims was very small.


Mines.

Near Pontoise is a small village upon a hill which has so
completely escaped both epidemics that it became a place of
refuge for the inhabitants of the neighbourhood. The hill is
said to contain copper.

At Phalen and at Sinakeeping, where are the richest
copper mines in Sweden, there never has been either the
plague or the cholera, although the latter occasionally raged
in the neighbourhood ; and, what is remarkable, there exists
a prevalent belief in these two parts, “ that the cholera miasma
and copper are incompatible.” I owe this information to Pro-
fessor Huss, and his account is fully confirmed to me by the
Swedish ambassador, his excellency the Count of Posenheim.

In Siberia, on the estate of his highness the Prince
Anatole of Demidoff, 4,600 persons worked both in the copper,
malachite, gold, and platina mines, and above ground. In
1849, the cholera found its way thither, and only 9 men
died among the workmen engaged in extracting the copper.

But, if we suppose copper to possess the wonderfully pre-
ventive and curative property of which all these facts leave
no doubt, the originality of this happy discovery will not
belong to me; because the accredited organ of a different
school from my own has recently expressed itself in the fol-
lowing terms with reference to my communication made to
the Academy upon the prevention and treatment of cholera
with this metal.

“Copper, in addition to a curative, would seem to pos-
sess a preservative, property, according to the researches of
Dr. Burq. This is a fact which homeopathy foresaw, and
which practice has verified.

“The employment of copper,” says Hahnemann, “ united
to a mild and regular regimen and proper cleanliness, is the
most efficacious and certain preventative, if a dose is taken
every week in the morning on an empty stomach.” Hahne-
mann even adds (and this is a remarkable instance of em-
piricism and popular good sense frequently forestalling scien-


Mines, Factories. 153


tific discovery) : ‘It has also been observed in Hungary that
wearing a plate of copper next the skin was a preservative
against the infection: this I have have been assured of by
several good authorities in that country.”—Journal of the
French Homeopathic Society, January, 1853: Dr. Escauurer.

If, as cannot be doubted, the statement of this gen-
tleman is correct, it ought not to vex, but to please me: for
in that case all the trouble I have taken has the less chance
of being useless.


Different factories of iron, steel, zinc, and mercury.


Copper does not seem to be the only metal which proved
a preservative against the cholera: but other metals, high in
the scale of electric conductibility, such as iron, steel, and
mercury, appear to have protected many workmen who were
not aware of the circumstance. But, as these metals possess
a mediate or neighbouring influence only upon the cholera,
the immunity will not be perfect unless the protecting agent
is in great activity and in sufficient mass; nor unless no par-
ticular circumstances neutralize the effects of its presence.
At Paris, the great establishments of MM. Cail at Chaillot,
and Cuvé in the Faubourg St. Denis, each of which employs
from 500 to 600 workmen; that of M. —————, near
Parmentier, which employs 150; M. Decorser’s building
factory in the Rue Stanislar, 70; that of M. Calla at La
Chapelle, 200; that of M. Gonin at Batignolles, 300; and,
lastly, the establishment of M. Farcoux at St. Ouen, 200;
did not lose 10 in the whole during the two epidemics. The
houses of MM. Charriére and Euér, and in general all the
manufactories of surgical instruments, lost only 2 in 1832
and 1849. Steel polishers, and makers of files and steel
springs, makers of steel helmets and cuirasses, lost about 5
or 6in a 1000. Iron foundries, which have less connection
with this metal than the preceding occupations, and which at
Paris employ about 1000 men distributed in from 25 to 30
houses, lost 10 or 12 in the last epidemic.*

Locksmiths and especially shoeing smiths, who are sur-
rounded with but small quantities of iron, suffered a good
deal. The same held good among the cutlers in the depart-


* A very interesting fact, generally observed among steel temperers, is that,
in the two epidemics, it was seldom possible to make good springs. In 1849,
M. G., a skilful mechanician, at Menilmontant, Paris, to whom more especially
I owe this information, tried all means in vain to overcome the new enemies of
this manufacture. The springs continued to break till the violence of the epidemic
was passed. He has afterwards never failed but by accident, and is now at the
head of this business.


154 Evidence from the Cholera Commission.


ments, who, as at Bresles and Nogent, were isolated, and
had only some tools and very little iron or steel in their
neighbourhood.

On the contrary, in the great establishments in the de-
partments la Creuzot at Decazeville, the forges of la Provi-
dence, of Commentry, and of Val D’Osne, &c., &c., where
there are great quantities of metal, the immunity was com-
plete in proportion as the establishment was situated more at
the mines themselves.

I must mention one exception at the forges of Montalairé.
This establishment, placed in a very unfavourable sanitary
condition through the proximity of several marshes, and which
besides derives all its ore from la Champagne, suffered so con-
siderably in 1849 that it was obliged to close its doors.

The zinc mines of Stolberg and of the ancient Montagne
were spared.

It was the same with various quicksilver mines: and, on
account of the immunity in them, Dr. Jules Suérin, of the
Gazette Médicale, proposed to treat the disease with mer-
curial frictions: and the practice prevailed in Germany during
the last epidemic of carrying about with one a tube filled
with mercury as a means of prevention.

Should all these facts fail to convince, before we have
those furnished by the zeal or interest of all concerned in
such occupations, magistrates, medical men, &c., to whom I
am at present applying to attain my object, I can only say
that the Cholera Commission of 1832 has already uncoi-
sciously nearly gained me the victory,

1. By shewing in its valuable statistic collections that the
occupation most spared was that of hardwares.

2. In assigning a small mortality to the Rue de Rappe,
Faubourg St. Antoine, a street inhabited by people very care-
less in its habits and in all things conducive to health: and
to all the quarters of St. Martin’s in the Fields, which is
miserably full of little streets, courts, and alleys of all kinds,
but which, on the other hand, is full of copper and steel
factories: whereas the rate of mortality was frightful in St.
Giles, which is only separated from it by St. Martin’s Lane,
and in which, instead of metal factories are the shops of
mercers, milliners, druggists, &c.

During the two epidemics in France, in 1832 and 1849,
the metals, wherever I could collect observation, exerted in
general an influence as beneficial, as it was conspicuous, in
all occupations much concerned with metals.

II. This influence, so evident that I am astonished it has
attracted little notice and led to no results, is especially re-


Metallic prevention and cure.


markable among the workers in bronze and brass, and, in a
lower degree, among the workers in steel: but, as we descend
in the scale of trades, the top of which scale would be occupied
on the one hand by the alloys of copper, and on the other by
the carburets of iron, and the bottom by these two metals in
their greatest purity, the cholera mortality increases till at
length it attains perhaps the mean; and, in the case of
copper, is very great, though without reaching its limits.

Thus in 1849 a thousand workers in steel lost scarcely 3
or 4 from cholera: whereas, for instance, the journeymen
shoeing-smiths, amounting to 200 or 250, lost 5: and, though
all the musical-instrument makers, amounting to 600, lost but
2 in 1832 and 1849, the boiler factories of Paris, which em-
ploy about the same number of hands, lost 4 or 5 in the last
epidemic only.

3. The protection afforded by the metals appear to have
been of two distinct kinds :—preventive and curative.

Preventive, without doubt, directly by contact with the
metal, and in proportion to the quantity of the metal; and
indirectly by mere proximity, like persons placed within the
sphere of a protecting thunder rod: at least this is the only
way of explaining the great exemption from the disease in
almost all the inhabitants of copper foundries, unless it is
ascribed to the dispersion of the metals in the form of very
minute particles or particular effluvia during the melting and
the working of the metal.

4. I think that the preservative power is possessed on the
same ground by all metals which are at the same point of the
electric scale: and, if it exists especially in brass and steel,
this is probably because these two metals, endowed with
strong electric and magnetic properties, successfully modify
similar perturbations, in the midst of which only the cholera
miasma is able to commit its ravages. It is very remarkable,
in the latter point of view, that I have never met with the
same amount of protection in occupations, similar in the
nature of the metals, but, like watch-making, differing in this
that the metals were most carefully greased or oiled.

III. The curative power, on the contrary, appears pos-
sessed by copper only, which is, to the miasma of cholera,
what sulphate of quinine is to the miasma of intermittent
fever. Many times have I noticed this remarkable property
most decidedly, and a particular workman or master of a
copper foundry has been exempted from the worst symptoms
of cholera by continuing to reside in the midst of copper
dust and emanations, whereas another, less fortunate, has
perished by quickly leaving the factory.


156 Persons variously susceptible to Copper and Iron.


The preventive and curative properties of copper are so
great that the whole of a type-foundry, in which, however,
copper is not greatly used, lost but 2 men in 1832 and 1849:
and in 1849 the occupation which, doubtless, from its known
intemperance and unhealthiness of habits, was thought likely
to suffer the most,—the copper foundry at Paris,—lost but 8
persons out of 1500, and among them was an inveterate
drunkard, drinking brandy excessively at the very time, an
apprentice, and two individuals who were already ill, and
one of whom was seized on a Sunday when out of the
foundry.


Ultimate conclusion—The alloys of copper, brass, and
bronze, carburets of iron, termed in commerce German and
English steel, applied extensively and constantly to the skin
are a valuable means of prevention that ought not to be
neglected during the prevalence of cholera: for their applica-
tion is attended by no inconvenience, and, if the relative
preservative power which I think they possess is not perfect,
we might possibly increase it by pinches of very finely pow-
dered brass or steel snuffed up the nostrils; and, as a last
precaution, by large plates of brass or steel that people well
off might conceal in their rooms.

2. In the treatment of cholera, copper, given at a suit-
able time, either alone, or united with agents which, like
opium, have received the sanction of experience, either in
filings, or in any other form, the proper dose of which, as
well as its best mode of administration, practice will soon
point out, has the best chance of becoming in the hands of
skilful physicians a powerful means of cure.


All persons may be classed, according to their metallic
susceptibilities, in a scale of 100 divisions, with copper at one
end and iron at the other. These two extremities are like
two opposite poles and cannot be confounded : and he who is
sensible to iron or steel is insensible to copper, and vice
versd ; though we are unable to explain the difference why
anesthesia, for instance, which vanishes in one person under
the influence of the first metal, ceases in another on the ap-
plication of steel, and why one chlorotic patient is readily
cured by iron taken internally, while another is unaffected by
its various preparations or is even disturbed by them.* From


* I never saw a case of chlorosis which was not cured by the continued
and properly adjusted administration of iron. It may disagree if overdosed or
otherwise badly administered, like every other medicine: and, when it disagrees


Rings of Copper and Iron. 157


30 to 35 divisions of the scale seem to me to belong to iron
and its compounds (the different kinds of steel): a nearly
equal number belongs to copper and its alloys: and the rest,
viz., the 30 or 35 divisions of the centre of the scale will scarcely
be occupied by the other metals—gold, silver, platinum, &c.

I have proved the truth of these proportions by shewing
in the numerous cures which I published in The Zoist that
steel and copper had effected nearly all the cures.

My plan of treatment, therefore, consists in employing
almost equally all the four metals—copper,* brass, English
steel, and German steel (which all act in about three-fourths
of the cases), in the fabrication of a series of apparatuses of
utility, religion, or pleasure, that are generally in common
use ; such as finger rings, necklaces, girdles, bracelets, medals,
rings of all kinds, plates, and chains; busks for stays, Indian
strigils, and rods for friction and kneading; bathing vessels,
poultices, &c., for the purpose of dry or wet application to
one part’of the body when desired, without, however, chang-
ing the habits of the patient.

The form of all these articles is quite indifferent, and
they may be indistinguishable in appearance from those already
in use; but their construction should be such as to allow of
their exact and convenient application to the respective parts
of the body for which they are required ; so as to present a sur-
face in direct relation with the degree of the effects desired ;
and especially in all cases in which the nature of the appa-
ratus or article allows it, or where there is an advantage in
doing it, such as to afford the possibility of applying, at
pleasure, the copper and brass and the two steels, separately
or conjointly.

Rings.—Fig. 1 represents Fig. 1.
two rings: the one, A, consist-
ing half of copper and half of
brass; and the other, B, half
of English and half of German “
steel. If the four metals are
used together in this form, two
rings are worn on the same
fingers, or on two fingers of the same hand. A or B, is,
on the contrary, sufficient alone, when rings of copper or
brass merely, or of the two steels merely, are employed.


from these causes, it may still cure when well administered. The dose of it, as
of every other medicine, may be reduced till it must agree.—JoHn ELLioTson.
* It is not exactly the copper of commerce: and the same may be said of the
other metals: but it is an alloy of copper, containing, of copper, 88; zinc, 10;
antimony, 1; tin, 1. This I have found more useful than pure copper.


158 Medals, Chains, and Armatures.


Medals.—This is a medal of its Fig. 2.
true size. On one side are the
copper and brass, on the other
the English and German steel.
The metals are in fine plates, from _
half to a whole millimetre in /
thickness, but fixed upon a shield \—
of leather or cloth for the pur-
pose of preventing the galvanic
contact of the two coppers and
the two steels. Either side of the medal is applied, accord-
ingly as we desire the properties of the copper and brass
or of steel: and, if we wish to use all four metals together,
we employ two similar metals united by a little chain, as seen
in fig. 3, so that one presents the copper and brass, the other
the two steels.


Fig. 3. :

Chains.—Another form, intended especially for moist ap-
plication or metallic baths. The little metallic plates are
single, and serve, by the addition of a small series of two or
three plates of different metals, to compose chains of all


lengths, presenting at pleasure the copper and brass or the
two steels, or all four metals at once.


Armatures (a new form).—Armatures of 4, 8, 12, 15, 20,
30, &c., small plates or double pieces, each formed of different
metals, and presenting copper and brass on one surface, and
German and English steel on the other, alternately.


Busks. 159
Galvanic contact is prevented by little pieces of paste-
board, cut in the middle so as to permit the free circulation
of an elastic band, which serves to fix the little plates of the
armatures, and, when necessary, to further separate them
from each other.

If it is wished to have the copper and brass, or the two
steels, next the skin, the plates are applied on one side or on
the other; and, when the four metals are to be applied to-
gether, we have only to turn one half upon the other surface,
or previously to thread the little pieces so as alternately to
present the copper, the brass, the English and the German
steel, towards the skin. This armature is very easily applied
as a bracelet, a bandeau for the head, a necklace, or a large
girdle, as a preservative against cholera. I now prefer it,
and I give the same form to all the metals, gold, silver, &c.,
which are indicated by exploration when I find copper and
steel in operation.


Fig. 5.


Necklace.—A metallic necklace, the well-known form of
which is employed for infants and young children.


(URRY seni


Busks for Stays.—A busk for a stay seen on two sides.
On one side, copper and brass; on the other, English and
German steel.

A busk may be made with the four metals on the same
surface: but this is no great advantage.


Rods and Strigils.


a>
ty
IPEPTIASS


ZS
gto i
WS
ey


|


Rod for percussion (fig. 7).—A rod for percussion with a
bunch of fine wires (about a millemetre in diameter) in nearly
equal proportions.

Indian Strigil (fig. 8).—An Indian strigil for friction: the
wooden roulettes are covered alternately with rings of copper,
English steel, brass, and German steel.


Pads and Baths.


Pads, or Metallic Poultices.—
A sheet of padding, or sort of -<9
metallic poultices. It is a cotton
chard, about 30 centimetres by 25. {
On one side is spread a fine layer (aaa
of filings or small shreds of cop- (4am
per, brass, English or German:
steel, previously mixed with al
proper quantity of a solution of ™
gum, or sugar, or of treacle (the latter prevents the oxida-
tion of the metals, and gives a certain degree of malleability
to the pad), and then spread with a few filaments of wadding
to destroy the asperities.

By these three latter kinds of metallic applications—rods
and strigils on the one hand, and pads on the other—we evi-
dently obtain a rapidity of percussion and friction, that in
the two former cases brings the appropriate metals almost
every moment into contact with those parts of the skin on
which we wish to act, and in the third mode of application,
in consequence of the tenacity of the metal that allows no
portion of the skin to escape either, there would be no ad-
vantage in adopting any other arrangement which would
allow the employment of two metals only at pleasure under
the same form.


Fig. 10.


Metallic Baths.—A bath formed of equal parts of the four
metals ; or, what is better, of copper and brass or of the two
steels only,* for the application of copper or brass or English
or German steel, or of all the four metals together, over a
very large surface, and dry or wet.

In the latter case, the person places himself indifferently
at either end of the bath, and his upper parts are then


* To avoid certain difficulties, I have hitherto limited myself to making the
baths of the two metals instead of copper or brass only or of steel only.


162 May be plated.


covered with filings or fragments of the four metals, just as
in giving a sand bath.

This form of bath is more especially adapted to dry ap-
plication. For moist application, we place chains of the
same metal as the bath at either end alternately upon the
English or the German steel: and, if we desire to increase
the surface of the action of the metal without employing the
filings, we place the chain around the limbs, or even around
those parts of the trunk that are not in immediate contact
with the bath.

Whenever the filings are employed, those must be selected
which contain no dust, and which, like the portions of copper,
brass, and steel that are obtained in the manufacture of
buttons or studs, are large and round enough not to get into
the skin.


Such are my arrangements for applying the metals effi-
ciently and conveniently, both in the treatment of nervous
affections, in the cramps of cholera, &c., and in the preven-
tion of cholera. The expense of all these apparatuses is very
moderate, with the exception of the bath, which can be pro-
cured in particular places only, such as Neothermer’s, Rue
de la Victoire, where I have placed it in the first instance, and,
although among them there are several, such as the medals
and the metallic pads, which are not likely to be so much
liked, I have ordered large numbers of them for the purpose
of adapting the metals to all kinds of applications, from the
most limited to the most extensive, and from those calculated
for hollow places to those intended for muscular masses.

Wishing to add to all these advantages, and to prevent,
among the more easy classes especially, the little inconveni-
ences which may result from the oxidation of the metals inter-
fering with the cleanliness of the person, I sometimes use
bracelets, armatures, medals, and necklaces plated with gold
or silver ; but not till a preliminary trial has satisfied me that
the fine layer of plating does not sensibly interfere with the
action of the copper, brass, or steel. If we find it to inter-
fere, the patient must lose the benefit of the treatment ; or
the most delicate must put up with a little stain of rust or
verdigris, which, I must remark, readily disappears under
soap and water, or a weak solution of oxalic acid, about a
pinch to a quarter of a pint of water.

N.B. To avoid all misconception and to secure myself at
the very first from the chance of counterfeit apparatus, I
entreat patients and medical men to apply to respectable
tradesmen only for the armatures and the other metallic


Preventive treatment. 163


articles which they like. This advice is indispensable, because,
on the one hand, my copper, being an alloy of zinc, tin, and
antimony, is made expressly for me, and is therefore dearer
than the copper of commerce ; and, on the other, the value
of the steels is to the value of iron plates nearly as 6 to
50, without any difference being perceptible to either sight
or touch, and we have always to fear imposition.

Preventive treatment.—Nervous diseases, above all others,
require preventive treatment; for, not merely in their pro-
duction have they a perfect system, which, if well understood,
renders escape from them more easy; but, if they once es-
tablish themselves in an individual, we too frequently find
their victims long subjected to all sorts of miseries. We
cannot therefore begin to watch too carefully over the ner-
vous system of those who are hereditarily predisposed to
them. If the parents of a child labour under nervous affec-
tions, it ought, when a month old, to wear such a necklace
as is represented in fig. 3, instead of the little ball of bone,
amber, or ivory, probably in common use only because there
was nothing better. At the time of dentition, the few grains
of metal that compose the apparatus will often prove very
useful in liberating its young organization from the excess of
nervous energy which so frequently gives rise to great excite-
ment, and occasionally to fatal convulsions. When necessary,
we must add to it two rings of the form of those of fig. 1,
but large enough to be applied alternately to both arms im-
mediately above the elbows: and, if that is insufficient to at
least lessen the agitation of the little patient, it is because
one of these four metals does not suit the individual. In
this case, it would be well to make a metallic examination of
the parents, and to replace the copper, brass, and steels by
the metal which succeeds best with the father or mother.

When the child is older, convulsions, hooping-cough, and
other nervous affections of infancy, are no longer to be
feared. If it is a boy, keep the two rings above the elbow :
if a girl, her rising vanity will no doubt make her prefer one
or two bracelets of the same metals, especially if you have
taken care to plate it with gold or silver ; or she might prefer
wearing one or several rings, which may be of any form she
likes. In no case forbid this little discharging means, for the
success of Georget’s steel rings proves, in regard both to
medals aud mere rings,* that there are not more little con-
trivances in medicine than in politics.

Up to the period of youth, let neither boy nor girl lead


* We occasionally meet with nervous patients who have lost the suscepti-


164 Prevention of Nervous Diseases in Females.


a too sedentary or studious life; but, on the contrary, try to
strengthen the muscular system by every sort of exercise ap-
propriate to the sex of each. Gymnastics may very often
prove useful: and if, in the various exercises of the arms,
upon which especially you must insist unless there is some
special reason against it, the girl loses a little of the delicacy
of her hands, be assured that her future husband will find
ample compensation in the freshness of her complexion and
the beauty of her shape.

Be careful to preserve the ripening young girl from all
emotion, and let her not mix too early in society. Let her
stays merely preserve her shape, without compressing her
waist : let her bed be hard rather than soft; let her retire at
a regular hour, and not sleep longer than is necessary.
Also, we must never forget that in the repose of the night
we collect much, and ought not on getting up in the morning
to omit washing the whole body with cold water, followed by
dry frictions of the limbs, even although the apparent feeble-
ness of an individual should seem to forbid it. Lastly, the
diet should be nourishing, but not stimulating.

If these rules of reason and experience are carefully fol-
lowed, the nervous energy of the young girl will be properly
balanced ; she will lose none of her sensibility or muscular
power; and the catamenial function will begin without diffi-
culty at the proper period: whereas, if they are neglected,

ou will have to fear.a storm at the critical period of female
life. If the new function is established with difficulty, you
will assist it greatly by an armature of the four metals worn
upon the loins and lower part of the abdomen during the day,
and lower down during the night. In boys, nervous derange-
ments are less to be feared and will in general be easily over-
come: so that it will be sufficient to insist upon attention to
the general health in the ways already mentioned, to watch
over his connections and his new habits at this period of the
passions, and to strengthen in him the taste, which we almost
all have at this age, for arms, riding, hunting, and all exer-
cises, and to give him every opportunity of usefully enjoying
the abundance of his nervous energy. By this simple pre-
caution, puberty will take place without those nervous symp-
toms so common in the present day. The man will be robust ;
the woman a fruitful mother; and, at a later age, having
been fortunate enough not to have allowed themselves to be


bility of pain everywhere, in their upper extremities especially, except near a
ring, the metal of which, whether gold, silver, copper, or steel, has proved per-
fectly adapted to them.


Selection of Metals. 165


neither been depressed by grief nor excited by joy, will quietly
reach the period when the nervous system no longer predomi-
nates over the rest. But if, from one cause or another, the
force of the disease triumphs, and head-aches, neuralgias, pains
of the internal organs, or spasms, general or local, accompa-
nied by loss of consciousness, take place ; if hypochondriasis,
melancholia, or any other more serious disorder of the moral
or intellectual functions, the affection will be, to my view, the
very same except in intensity and require fundamentally the
same treatment.

Curative treatment.—The first point, in the useful appli-
cation of one of the new armatures (and what I am about to
say in regard to them is applicable to all the others), is to
determine which metal, copper, brass, or steel, is to be pre-
ferred.

In treating the cramps of cholera, or preventing the
disease altogether, the point is clear, and copper must be
applied directly to the skin: but in nervous affections the
following course must be pursued. In an urgent case, (and
some nervous symptoms require to be checked instantly,) such
as violent convulsions, all the four metals should be applied
at once, the pieces of copper or brass being arranged in one
of the two ways pointed out in the description of the arma-
tures. In common circumstances, if the patient has pre-
viously taken iron medicines, (and few nervous patients in the
present day have not taken them,) should the medicine have
proved useful, the two steels should be employed: in the op-
posite case, copper or brass is likely to be most useful, and
the more likely if somnambulism has occurred. The result
of my trials upon several patients in London is, that all the
somnambulic patients were susceptible of the action of copper ;
and that this metal, the properties of which in these ex-
traordinary cases I shall soon make known, as well as the
diametrically opposite properties of steel, is a valuable touch-
stone of the various susceptibilities of the state called som-
nambulism.

As to the part to which they should be applied, I have
spoken too fully upon the relation of cause and effect that
exists between the negative and positive phenomena* of ner-
vous diseases not to render it unnecessary to repeat that,
though we should, at the utmost, palliate only, analgesia,
anesthesia, amyosthenia, &c., are the symptoms to be com-
bated with the metals as well as with other measures.


* See No. XXXIX., p. 241.—Zoist.
VOL. XI.


166 Methods of administration.


never shewn signs of somnambulism, and the previous his-
tory throws insufficient light upon the case, three courses are
open to us :—

1. To ascertain carefully at first the degree of sensibility
at the fore-arm, by means of pinching and pricking ; the dif-
ference being observed between the sensibility to contact and
to pain. Then to apply the copper or steel half of the arma-
ture on the right side, and the other half with the other
metal on the left; and an hour or two after the return or
augmentation of sensibility in one of the fore-arms will be
exactly 60 or 70 times greater in the hundred from the proper
metal.

2. If there is the least difficulty in this examination, as
the patient cannot suffer from delay, we must apply the
copper and brass or the two steel halves of the armature ;
and, in three or four days, either the continuance or diminu-
tion of the nervous disease will inform us whether we ought
to continue the application or use the other side of the ar-
mature.

3. Lastly, if any doubt remains regarding the action of
the copper or the brass, employ all the four metals of the
apparatus at once ; just as in urgent cases: and, if the patient
derives no benefit,—a circumstance which may happen in
30 or 40 cases out of 100 when the metal is not the proper
one, we must either make a complete examination, or, as
the susceptibilities to the metals are marked, we must bring
these to light by the various means already pointed out,
avoiding, in every instance, to fatigue the patient by useless
applications if after a short time any improvement is per-
ceptible.

At the same time, to use all the hygienic means of pre-
vention ;—frictions of the limbs, not with brushes, hair-
gloves, &c., only, but with strigils, which unite mechanical
action with the influence of the most active metals ; percus-
sions of the indolent muscles with metallic rods ; all kinds of
muscular exercise without fear of fatigue ; in short, to increase
strength and sensibility, and bring these to a more healthy
condition.

To give the preparations of the same metal internally
which is used externally ; in short, when copper, brass, and
steel are inefficacious in the dry form, to give them wet, in
the form of a bath.

I have already said that the bath may be of three forms:
a simple bath of copper, brass, or steel, with plain or slightly
salt water—four pounds of sea salt: or, in addition to the
metal of the bath, a long chain of copper, brass, or steel is


Differences in excitability. 167


put around the arms and legs; or a bath is made of filings of
copper, brass, or one of the two steels, in which the patient
is kept from half an hour to two hours. I cannot too strongly
recommend the wet forms for cases in which the dry forms
do not completely answer. But, unfortunately it is, and will
always be, the most difficult to procure, because, except at
some large bath establishment, as that of M. Neothermer, a
long time is likely to elapse before the general use of my
bathing vessels will cause the expense of them to be incurred.

The excitability of the nervous system, although shewn
by merely sudden redness of the face, palpitation, or a con-
cealed excitement of the feelings, by general trembling,
copious evacuations, faintings, or even delirium, displays
itself by their suddenness and the disproportion between
them and their causes.

This excitability has infinite varieties. To say nothing of
the differences in this respect according to sex and age, resi-
dence in town or country, between artists and artizans, per-
sons of fashion and those whose nervous systems have been
early accustomed to a more regular life ; the excitements of
the nervous system present other great variations in indi-
viduals who appear subjected to the same influences. Thus
in the very same classes we find persons of so calm a tempera-
ment that nothing excites them, and the most violent inun-
dation would not prevent them from being completely masters
of themselves. Others, again, placed at the opposite extre-
mity of the scale of impressionability, possess so morbidly
excessive an excitability that the least sudden noise, the
least news, upsets them, or at least disturbs some of their
functions.

In the latter, indeed in all nervous patients, great pertur-
bations of the nervous energy are readily produced: it is
easily displaced from organs in which its accumulation had
already begun to occasion a morbid activity of function with
all the consequences, and transferred more uniformly, or even,
when we desire, removed, by means of the metals.

In others, on the contrary, nothing is more obstinate
than this energy in health; and it is only when, by the force
of the disease itself, it has acquired a certain excitability that
we can hope to render it obedient to us sometimes. It is our
duty, and will be our duty, to put other restraints upon it
occasionally ; for the nervous system of some of those strong
and robust constitutions that we all have met with has been
too singularly disturbed to be easily attacked by simple and
external means. If it has not yet attained a sufficient degree
of excitability, apply a metallic plate to the patient: and,

N 2


168 Modes of fulfilling indications.


provided the metal is proper, the nervous energy, solicited
only as two, and maintained, if one may say so, as four, will
remain within its natural limits, or will not permit itself to
lose more than a very inappreciable quantity: you have then
to do with what I have called the dissimulated metallic sus-
ceptibilities.

In this case, it will be useless to multiply the application,
unless you increase the attractive force, of the metal ; or, un-
less, if you do not interfere, the nervous disease itself or
some fresh causes lessen the stationary condition of the ner-
vous energy: and the only means by which I have cured the
disease has been by fulfilling one of these two indications,
and, if necessary, both.

In order to fulfil the first, increase if possible the activity
of the metal. There are two ways of doing this. First, to
moisten the armature by placing between it and the skin a
constant layer of plain or salt water by means of flannel
or a compress wetted, and give to the metal a rough instead
of a smooth surface. In the latter case, there is something
similar to what takes place every day in a house when we
expose two coffee pots to the fire,—one of which is as smooth
and polished as the other is black and embossed. If we are
using copper, brass, or steel, we readily combine both means
by taking the filings of either metal and a little sugar and
water, with the view of making a kind of poultice (the sugar
prevents oxidation). These poultices are very efficacious, and
lately cured (in Major ’s family) a wry neck, in a few
days, that had existed for eight months.

To fulfil the second indication, the metallic susceptibilities
will be ascertained by giving medicines, which, like the salts
of strychnine, exert upon the central nervous system either a
very powerful expansive or centrifugal action.

The preparation which I prefer is the tincture of nux vo-
mica. Every morning and evening the patient should take
from five, six, seven or eight drops successively to 20, in one
or two spoonfuls of sugared water ; and, when this does not
dislodge the enemy, I alternate them with sulphate of quinine,
which often acts so decidedly upon the nervous system and
its diseases.

But a measure which appears superior to these is MEs-
MERISM. Indeed we seldom have met with a patient who,
having been treated mesmerically, does not answer toa metal,
although he had never been sent to sleep; and in our next
memoir we shall see how well the metals and mesmerism
co-operate.

Let me repeat that it is perfectly useless to fatigue a pa-


Mr. Wakley’s gentle language. 169


tient if the metal has not acquired power enough, nor the
nervous system susceptibility enough, to give in the intervals
of their application sensible results under the pin or the dy-
namometer after an application of the suitable metal.*


VI. Cure of an appalling case of Obstruction of the Bowels,
accompanied by stercoraceous vomiting. By W.J.Tusss,
Esq., of Upwell, Cambridgeshire. Communicated by
Dr. Elliotson.


**Is any one rash enough to look for honourable dealings from the man
whose professed calling is an imposture ; whose very existence is drawn from the
daily practice of fraud; who is amenable to no responsibility ; who is under no
restraint but the remote and almost inappreciable fear of a trial at the Old
Bailey ?

‘* Let those who lightly talk of ‘free trade in medicine’—who encourage ho-
mceopathists, MESMERISTS, Coffinites, practising druggists, e¢ id genus omne,
reflect upon the consequences to society. They are directly fostering fraud, nurs-
ing iniquity, and spreading social crimes in a Christian country, such as we are
accustomed to denounce as the peculiar disgrace of barbarous and heathen na-
tions.””,—Mr. Waxtey, Lancet, May 7, 1853.


** We leave it to those who have leisure and taste for the amusement to ana-
lyze the various shades of darkness between ‘ homceopathists, Mesmerists, Cof-
finites, practising druggists, e¢ id genus omne,’ whom we classed together, and
still class together. Splitting hairs is not our custom.’”’—Zbid., May 14, 1853.


Exizasetu Stevens, aged 16, living about half a mile from
my house, assisted her mother to lift her sister, who was in
a dying state, from one side of the bed to the other. Shortly
after this she felt a sudden pain in the left side. In a few
hours diarrhoea began, attended by fever, hurried respiration,
and a quick pulse. I ordered a blister, and she took digitalis
with hyoscyamus and liq. ammoniz acetatis. As her sister
had died of decline, it was supposed that she would soon
follow.

For several days there was a teazing cough. The rector
—the Rev. William Gale Townley, called to ask me if cod
liver oil would be of service. This was given seven or eight
days. During this time a soreness was felt in the left side.

On the 20th March sickness came on, and lasted several
hours. I entered the house shortly after she had vomited a


* Though I have been at the trouble of translating Dr. Burq’s three papers,
(and great trouble it has been from the excessive carelessness of the hand-
writing and the foulness of the copy sent by him to me,) and I have forwarded
them to The Zoist, I beg to decline all responsibility. I know not whether his
observations are well founded : but I am always anxious to promote the publication
of what is new, if not evident absurdity and disgraceful imposture like spirit-
rapping and spirit-table-moving: lest a good truth should be lost, at least for a
time, through indifference at its announcement.—Joun ELLioTson.


170 Vomiting stopped and sleep induced.


glairy fluid, streaked with blood. As the bowels had not
been relieved for nearly two days, I ordered a saline prussic
acid mixture with calomel and colocynth pills. There was no
relief of the bowels, but an increasing irritability of the
stomach.

When I saw her at night, I ordered croton oil in combi-
nation with hyoscyamus and calomel, continuing the prussic
acid mixture, with a mustard poultice to the stomach. Ene-
mas were tried, but only unloaded the lower bowel. I in-
troduced a very long tube as far as I could. I now had
recourse to croton-oil pills every two hours, telling the mother
that some might be retained. I ought to have stated that
stercoraceous vomiting had taken place before I began giving
the croton oil.

Early in the morning on Saturday, the 25th of March,
her mother, thinking her daughter must die from the state of
exhaustion through constantly vomiting her motions, was on
her way to my house, when, happening to meet with Mr.
Heming, a surgeon, who was on his return home from a
midwifery case, she asked him to see her daughter: and he
kindly did. The mother returned with him for the medicine,
and was directed to give a powder at twice. All was rejected.

Nothing was retained on the stomach day or night, until
Sunday morning the 25th, after my first mesmerising her.

I visited her three times on Saturday.

The last time was at eight o’clock in the evening. Mrs.
Massa and Mrs. Pawley had been fanning her most part of
the afternoon: she had vomited several motions during the
day: her countenance was anxious and haggard: her eyes
dark and sunken: her pulse weak and thready, 146: her
tongue moist, coated with a yellowish fur ; its tip and edges
red: her cheeks of a dark circumscribed redness: the alz of
the nose contracted : the rest of the face as pale as snow: the
temperature of the body was low: the knees drawn up:
pressure gave pain in the left side.

I was about leaving the room, when, taking as I thought
my last look of my patient, I said to the mother I should
like to try what mesmerism might do: and, obtaining her
consent, I soon pulled off my coat, took my seat by the side
of the bed, and, with an earnest stare to do my best, J suc-
ceeded in throwing her into balmy sleep in less than ten minutes.

I continued making passes for some time. I raised the
arm, which dropped as if it belonged to a dead body. I said
to the attendants, who were all anxiously watching my move-
ments, and were three, Mrs. Bates, aged 73, Mrs. Grey, aged
50, and the mother, all residing in this village, “She is now


Obstruction removed and cure effected. 171


in a happy state. I will try to make her get up, and then
will endeavour to act upon the side by means of my breath.”

At my wish she gently rose, and was placed on the utensil.

I said, “ Now, my dear, try and get your bowels relieved
and I will help you.” I breathed on the left side until I was
quite tired: and she exerted her abdominal muscles. Only
a little flatus escaped. She tried for some time, and then she
lay down again. I said, “ Are you easy?” “Yes.” I now
took her out of the sleep by breathing over the eyes. She
had not felt me raise her arm, but said, “I feel better.” I
then sent her off again, and mesmerised her until I was in a
profuse perspiration. I now left her, telling her mother I
thought her bowels would be relieved before morning.

In returning home I called at a friend’s house: and,
meeting there Mr. Hanslip Palmer, solicitor, and Mr. Harris,
land surveyor, I told them I had been mesmerising a poor
girl who I thought would die ; that I hardly expected it would
be of any use, but “dum spiro spero ;” and bid them good
night.

At eight o’clock in the morning I was exceedingly glad to
find the patient wonderfully better. She had first slept forty-
five minutes, vomited once, and fallen asleep again for half an
hour, when she called for some cake and wine, which she took
and kept down, and then said she felt so sleepy that she must
have another sleep. On waking she had enjoyed a piece of
toast and a cup of tea. At twenty minutes past seven she
had felt so well that she got out of bed, and had a copious
evacuation from the bowels.

She had another before dinner.

At that meal she enjoyed a piece of pudding and boiled
mutton, and drank some wine. She said, “I am all right
now, Sir: my body feels as soft asa glove.” Her counte-
nance was strangely altered for the better.

I mesmerised her night and morning when I could find
leisure: at other times she was operated on by her mother.

On the fourth day she sat up, and would put on the very
clothes that were intended to lay her out in.

The rector of the parish visited her about an hour before
I mesmerised her, and was, I believe, of the same opinion as
the rest of us were,—that “all who live must die, passing from
nature to eternity,” and that her’s was a dying case: and I
am sorry to say now, that neither the rector nor his curate
(the Rev. E. Marshall, of Elem), who both daily visited the
house, has the honesty to acknowledge that mesmerism cured
her, but maintain that the croton oil did the work.

I wish my readers to know, that, on the very Sunday I


172 Incredulity of the rector and curate.


mesmerised her, she was prayed for at Upwell Church, and
the following Sunday the curate, at her desire, returned
thanks in church for her speedy restoration.

An account of this extraordinary case was in our papers
the two following weeks.

The patient is now enjoying perfect health, and is ex-
tremely grateful to me for having mesmerised her.


W. J. Tusss.
Upwell, June, 1853.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.


*,* The incredulity of the rector and curate was the re-
sult of gross, yet pardonable, ignorance. But the consequential
fellows and members of our medical colleges and societies,
our journalists, and the busy reformers! of the profession,
should blush and take a lesson from Mr. Tubbs—from an
honourable, benevolent, intelligent, and fearless inhabitant
of a humble country nook.


I received a letter from this excellent man two months
ago, from which, without his permission, I will venture to
make an extract.


“My dear Doctor,—I am now a convalescent patient, and
am grateful that God has again spared me once more to join
my good wife and daughters. Of late I have had much to
do by night and by day. I caught a severe cold about a
week since, and daily augmented it until I was obliged to
take to my bed. I was icy cold for twenty-four hours, until
my servant (who is an excellent servant, as well as a good
mesmeriser, and one you shall have in London some day)
mesmerised me for an hour and a half, on the 15th ult.,
when I returned to my bed with a little warmth within me.
I took the following, liq. am. acetatis with minute doses of
antimony (I would not take salts or nitre, as I knew you
would not like me to do so, owing to my left kidney having
been affected) every three or four hours, with hot mustard
poultices occasionally applied to my chest. I was mesmerised
night and morning. At each operation I felt more warmth
than from all the sardorifics I had taken and the stimulating
poultices which had been applied.

“On the night of the 17th I was very hot, restless, and
felt much oppression over the sternum, with a pulse quick and
strong, and a dry cough, which was followed in a few hours by
acute pain under the right clavicle, occupying a space about the
size of a five-shilling piece. This was between two and three


Mr. Tubbs’s own case. 173


o’clock in the morning. My wife, finding me very uneasy,
immediately got up for the purpose of sending the servant to
the druggist for twelve leeches. I said, ‘Tell the boy to
come to my bed-side, and try and ease this pain by some
passes; and if, after mesmerising me half an hour, I am no
better, then let us apply the leeches.’ My wife left the
chamber door unlocked, and got beside me. 1 took my wife’s
hand, and said, ‘ If I feel better, and inclined to doze, I will
squeeze your hand, which will be a signal for the servant to
go to bed.’ In the greatest fear that 1 was becoming the sub-
ject of pleurisy, and a horror I felt of being bled and calomel-
ized, and having my brain stupified by opium, I was resolved
to hazard my life at the expense of a little humbug called
mesmerism. However, at the expiration of three quarters of
an hour, I was delighted to find the enemy about taking its
flight: a few minutes afterwards I felt ‘nature’s soft nurse’
stealing on my brain. And here ends my tale, for I never
woke till half-past eight o’clock, when the servant-maid, as
usual, knocked at the door to remind us that breakfast was
near at hand. Even then I could have slept on and taken
my rest. On turning over I felt a pain in my old spot (the
left kidney), which increased by my exerting the diaphragm.
I got my breakfast in bed; and, finding the pain no better,
I said to -my wife, ‘Send the boy up; and he shall try and
take this pain quite away.’ Tlie boy soon came. I said,
‘You got me to sleep, and removed the pain from my breast :
you shall try and ease me of this pain in the side.’ He ac-
cordingly made passes for a few minutes over the seat of pain,
and then gradually drew down the pain off by the toes. Suf-
fice it to say, it has not returned.

“TI have often, my dear Doctor, removed the pain from
various parts of the body by locally mesmerising patients :
but little thought that I myself should be relieved in such a
manner.

“I remember a few years back going into a druggist’s
shop in the village, and seeing a butcher’s wife waiting at the
counter, with her back towards me: and, having often heard
her say that she would give anything if she could but get rid
of the pain in her back, (I once attended her on purpose to
try and relieve her back, but did not do so,) I thought it was
a nice chance for me silently to mesmerise her while she was
giving orders to the druggist. I stood within a yard of her,
and made slow downward passes, earnestly wishing to relieve
her. This I am quite sure of, that she was not aware of my
intention of mesmerising her, and she always greatly ob-
jected to the name, much more the application, of mesmerism.


174 A butcher's wife and daughter cured.


“Presently she cried out, ‘What are you doing to m
back? you are drawing me.’ I said, ‘Only taking the old
pain away.’ She said, ‘I can’t stir. ‘No, said I, ‘nor
shall you till I have got it out of your leg.’ ‘ Well,’ says she,
‘ pray make haste.’

“T made passes down the left leg till I got the pain from
the loins to the knee, that she told us of. A few more
passes brought it quite away. ‘There,’ says she, ‘if that is
what they call mesmerism, it is no bad thing.’

“Tt is not many days since I saw her and asked her how
her back was? ‘ Quite well; have never had the pain since
you took it away at the old shop.’

“ About a year since I attended her daughter with severe
chest affection, whom I ordered to be daily mesmerised. This
was done by a sister and sometimes by the mother for several
weeks, and she perfectly recovered.

“Though I do not practise mesmerism myself, I still
order it to others, and have at this time two patients who
are daily attended to by my mesmeriser. I will always sup-
port a good cause.

“A doctor, to whom I wrote the other day to tell him I
had sent two photographs of a wry neck* case to the Exhibi-
tion at Wisbeach that I had cured by mesmerism, in his note,
alluding to mesmerism, said, ‘It is more likely to create in
weak and ignorant minds scepticism fatal to the cause of true
religion, than to benefit mankind.’ Such nonsense I could
not stand, and accordingly sent him this reply: ‘ How any
science can be repugnant to the precepts of religion, I am yet
to discover ; and I should be willing to abandon it altogether
if you would be kind enough to point out to me such per-
nicious tendencies. My views of things have quite an oppo-
site tendency : for I consider that where we have clear evidence
from our senses and principles of knowledge, reason becomes
the proper judge ; and, though religion, by agreeing with it,
may confirm its dictates, yet cannot in any case invalidate its
truth: ‘nor are we obliged to give up the clear and evident
sentence of reason, and quit it, under the pretence of those


who consider it as inconsistent with their own notions of
faith.’ ”


* See Zoist, No. XXX.


( 175 )


VII. The Mesmerisation and Movement of Tables, &c., con-
sidered: with a notice of a recent pamphlet, La Danse
des Tables, phénomenés physologiques démontrés, par le
Docteur Félix Roubaud. In a letter to Dr. Elliotson by
the Rev. George Sandby, Vicar of Flixton, Suffolk.


‘* But, though every body is constantly performing the process described in
the second book of the Novum Organum, some men perform it well and some
perform it ill. Some are led by it to truth, and some to error. It led Franklin
to discover the nature of lightning. It led thousands, who had less brains than
Franklin, to believe in animal magnetism. But this was not because Franklin
went through the process described by Bacon, and the dupes of Mesmer through
a different process.’”"—Macavu.ay, Essay on Bacon.


Rue Richepanse, Paris, May 28, 1853.

My dear Elliotson,—All Paris is in excitement at the
“dancing of the tables,”—as they call it. We have heard
of nothing else since our arrival. So engrossing is the topic,
that it has superseded the marriage and the illness of the
Empress, and become the rage of the day. Certain marvel-
lous facts were just beginning to be mentioned in London
before we crossed : for the two extracts from foreign journals,
that had appeared in The Times, had directed the attention
even of many persons, who had not mixed themselves up with
any belief in the spirit-rappings, towards a consideration of
the question ; and I had heard, as you know, of two or three
eminent men of literature and science who had succeeded, as
it was said, in these experiments. But the sensation in Paris
far surpasses anything that you could have imagined upon
such a subject: every acquaintance that I have met refers to
it: men, women, and children begin at once to tell you what
they have seen or done: and the walls and shop-windows of
the booksellers are covered with affiches and with woodcuts,
advertizing and illustrating different pamphlets on the subject.
I determined to judge for myself, and to lose no time in
bringing the alleged results to a test. And I was fortunate
in having friends, who were acquainted with the “ conditions”
which are said to be necessary, and who had themselves as-
sisted at former experiments. Five of us, then, being four
ladies and myself, placed ourselves before a small round ma-
hogany table, which went upon castors, observing certain
instructions, of which I will speak presently. In about ten
minutes, the table began to creak, and slightly to heave, and
at last to move in a most decided way. We had to follow it
in its course, as well as we could. The fact to my mind was
undeniably established : however, as this small table went on
roulettes, it was suggested, that we might unconsciously have
given an impulse to the table and caused the motion ourselves,


176 Mr. Sandby’s experience of the fact.


so we determined upon another experiment. We selected a
mahogany card-table, which was closed or doubled, and co-
vered in the inside with cloth. Seven of our party sat down:
but we were not successful: there were occasional creakings
and heavings, and, as we thought, incipient movements,—
but no actual motion. Whether the baize disturbed the ac-
tion of the fluid, as it was thought by some of us; or whether,
as I believe, that two of the ladies, feeling themselves fati-
gued, and becoming anxious to leave off, ceased to give the
needful assistance, I cannot say: my own opinion is, that if
we had been joined by additional aid, and given a little more
perseverance to the attempt, the card-table would have been
speedily in motion. Four of us next selected a small oblong
rosewood table, not upon castors. In ten minutes the move-
ments began. That no impulse was given, I am confident.
After the motion commenced, we all most carefully avoided
giving any pressure to the table. We touched it very slightly
with the mere tips of the fingers, in such a way that a fly
would scarcely have been injured or a flower crushed. The
action, however, of the table was strong, and quick, and
most unmistakeable. I consider the alleged facts to be esta-
blished beyond a doubt,—and that the controversy is at an end.

Pamphlets are appearing every day in Paris upon the
subject. The best is one by Dr. Felix Roubaud, called The
Dance of the Tables; or, Physiological Phenomena demon-
strated. 1 will give you a brief resumé of its contents ; for
though I dissent from some of the Doctor’s conclusions, and
though some of his short dissertations, for instance, those
upon “ circonstances morales,” “ sentiments de l’dme,”’ and
such like kindred topics, are mere surplusage, and introduced
for the purpose of swelling the pages, still as the little dro-
chure contains a certain amount of instructional and sug-
gestive matter, and offers a succinct statement of the rules
or conditions, which are, at present, assumed to be needful
for success, you may be not unwilling to learn what are the
author’s views.

Dr. Roubaud says, in his Preface, that at first he utterly
discredited every part of these revelations; but, when he
found that several scientific and medical friends, upon whom
he could rely, had attested the reality of these phenomena,
he resolved upon making an investigation himself. “Doubt,”
he now asserts, “is no longer possible: whatever may be the
cause,—we must admit the facts, which are constantly repro-
duced with a species of mathematical accuracy.” “My hope
is,” he adds, “that an examination of the subject will be
speedily commenced by some learned and scientific body.


Dr. Roubaud’s book.


His first chapter contains the history and the origin of
the discovery. He traces, of course, its first appearance to
the three well-known American girls,—with whom commenced
the recent spirit-rappings,—and whose object (he thinks) was
to found a religious sect. Whether he be right in that con-
jecture, is unimportant: but at any rate it is clear, that this
action of the tables was first developed at the spiritual con-
ferences of these young women, and that this rotatory move-
ment was said by them to be caused by spiritual agency.
With this part of the story we are most of us familiar: but,
according to Dr. Roubaud, Germany, which of all nations in
the world, through its love of the marvellous and the mys-
tical, and at the same time its strong powers of reasoning, is
best able to “separate the false from the true, and the ima-
ginary from the real,’”—-Germany was the first country to
receive this discovery of the “ moving-tables” as a philoso-
phical fact, apart from and unconnected with the superstition
of the spiritual manifestations. To the alleged electrical
action, then, of the human frame upon wooden matter, the
Germans exclusively directed their attention ; and at Bremen,
the first investigations took place. Dr. Andreé, who, it ap-
pears, is a medical man of high character and attainments,
published a letter in the Augsburgh Gazette, giving therein
the results of his experiences. From thence the inquiry
spread to Bonn,—to Vienna,—and to Paris. It is needless
to add that the number of believers is immense, and daily
on the increase.

Dr. Roubaud, then, proceeds in the following chapters to
lay down the rules of procedure and the conditions of suc-
cess; but these, I imagine, he has multiplied far beyond that
which is necessary. The main conditions seem very simple.
A certain number of persons place themselves round a table,
according to the size of the latter, and form achain. The
dresses must not touch, and the chairs ought to be sufficiently
apart so that nothing should come in contact. Rings and
bracelets should be taken off, and the table only touched by
the hands. The chain is then established by each person
laying his hands lightly upon the table, and placing the little
finger of his right hand upon the little finger of his neigh-
bour’s left. Some persons say that the palms of the hands
should-touch the table; others, that only the fingers should
touch: I placed my palms upon the table: if it be not the
best way, it is at least the most convenient, especially if the
experiment be prolonged. The fingers, it is said, should not
touch each other: and it is desirable that there should be no
carpet on the floor: I do not believe that this condition is


178 Dr. Roubaud’s error.
essential to success; but, of course, everything that inter-
rupts the electrical action, is prejudicial. Dr. Roubaud is of
opinion that a chain formed partly of men and partly of
women succeeds best: of course, youth and health are the
best elements: but some parties have more power than
others, or perhaps unite more harmoniously according to the
constitutional temperaments of each other. As in mesmeris-
ing the human body, so in mesmerising a table, silence and
attention to the subject, or what we call “willing,” shortens
the time. Sensations in the fingers, yawnings, pains in the
arms and in the head, and something very much like sea-
sickness, are experienced by some persons just before the
tables begin to creak. I felt a marked sensation at the ends
of my fingers. The development of the phenomena varies
according to circumstances.

After an enumeration of some curious experiments, and
of sundry analogous facts connected with this discovery, we
come at length to Dr. Roubaud’s conclusion respecting the
rationale of this phenomenon; and here the writer is most
obscure. What, indeed, his own opinion is, it would be dif-
ficult to guess. This motion of the tables, he says, has no
connection with electricity, nor with galvanism, nor with
caloric, nor with terrestrial magnetism, nor with animal mag-
netism ; neither is the phenomenon of a moral character ;
there is no physiological action in the matter which thus walks
and turns, neither any psychological action. “1 know not,”
he adds, “ what the cause may be, but I know and I affirm
that it is none of the above.” It will strike many persons,
perhaps, that this learned Doctor, who displays such becom-
ing modesty in admitting his ignorance as to the cause of
these strange facts, would have exercised as wise a discretion
had he not so peremptorily asserted what was not the cause,
more especially, as he does not pretend to offer the slightest
argument in support of his asseveration. “I often hear,”
he says, “the words, animal magnetism, pronounced in con-
nection with this discovery: but what is animal magnetism?
and what relation has the false, or at least doubtful, lucidity
of the somnambulist with this positive and incontestable phe-
nomenon?” This is by no means the first time that I have
perceived amongst French writers, that their exclusive notion
of mesmerism is that which relates to clairvoyance.and its
analogous manifestations. With them it is always lucidity
and somnambulism, and nothing else: and here, therefore, I
must agree with Dr. Roubaud that there is no connection in
the dancing tables with the higher phenomena of our science ;
but with pure and simple mesmerism in its primary action,


The agency is mesmeric.


there can be no question that this discovery is closely allied,
if it be not, as I believe, one and the same thing.

I have always contended for and believed in that theory,
which Mesmer originally promulgated, (and with every defer-
ence to Mr. Macaulay, 1 am not ashamed to confess myself
to be one of the “dupes” of that calumniated man,) viz.,
that some external agent, analogous to a fluid, or perhaps
to the sparks that proceed from an electrical machine, does
proceed in the act of mesmerising from one human being to
another. This invisible, imponderable agent I have seen
many reasons to regard as being of a quasi-electrical cha-
racter, if I might not even call it an actual electrical mani-
festation under the modification of physiological action. Dr.
Scoresby’s scientific investigations on this very point have
added greatly to our arguments in favour of this view.
Reichenbach’s elaborate researches confirm the notion. The
alleged results of Mr. Rutter’s experience with a gold ring
and with the magnetescope (of which I myself have seen
nothing decisive) tend the same way. A variety of circum-
stances go to prove this transference of an external agent,
irrespective of any connection with mental preparation.* We
mesmerise the blind and very young children without their
cognizance. We re-induce mesmeric effects upon patients,
who have been previously rendered susceptible to mesmerism,
without their consciousness : we mesmerise animals repeatedly ;
we mesmerise water, metals, leather, and paper, as we learn
from the effects produced upon our patients: and this action
of the tables, induced by continued contact with a chain of
human fingers, is nothing but simple mesmerism, developing
itself in an unexpected phase.

And the value of this discovery is considerable. We can-
not, indeed, say whether it will lead to any ulterior facts, or
be useful in promoting more extended information in science :
perhaps not, to any very great extent: but it adds an im-
portant, it might be said, a conclusive amount of evidence
towards the establishment of mesmerism as a physical truth.
The theory of imagination will not hold good with wooden
matter. Miss Martineau, in her clever narrative relative to
the cure of her sick cow, observed pointedly enough, that
the said cow was a good cow, and possessed admirable quali-
ties as a “ milker” (as we say in Suffolk): but unfortunately
that she was deficient in the imaginative faculty. There was
no preparation of consciousness, to speak after the pedantic


* See my Review of Dr. Holland’s Theory in the Tenth Volume of The
Zoist.


180 The movement is not from muscular action.


phrase of the medical world, on the part of the dumb animal :
and of course, still less is there, if it be possible, in regard
to the genus, table. Tables, useful implements as they are,
at least are safe from being taxed with imposture, or desig-
nated as hysterical convulsionnaires: but then, it is said,
that though there be no “ expectant attention” on the part
of the table, there is much on the part of those who sit round
the table, and hence the source of the mistake, and the ex-
planation of the wonder. The tables move, it is condescend-
ingly admitted, but not from electrical or mesmeric action ;
but because the parties, interested in the process, give un-
consciously an innocent impulse, and stir the moveable ma-
chine through impatience or fatigue. This, I perceive, is the
explanation offered by the sceptical opponent. Unintentional
or insensible muscular action produces the effect; and the
parties, who cause this involuntary movement, are as much
deceived themselves as the spectators.

Now it must be admitted, that there is a certain portion
of truth, and a great deal that deserves attention in this
argument; but then, like many of these arguments, it is
built on partial or one-sided data. It is the truth, but not
the whole truth. The sceptic generalizes from particular
facts which have come within his own knowledge, and which
are probably correct, and assumes that there are no other
facts of an opposite nature. And this is the case with us
all, with believers as well as with opponents. The anti-
mesmerist, who has witnessed certain undoubted fruits of
imagination or suggestion upon the human frame (for iu-
stance, those in “ biology”), assumes prematurely, that all
the results of mesmerism are of the same character. And
the same process in reasoning obtains in regard to this new
phenomenon. Table-moving, in general, requires patience ;
more patience, in fact, than most persons are prepared to
bestow ; it is often a long and wearisome pastime ; and con-
sequently it is very probable, that in sundry instances, the
exhausted attention of the anxious circle is not conscious of
the slight muscular movement that has caused the result.
Several probable examples of this kind have been mentioned ;
and I do not discredit the details as they are given: but what
do they prove? simply, that in those particular instances the
movement was produced by muscular action and concomitant
fatigue, and that, therefore, great caution and watchfulness
are needed in testing the truth.

But fifty negative instances and fifty failures cannot over-
set one positive authenticated fact. For, on the other hand,
there are numerous instances, in which this explanation of


Rapidity of the motion. 181


fatigue and of long-prepared expectation will not apply at all.
As in mesmerising the human frame, so also in mesmerising
a mahogany table, certain persons seem gifted with greater
and peculiar power, and produce more speedy and more
marked results. Sometimes the motion is effected by them
in the course of five minutes, or even less; and every pre-
caution is employed to prevent any approach to assistance
from muscular pressure. Not only is there no unconscious,
involuntary impulse, but the mind is actively on the alert in
anticipation of such an objection, and with a determination
that no such an allegation shall be correctly adduced. And
in fact, the intervening period is so short, that there is no
time for fatigue or for over-wearied expectation to lend its aid
towards the result.

But there is another point, which to my mind is conclu-
sive against the above argument, and that is the rapidity with
which the table often moves. It will be observed that there
is no charge of imposture preferred against those who boast
of their success in these experiments ; all that is said is, that
they are self-deceived. Now let us admit that in very many
instances this slight muscular pressure has set the table in
motion; I am speaking now of the incipient motions of the
table; but when the latter begins at length to move with
such speed, that the experimenting circle can with difficulty
keep up with it, the argument surely is at an end. It is idle
to suppose that the scientific men, who have cautiously tested
this alleged discovery, should have been deceived at that
stage of the experiment. Dr. Andrée, of Bremen, says that
on one occasion “the table moved with such rapidity that
they who formed the chain could scarcely follow the rotation.”
Dr. Mayer, chief editor of La Presse Médicale, at Paris,
mentions that, a chain having been formed with three of his
friends, at the end of eight minutes the rotatory movement
had acquired such speed that they could with difficulty keep
up with it. Dr. Hermann Schauenburg, professor at Bonn,
employs similar language in respect to a small mahogany
chest of drawers. I have read similar statements in regard
to some other experiments at Paris. And a correspondent of
the Manchester Guardian, who is well known to the editor,
says, that “the motion increased in rapidity, and we became
both dizzy from moving round, and tired with the circular
length of walk or rather run. I tried to stop the table by
pressing very heavily, and succeeded,” &c. Now all these
experiences are decisive as to the fact. It is impossible that
all these grave narrators could have been mistaken. They
might not be conscious of giving a slight pressure at first,

VOL. XI. oO


182 Becquerel’s experiment.


but when the rapidity of the table became such that they
could scarcely follow it, it is ludicrous to suppose that philo-
sophic men, who are purposely testing an alleged phenomenon
with the wish of establishing what is the truth, should be
self-deceived in a transaction of that nature. Chevreul’s ex-
periments in regard to the oscillations of a pendulum have
not, as it is supposed, any bearing upon this rapid action.
For it has been argued, in an attempted explanation of the
table-movements, that M. Chevreul shewed, that in holding
the pendulum or a ring, an insensible muscular movement
of the arm set it slightly oscillating ; and hence, it is inferred,
that the same slight pressure from a wearied hand produces
a similar effect upon a table. But there is no analogy in the
two cases. The tremulous oscillation of a ring, which is so
slight that optical illusion is called in, and the eye made to
suppose that it perceives a vibration, (as in the case of the
magnetescope, respecting which I give no opinion,) has no-
thing in common with the marked and rapid racing of a
table. The comparison between the two instances breaks
down at once: for in the latter case, self-deception and im-
perfect vision are not admissible. I repeat it, then, that we
may consider the well-established fact of the rapid action of
the table as alone decisive of the question.

A very striking incident, which I have received from un-
questionable authority, presents us also with strong additional
proof. The incident took place in the presence of three
members of the Academy of Sciences, the Baron Thénard,
Messrs. Elie de Beaumont and Becquerel. A young girl,
aged’ 14 years, (and I cannot help observing by the way,
that numerous instances seem to shew that young persons
from the age of 14 to 20 are powerful agents in producing
the phenomenon,) set a small rosewood table in motion after
an interval of less than six minutes. It moved quickly and
strongly. Each of the Academicians in succession placed his
hands upon the table in order to stop the movement, but the
table moved on. The muscular pressure, it will be observed,
was here directed against, and not in favour of, the motion.
At length M. Becquerel, having placed his two hands upon
the table, requested the young girl to place her two hands
over his, making a complete isolation (V’isolement etait com-
plét) : that is, no pressure could possibly proceed from the
hands of the young girl, as the hands of M. Becquerel inter-
vened. But the movement of the table was uninterrupted
in its course. I understand that M. Becquerel, whose judg-
ment is of value in questions of this nature, was perfectly
satisfied with the experiment; and that, in short, the three


The movements admitted in France. 183


Academicians now believe in the reality of some external and
newly-discovered fluid.

The names of other scientific men, both in Germany and
France, can be added to the list of believers. Dr. J. Bohm,
director of the observatory at Prague, assisted by Professor
Schleicher, Professor the Baron Leonhardi, and Dr. Halla,
has made several successful experiments,—the results of which
were published in a short letter. Professor Ennemoser, an
established name in Germany, has written a letter on the
subject to the Augsburg Gazette, in which he says, “The
formation of this chain is of great importance, not only in
reference to the movement of the tables, but also in respect
of other effects. Mesmer was the first to throw light upon
this subject,—which is a fact little known. It was he who
formed a chain of sick persons, and of persons in health, and
produced the most striking results. . . . The efficient cause of
these marvellous phenomena is nothing but electricity; and
the rotatory movements of the tables towards the north or
towards the south are brought about in accordance with the
well-known laws which Oerstedt and Faraday have esta-
blished.” And in Paris, the truth of this phenomenon is
now so fully admitted, that several scientific men have formed
themselves into a “ commission” for the purpose of ascertain-
ing what is its character and rationale. This I have learnt
through one of the members. In short, the facts are now no
longer questioned.

A combination of circumstances, then, seems to prove
the existence of a physical emanation from the human body.
And with this physical emanation it would appear that the
tables become saturated, and action commences. I was glad
to observe in the last number of The Zoist that the acute
writer of the paper upon the “ Spirit-Rappings” cautiously
adverted to the possibility of some “ electrical” agency being
mixed up with the manceuvres which he had witnessed. He
had detected much that was false, and much that was ef-
fected by dexterous jugglery; still he felt that there was just
room for the entrance of some other element, and that a
portion of the “ manifestations” might have been aided by
electrical combinations. ‘ We write,” he says, “ of that only
which we have witnessed : of real electric phenomena we give
no opinion.” Subsequent events have proved the sagacity of
the writer, and shewn the probability of his conjecture. For
a long time I have thought that there might be a substratum
of truth in these “ spiritual-performances :” the manner by
which the alleged communications from the “ spirit-world ”
were accomplished, was clearly explained: still there were

02


184 Mr. Macaulay’: remarks.


points which perplexed me; and among them, were certain
table-movements, in which, if the evidence were to be de-
pended upon, I could not see how the operations of the
Medium came into play. The mystery is solved by these
new physiological facts.

All these discoveries tend to prove what injustice has
been done to the memory of Mesmer. In one of his most
charming essays,* Mr. Macaulay has truly observed in regard
to the fate of the heralds of new truths, that “ it is for the
interest of the human race that the memory of such men
should be had in reverence, and that they should be sup-
ported against the scorn and hatred of their contemporaries ;
—to go on the forlorn hope of truth is a service of peril.
Who will undertake it, if it be not also a service of honour?”
And, again, in respect to the manner in which a new truth
develops itself, from its first faint glimpses, and its gradual
accumulation of facts, till it shines out unto a more perfect
day, Mr. Macaulay in the same essay makes observations
which may apply in some degree to the progress of mes-
merism. “ First come hints, then fragments of systems, then
defective systems, then complete systems. The sound opi-
nion, held for a time by one bold speculator, becomes the
opinion of a small minority, of a strong minority, of a ma-
jority of mankind.” Perhaps, if I were required to express
the present position of mesmerism, I should use the language
of Mr. Macaulay, and say that it is appreciated by a “ strong
minority.” Everything tends to shew that the time is ap-
proaching when it will be entertained by a “ majority.”

That these table-movements will hasten that time, there
can be little doubt; provided only that mesmerists be cau-
tious in their experiments. Especially must they be careful
not to assume that in every instance, in which they appear
to succeed, they have succeeded. Perhaps the real cases of
success are more limited in number than that which we first
imagined, If we be all diligent in testing the truth of this


* Essay on Sir James Mackintosh’s History of the Revolution. Apropos of
this quotation ; among the successful table-movers in England, might be named
one of our most accomplished Bishops, an historian, who had met with nothing
of the kind in the ‘‘ middle ages,” and an artist of distinguished name. These
were the three warlocks who set the table in motion. And a gentleman, who
received it from one of the party, informed me that another great historian, who
was present and looking on, stared at the movement of the table with unmixed
astonishment, Perhaps he felt some rising misgivings as to what he had once
written respecting ‘‘the dupes of Mesmer,’’ and regretted that he had been
“80 very sure” in his judgment! To feel ‘‘so very sure” himself, and think
every one else wrong, is one of the defects of this great writer, who will be com-
pelled to alter many of his observations in his Essay on Bacon.


Mr. Townshend convinced. 185


power, its reality will be safely established: if we be hasty,
impatient, and injudicious, the enemy will avail himself of
our blunders, and a reaction against mesmerism be the in-
evitable result.

As I am well aware of the extreme and conscientious
caution which you yourself exercise in the examination of
every alleged fact, I am not certain that you will be prepared
to go along with me in my belief. I well know, what an
ignorant world does not know, that while your medical ad-
versaries endeavour to represent you as being precipitate in
your decisions, you are one of the most patient, the most
cautious, and the most correct of observers ; and therefore I
scarcely expect your full adhesion to this new table-hypo-
thesis. But at any rate, whether you agree with me or not ;
and whether you think my unscientific opinions deserving of
publication or not, I must always subscribe myself,

My dear Elliotson,
Your sincere admirer and friend,
Georce Sanpsy.


VIII. On Table Moving. By the Rev. Caauncy Hare
TownsHEND. A letter to Dr. Elliotson.


‘In answer to the lady who styles herself the Wife of an M.D., we beg to
state that we cannot discuss in our columns the subject she has noticed. We
reply, however, to her questions in the order that they stand. In answer to
No. 1. We say no.—In reply to No. 2, Mechanical pressure.—3. A deception.
—4. No.—5. A juggle like mesmerism and homceopathy.”’"—Mr. WakK.ey.
Lancet, June 11, 1853.


I recetvep the following letter from Mr. Townshend in the
middle of May: and, though I have no authority to publish
it, I forward it to The Zoist, with the suppression of some
names: for, like all that Mr. Townshend writes, it is too
charmingly written to be lost, and I know he will pardon me.
Joun E.tiorson.


Mon Loisir, Lausanne.

My dear Elliotson,—I think you will like to hear that I
am safely arrived, after a prosperous journey, at my old
quarters at Lausanne. I have also something to tell you
which I think will interest you. I found all the world here
talking of table-moving, and much in advance of the London
world in regard to experiences. At first, I did not take
much heed of these things, till a friend of mine, on whom I
have thorough reliance, Sir C 8 , aman of exact
information, and of rather an incredulous turn (if anything),


186 Mr. Townshend’s experiments.


told me that he had himself assisted at a table-moving, and
had no doubt of the reality of the phenomenon. He was
kind enough to take me to the lady’s house where the expe-
riments were made—Madame de S ’s. The experiments
were made on a small round table, or guéridon, (some-
thing like a lady’s work table,) on three legs, without castors,
(time one o’clock in the day.) First the two Medlles. de
8 lightly laid their hands, not touching each other, on
the table, and in about a minute it began to turn. I was
then invited to place my hands also on the table, and I tried
to stop it, but could not. Then Sir C—— 8S put his
hands on the table, and we often shifted hands, and one or
other withdrew from the table; but it kept moving round
with accelerated velocity, and I was forced to run to keep
pace with it. Then, by degrees, all left the table except
the youngest Miss de S » who also gradually withdrew
every finger but one; and still the table kept on, nor ceased
till she withdrew that last finger. But the strangest part
was that Sir C—— § by his will, either expressed or
mental, could make the table perform various feats. At his
will, it stopped, or went on. At his will, it leant over to
this side or that side, or balanced itself on one or two legs,
or struck so many times on the floor with one leg, or ad-
vanced towards the window, in a sideling way—making demi-
tours to the right and left. I am quite sure there was no
trick in this. Sir C is incapable of it, and the Misses
de § seemed much grieved in speaking of the way they
had been suspected. If Sir C willed the table to lean
over, I tried to stop it on the other side; but it seemed al-
ways impelled by superior force. I did not doubt of the reality
of the phenomena. We first tried the table on a boarded
floor (parqueté) and then on the carpet. It was longer before
it turned on the carpet ; but, once in motion, it seemed to go
round with even more velocity.

On arriving at home, I took a small, but, for its size,
a heavy table, with an octagon top, one foot four inches
across. It has three heavy claw legs, without castors, and
the wood is very rough underneath. It moves with difficulty,
and I can hardly push it round in an ordinary way. I
placed it in a room without a carpet, and called in my man
Henry and one of the maids. I then, without saying what
I wished to effect, made them place their hands lightly on
the table; I also placed mine, so as to touch little fingers all
round, We all stood up, as in the former experiment. At
first indeed I sat, but when the table began to move, in about
four minutes, I got up. My servants were astonished. The


Some have an opposing power. 187


table went quickly round. They thought I was pushing it.
No! I was carried with it, and it always seemed to move
more quickly than I, and I could hardly keep pace with it.
My man Henry, rather acutely, asked me to take off my
left hand. I did so; and so did we all successively ; and yet
as long as any two hands were on it, it moved round.

In the evening I tried a square table, one foot nine inches
by one foot two and a half inches, with four legs, without
castors, and on a carpeted floor. I tried it by myself (sitting
down), and in about twenty minutes it began to move, but
slowly. I rang for my man, and he put his hands on it also,
when instantly it began to rotate with such velocity that we
were forced to run, and I became giddy and was obliged to
cease. I must observe we all felt tinglings in the tips of the
fingers, and, after I had left off, I felt a peculiar fatigue as
if I had been mesmerising. On one occasion I willed the
table to stop, and it stopped; but I could not make it lean
over, by my will, to the side I wished: only once, I willed
it to lean to my side, and in about a minute it leant over
rather away from me, just as I had forgotten I had willed
anything.

Yesterday, I called on Miss H , Lord B ’g sister,
a lady of much intellect, and not at all of a credulous dis-
position. As I had heard of hat-moving, I asked her if she
would try it; she agreed, and called in her maid to help.
My hat was placed on a table, rim upwards. We placed our
fingers very lightly on the rim, and in three or four minutes
it began to rotate, to the maid’s great astonishment. We
had to move very quickly to keep pace with it; and I only
stopped through a feeling of sickness and giddiness which it
produces in me. Miss H was perfectly convinced. You
see, from the shortness of the time, there is no question of
fatigue, or of weighing heavily from fatigue on the hat or
table. The unbelievers, all of whom will only look on and
not try the thing themselves, explain it by spasmodic nervous
action, muscular contraction, &c. I cannot admit this ex-
planation, as I have seen the table move by the contact of
one finger, and I know that my own hands so touched the
table that they would rather have stopped it than otherwise
in an ordinary way. Some persons seem to exercise a nega-
tive power. Mr. B——, a clergyman here, tells me that
he believes in the thing—that he wishes to be one of the
table-movers, but that, invariably, if he is present in a chair,
or if he only touches a moving table, it stops. Others, like
Sir C 8 , have great positive power. The power, I
am told, is developed by exercise. Sir C tells me that


188 Mesmeric effects. ’


at Madlle. de S——’s a large weighty man was placed in the
centre of a circle with fingers touching him. After a time
he began irresistibly to revolve: but he felt very ill after the
experiment, and was forced to go to bed. Madlle. de S——
shewed me a very large round table in her drawing room
which by a sitting party with little fingers in contact (though
this does not seem to be an essential) was made to move in
forty minutes, so that a loose carpet, on which it stands,
above a fixed carpet, was all rolled round the legs. The time
of moving seems to bear a relation to the size of the table
and the number of persons, perhaps also to the mesmeric
power of the persons.

Madlle. de 8 , to shew that nobody pushed the table,
put draughtsmen all round it (in my presence), and then we
laid our fingers on the draughts, and the table moved all
the same; whereas you know, had we pushed, the draughts
would have moved. A sheet of paper laid on the table shews
the same thing, for, if one pushed, the sheet would be
| crumpled. I am indeed almost convinced that these phe-
| nomena are mesmeric developments. Of course I shall in-
vestigate them further. The Misses de C have often
made hats revolve by lightly touching the rims. They tried
with two large tables at the Elysée, and with two parties
sitting round them. There was no motion: but in about
twenty minutes a lady at each table fell into the mesmeric
state. One was Madame de B , the other Miss L——
de C ; and it is curious that they could only be awakened
by the gentleman who had sat, not next, but opposite, to them.
Mr. L vH could alone wake Madame de B ‘
and Mr, de B could alone wake Miss de C . Other
singular phenomena were developed, such as attraction and
repulsion, sight with closed eyes, &c. At another trial ano-
ther lady was similarly affected.

I think I have now told you most of our experiences, and
now I beg of you to try the thing yourself and with reliable
people, and then pray let me know the result. Nothing is
so easy as to ¢ry with a hat or smail table, and I have never
found the trial last so long as even ten minutes, I observe,
and so did the Misses de S$ , that you must give a certain
attention to the table and concentrate the will, as in mes-
merism, and that, if you remit attention, the table either
goes more slowly or stops altogether. They say you must
not let any of the circle touch the table with their clothes,
only with the tips of the fingers. I observed frequently that
the table would stop in the midst of rapid motion, perhaps
from some sudden cessation of the necessary conditions for its


Effects like those of Mesmerism. 189


motion. When once the table has been affected, it seems
much more easy to do it again. At Miss H ’s we were
over three minutes before the hat rotated. Then we took
away our hands (at Miss H.’s suggestion), and, on replacing
them, the hat went round again in a few seconds. I do
really infer the action of a fluid from all this, and a certain
accumulation of fluid (or vibratory action of a fluid, or me-
dium). The fluid or medium is not electric, because Mr.
Rosset (a believer) tried with an electrometer if electricity
were present, but it could not be detected. This, however,
does not prove that the mesmeric medium is not present. I
can only say, all my own sensations in trying the experiment
are mesmeric. I experience a tension of will; I am sensible
of an action that passes from my brain to the table ; I feel
mesmeric fatigue after the exertion. Some may say, “ All
imagination !” but I know my own sensations. It is true
that the slight nausea and head-ache may be the result of
mere circular movement, but not other very marked sensa-
tations that I have. And Sir C——S says he cannot
be mistaken as to the peculiar sense of fatigue he has for
some hours after exerting his power.
laughs at it all, and (though he has not even seen
it) says that none but girls, women, or weak-minded men
believe in it. Then am I, I fear, a weak-minded man.
Ever affectionately yours,
C. Hare TownsHeEnp.


*,* After I had received Mr. Sandby’s letter, I wrote to
Mr. Townshend, requesting to know whether he had made
any more experiments. The following is his reply.

Joun EL iotson.


Mon Loisir, 19th June, 1853.

My dear Elliotson,—I have little more to relate respecting
the turning tables. Indeed, I have found that to try the
experiment often is very exhausting. Nor am I the only
person who experiences this effect. My cousin, Major L .
who is staying here, after assisting at a successful experiment,
declared that, the next morning, he felt as if he had been
dancing all night at a ball. The evening we tried the expe-
riment Miss H helped us, and four stood round a small
octagon table with three legs. After it had turned awhile,
we, half jokingly, desired the table to tell the Major’s age,
when it immediately ceased revolving, and began with one


190 Different from muscular effect.


leg to strike. It was the leg next Miss H——. The leg
struck on the ground thirty times. The Major said he
wanted two days of being thirty: but, on enquiry, this came
out, namely, that I fancied he was twenty-eight, Miss H
wished the table to strike twenty-nine, but Major L——
himself, thinking he was fairly thirty, had wished the table
to strike thirty times. So it looks as if the Major’s will
overpowered our’s. I must observe, that he stood on one
side, where he could /ess influence, muscularly, the table
than any one else. This experiment was made so passively
and quietly as to seem more convincing than most others, as
to the presence of some peculiar motive power.

I must tell you fairly that I have sometimes had my
doubts whether some involuntary muscular action did not
influence the table ; but, as far as I have yet seen, there is al-
ways a residual phenomenon—a something which the theory
of muscular action does not exactly solve. The experiment
with the draughtsmen seemed decisive as to the fact that
there was no pushing ; also, the revolving of the heavy square
table at Mr. de C ’*s appeared incompatible with the ma-
terial motive force employed. This was particularly manifest
when the table changed its motion from right to left into a
motion from left to right. There was then always a moment
when it was still, and would, under ordinary circumstances,
have required a great amount of new impetus to set it going
again in a new direction. For, remember, this was a table
which our united forces could not make revolve, when it was
once at rest, by mere pushing. Then, Mr. H tells me
that his nephew, Mr. F M , has written to say that
he convinced himself there was more in moving tables than
is dreamt of in the muscular philosophy, by setting his little
children to turn a heavy large round table, which they could
not move under ordinary circumstances. It moved in less
than forty minutes, and, while it was in rapid revolution, he
placed himself on the top of the table, and sat there with his
whole weight, after which it went round as before. He then
remarks, “TI hardly like to say I believe,—yet how resist the
evidences of my senses ?”

Since I wrote, we have tried here the old schoolboy trick
of lifting up a man with only the eight forefingers of four
persons, when the patient and his bearers breathe together.
The extreme lightness of the lifted person is remarkable, and
has never been accounted for. May there not be some mes-
meric agency, here, aiding the muscular ?

We know that the muscles are only moved by the nerves
and by neuro-galvanism. Now this last power may possibly


Tables moved and spirits departed. 191


be continued on, out of the mere animal frame, so as to con-
stitute in itself a motive agency. And this will not seem
wonderful to a mesmerist, who so often projects a force beyond
his own body.
Mind, I say all this only problematically, and as a seeker
after truth. I long to know the result of your experience.
Ever, my dear Elliotson,
Yours most faithfully,
C. Harz TownsHEnD.


1X. The Departed Spirits. By Dr. Ex.iotson.


‘* Black spirits and white,
Red spirits and grey,
Mingle, mingle, mingle,
You that mingle may.”’
‘Whither are they vanished? Into the air; and what seemed corporeal,
melts as breath into the wind. Would they had staid.’’


Macbeth.
** Solventur risu tabule :—’’
Horativs.


Tue tables are beyond all doubt turned and the spirits have
been scattered and made to vanish for ever from the realms
of reality. Every body now sees the tables turn in his own
dwelling, be it Buckingham Palace or a room which serves for
kitchen and parlour and all, and can bear testimony to such
facts as are described by my two friends the clergymen who
have written to me on the subject. We are not indebted
to philosophers for either the original discovery or even one
of the endless instances which have established the fact.
They have been obliged, like medical men in the case of
mesmerism, in spite of prejudice to admit it; but have as-
cribed it to muscular pushing, exerted unconsciously. They
have, however, been the very last to go and witness the
movements; and it is reported that the great Alexander
Humboldt once pronounced the assertions to be nonsense,
saying that he had in his long life heard of strange facts
which had turned out to be unfounded, and that he was too
old to be caught with chaff; nay, it is reported that, when
a party were making the tables spin in the palace at Berlin,
he refused to go from an adjoining room to see them, not-
withstanding that at length the king left the party and en-
treated him.


As in the case of mesmerism, the public have beaten the
learned.


Some have pushed.


When they could no longer deny the myriads of fresh
instances, they determined, without seeing one, that all re-
sulted from pushing; though, they did not attempt to accuse
the pushers of fraud. The tables could not be called, by Mr.
Wakley and others, vile impostors, as the two Okeys were—
are not hysterical females, desiring notoriety: most have
luckily more than two legs to stand upon. The operators,
not belonging to a particular profession, as unfortunately I
do, were not assailed by professional spite on the part of
their opponents: but the facts were kindly explained. The
Leader newspaper advertized that on the next Saturday it
would explain the matter on physiological principles: and the
secretary of the Royal Institution, the Rev. Mr. Barlow, on
the evening before the Leader came out, when the audience
were assembled in the Institution for the lecture, astonished
every body by advancing to the table before the lecturer’s
arrival and begging them, for the explanation of the table- ©
moving, which no body was thinking of and which did not
relate in the least to the subject of the lecture, to consult a
lecture delivered a year ago by Dr. Carpenter really on
“ Electro-Biology,” and a chapter by Dr. Holland on the
effects of expectant attention—neither author being at all
original in this any more than in anything else he has writ-
ten; for Chevreul many years ago pointed out the occur-
rence of unconscious voluntary muscular action, and after
him The Zoist repeatedly pointed out that we not only may
will unconsciously, but may take in knowledge unconscionsiy,
retain it unconsciously, and act in unconscious consequence
of it, and act unconsciously. “Mr. Barlow seemed anxious to
be before-hand with the Leader.

Now I am sure that some cases of this turning are the
' result of unconscious muscular movement. A gentleman
arrived in England three weeks ago, heard of the subject for
the first time, and immediately found that he turned his hat,
though he was certain that he did not intend it. He felt his
arms grow stiff, and even his fingers, before the hat moved.
We both tried together. The hat in two minutes began to
rotate, but he felt, and did the moment before feel, the stiff-
ness. We began again, and I managed that he should place
the point of one of his fingers just upon the seam of the
leather which lies around the inside of the hat: while the
hat moved, I found that his finger got in advance of the
seam; so that he clearly pushed the hat round, though un-
consciously : and this observation I repeatedly made in sub-
sequent experiments. Impressed with this idea, I have
repeatedly experimented alone upon a hat: and always at


Some have not pushed. 193


length moved it, but clearly push it, (though unintentionally
and unconsciously,) for my hands always get on faster than
the hat, and have sometimes made a sudden slip forwards.
Others have noticed even my shoulders to advance before the
hat. On an occasion of a table moving downwards so many
times, instead of rappings being made, to answer numerical
questions, I observed the hand of the young lady, on the side
which moved downwards, not move with the table or after it,
but before it: and here all was apparently deception.

But may not such movements frequently result from some
other cause—from an occult energy? There are the facts
recorded by Mr. Townshend and Mr. Sandby. A very large
number of persons who have moved tables, and of others who
have witnessed the movements, ridicule to me the idea of
this explanation. They know of the explanation before they
make the experiment: and are most careful that the tips of
the fingers shall touch the table in the lightest possible way,
so that you may almost see between the fingers and the table.
A strong effort would be required to move some of the heavy
tables, and yet they are conscious that they make no effort,
and the bystanders are satisfied that there is no expression of
effort. Some also assure me that, when they really attempt
to move the table, they feel a heavy weight as well as an
effort: whereas “the genuine table-turning is quite light to
the hand :” and at the time some persons feel a curious
pricking of the fingers and a sort of chilly heat: and some,
as soon as it moves, even when it first cracks, as it often does
before it moves, experience this sensation and wish for fresh
air. One most truthful young lady tells me, and others have
made similar remarks, that, having moved a large table a
good deal one evening, it became so susceptible that they
had only to touch it with the very tips of the fingers, and it
would go rapidly ; always however cracking first.* In some


* Mr. Dalton, of Kelmarsh, Northampton, has kindly reminded me of the
following passage, which is the concluding sentence of Newton’s Principia :—

‘* Allow me to add a few words respecting a very subtle spirit which pervades
solid bodies and dwells in them: by its power and action the particles of bodies
mutually attract each other at very small distances, and, becoming contiguous,
cohere : and electrical bodies act at greater distances, both repelling and attract-
ing neighbouring small bodies: and it is emitted from these, reflected, repelled,
inflected, and it heats them: and all sensation is excited, and the voluntary mo-
tion of the limbs of animals is produced, by the vibrations of this spirit that are
propagated through the solid fibrils of the nerves from the external organs of
sense to the brain and from the brain to the muscles. But a few words will not
suffice for this subject ; nor are we yet in possession of experiments enough to
determine the laws of this spirit accurately.”

‘* Adjicere jam liceret nonnulla de spiritu quodam subtilissimo corpora crassa
pervadente, et in iisdem latente; cujus vi et actionibus particule corporum ad


194 I myself unsuccessful.


cases the fingers are convulsed before the movement begins,
and the operator is out of sorts afterwards. One gentleman
told me that before the movement begins he feels an uncom-
fortable sensation down one side that ceases when the move-
ments commence. I have seen one case, and heard of others,
in which one hand had become rigidly closed for weeks after
the experiment. In the case respecting which I was con-
sulted, the thumbs of each person had been placed on the
table and the hand grasped by the next person in the circle.*
The extreme facility with which a table, on which the fingers
or hands had rested till motion took place, is lifted by the
tips of the fingers under it, with as slight contact as possible,
has been mentioned to me by several experimenters: one
young lady said, “ Gradually the table has risen, and re-
mained stationary in the air upon the fingers.+

I have been unfortunate in my attempts to see the table
movements. Mr. Nottage, Mr. Capern,, Mary Ann, re-
ferred to in former numbers of The Zoist, and myself, sat
one evening an hour with our hands on one of my tables in
vain. Once I visited three young ladies who had been very
successful, and they and myself sat the greater part of an
hour with the tips .of our fingers properly arranged ; but in
vain. Once 1 went and met some other young ladies who
had been equally successful, and six applied their fingers, and
at last I added myself to them, for the greater part of an
hour; but in vain. I went to Surbiton, expressly to see the


minimas distantias se mutuo attrahunt, et contigue facte coherent: et corpora
electrica agunt ad distantias majores, tam repellendo quam attrahendo corpus-
cula vicina; et his emittitur, reflectitur, refringitur, inflectitur, et corpora cale-
facit ; et sensatio omnis excitatur, et membra animalium ad voluntatem moventur,
vibrationibus scilicet hujus spirits per solida nervoram capillamenta ab externis
sensuum organis ad cerebrum et a cerebro in musculos propagatis. Sed hec
paucis exponi non possunt ; neque adest sufficiens copia experimentorum quibus
leges actionum hujus spiritus accuraté determinari et monstrari debent.’’

* A friend writes to me :—‘‘ A young man, upon whom the moving of the
tables had a most extraordinary effect, was almost convulsed; and, during the
remainder of the evening, everything that he touched, workboxes, books, baskets,
&c., moved about by the mere touch. I am told that he himself alone moved
a large round drawing-room table. Two of my friends set the table in motion.
It moved towards them alternately : and each charged the other with pushing it :
but at each time the supposed pusher hardly touched it. The table came towards
them, and was not pushed by them : they began as sceptics, and took the greatest
care that no muscular action should come in. I recollect a stout farmer tried it,
and his arms became affected and stiffened from the action.”

+ In Nos. XXXVI. and XXXIX. are articles by Non-Wist of Edinburgh, in
which the lifting of a heavy man with the tips of the forefingers of a few persons,
provided the fingers touch the individual, is detailed ; and suggesting the possi-
bility of gravity being lessened. Sir David Brewster hands over the subject to
the mesmerists if his own explanation is not satisfactory: and Non-Wist now
writes to us suggesting that the muscular strength is exalted.—Zois¢.


A successful experiment. 195


experiments with young ladies who had moved great tables
admirably: but they failed, both with me and without me,
notwithstanding they all were desirous of seeing the table
move and fully expected during the long trial that it would
move. At last I again visited the first three young ladies.
It was only the evening before the printers had advanced to
this page in my MS. that I had this last opportunity of
an experiment. I must remark that the family informed
me that, very soon after I left them the previous evening,
they tried again, and the table moved. When I arrived
the father met me on the stairs and said the table was
moving. I found the son and two daughters had been sitting
at it for the best part of half an hour. It was the same table,
just sufficient for four to sit round, close to each other ; slight,
circular, with one leg standing on a large flat circular pedes-
tal without castors. It from time to time turned from their
right hands to their left, very slowly and to a short distance ;
then stopped; then began again: it moved faster sometimes
than at others. The father had been assisting, but now his
place was vacant, and still it moved on. I sat down and
joined in the experiment, and from time to time it moved as
before. Every one placed merely the tips of the fingers upon
the table, so very slightly that often one or other really did
not touch the table. I now and then tried the hands of one
or other and found the contact so trifling that movement by, _
pressure seemed impossible. I can answer for myself. The/~
family was that of Mr. C. R. Stanley, the eminent painter,
The truthfulness of father and children and their desire to
ascertain the real facts are perfect and unalloyed. They were
all grave and serious in the matter. They felt assured all
the time that they did not even unconsciously push the table,
I watched them all anxiously and uninterruptedly, and they
as anxiously watched themselves. From time to time I tried
their hands during the whole of the long experiment, and I
cannot discern how there was any possibility of the table
being pushed. Moreover, the table always slid away from
their fingers and mine, so lightly did we all touch it, It
moved faster than the fingers of any of us, and got in advance
of us. On placing the candle on the floor so that I could
observe both the top and the pedestal, I noticed that the lat-
ter moved on the rough carpet circularly and rather forwards.
At last I suggested that we should try to move the table: and
of course we at once succeeded, but the motion was not
smooth, and the fingers displayed clearly that they were in
action. In none of their experiments have Mr. Stanley’s
family found the table move rapidly or otherwise than when


196 Spirits neither rap nor move.


I saw it; and I suspect that, in many cases, the parties be-
come excited on beholding the movement, and then begin to
assist it with muscular force in spite of themselves: just as
in mesmerism there is the true mesmerism, and imagination
may codperate, and may in every case afterwards produce
the phenomena if the patient is aware of what you are at-
tempting. Still there is true mesmerism, as there probably
is true movement of the tables independent of muscular force.

Whichever be the true explanation of the table-moving,
even the most barefaced impostor of a Medium cannot much
longer refer the fact to visiting spirits, nor speak of—

‘* Spirits which by mine art
I have from their confines call’d to enact


My present fancies.”” &c.
Tempest.


In ignorant days, the attraction of the magnet, the electric
spark, thunder, the hurricane, were all referred to spirits.
As all people are moving the tables by a manual process or a
strong exertion of the will, without those dear Mediums, or
the invocation of spirits, or a single thought bestowed upon
their little invisible worships, the imposture of the Medium
must surely be seen through by the silliest of the weak.
The Medium may continue to put her mouth near the table
when asked to move it, and say, “ Will the spirits be so
kind as to oblige me by moving the table?” and then give
a rap to assure the baby listeners that the spirits will move
the table for her. But that must now end. If the Me-
dium knew no better before, she must now. But that she
did know better before is certain: for who raps out an-
swers? She herself. I never doubted that she made the
raps herself, or that she did so with her lower extremities ;
though I doubted that she did it by the action of one toe
upon another. The explanation given by a friend of mine,
in the article signed N. E. E. N., in the last number of
The Zoist is, I feel satisfied, correct as far as it goes.
But, in an outspoken pamphlet which has sold enormously,
and is now in its ninth edition,* it is said that the polished
leather of the boot or shoe, rubbed against the polished chair
or table, gives the precise sound and intensity of the spirit-
raps: and so it does. The Medium, no question, has more
ways than one, probably many, of doing as she wishes. Still,
that she makes the raps when she has no confederate, and,
when I was present, did make them with her lower extremi-
ties, I can have no doubt. If you ask a question, who hears


* Spirit-Rappings. By One who has tyied the Spirits. Ninth Edition.


Medium baffled. 197


it? why she does: and she is very wide awake. Then if you
ask for one, two, or three raps, who makes them? They
must be made by somebody; and by somebody that hears
your question, and is willing to rap. Who but she? unless
she has at times a confederate. Then if she evidently makes
the raps (for spirits are out of the question with any but
persons qualified for admission into the Asylum for Idiots or
Bedlam Hospital), she knows that no spirits do rap. To say
that she may refer her own voluntary action to spirits, from
having been educated superstitiously, is preposterous ; and she
must laugh in her sleeve at all her crudulous dupes, and know
that they deserve a rap upon the knuckles for paying her. I
would not encourage such imposition by paying for it. A
gentleman engaged a Medium for a party, and invited me to
it: and then the man who hired the Medium to show in
England begged me to visit her and judge for myself; and I
yielded to his request. I cheerfully pay Robin, Houdin, &c.,
because they openly tell you that all is trick ; and very clever
tricks these are, not like those of the Mediums, full of con-
temptible failures. I was shewn no table-moving at any
interviews with a Medium.

If persons will observe the few cautions given in the
article in the last Zoist, to every word of which I adhere, as
I am sure does the gentleman who wrote in it of the produc-
tion of the raps and the table-movement, they will find the
imposture of both. Captain , a friend of the Rev. —~—

» Was anxious to see a Medium, and went inclined to
believe. However, he was told how to test the affair. He
held the alphabet and his hands down out of sight, and the
declaration of the spirits were all wrong and the vilest non-
sense. He then, as if by chance, placed the alphabet on the
table, and all instantly went on perfectly right. While he
was leaving the Medium, she “ hoped that he was satisfied.”
“No, indeed, Madam, I am not,” said he; “ you have told
me all wrong, and nothing but absurdity.” “I am sure I
am very sorry, Sir. But you are at liberty to come again
free of expense.” He did not return, having had enough.
Professor F , of King’s College, went and took no pains
to conceal or lead astray, and all was rapped out correctly.
He then moved his fingers very slowly over the letters T.O.M.
N.O.D.D.Y in passing through the alphabet; and so the
spirit rapped out that its name was Tom Noddy. These facts
I can prove: and others of my friends have obtained the same
results. The Rev. Mr. T. went with Major . He took
no pains, and all was correct. The Major paused with care
on each letter equally, and all was wrong. The Medium need

VOL. XI. P


198 Mediums’ tricks.


not see the alphabet: she judges by watching the hands, even
the countenance, when it is the best moment for a rap.

We are told of a pen rising from the table, dipping itself
in the ink and writing a letter! and of a bookcase unbolting
and opening itself!

One Medium tells us “that messages is sent by her by
spiritual ¢elegrapht in less than three minutes to America and
back, enquiring and telling her how Mr. and Mrs. So-and-So
is, and what good or ill has befallen them; and then when
the letters come in by the mail all is confirmed to the very
letter !”? Now this is either a fact or a falsehood ; it is not a
question of delusion. We, from other falsehoods we have
detected, deny it altogether (apart from its inherent impro-
bability), and say that this, amongst many other instances we
could mention, shews to what lengths a Medium will go to
delude her victims.

All physicians are acquainted with spectral and acoustic
illusions from cerebral excitement, whether by disease, cere-
bral sympathy or mesmerism, or other sources of excitement,
and these have given rise to the belief in the appearance of
spirits. Many natural phenomena in inanimate matter, as
bell-ringing and other noises have been mysterious, but so
often explained, like the sounds proceeding from the statue of
Memnon in Egypt, that all, no doubt, admit of explanation on
natural principles. I have no doubt that many persons fancy
they have heard these rappings and seen movements, solely
from excitement. Very many people cannot observe correctly :
so that it is said with truth that we have as many false facts
as false opinions.

In the Leader of March 12th, Mr. G. H. Lewes says that
his party found they could move a huge oak table with their
knees, invisibly to all sitting round it, although they could
not move it by their hands; and that, when the Medium tried
to move it as she had promised, one gentleman twined his
legs around its leg and prevented her, but felt her straining
to move it, and that she at last gave up the attempt in
despair.

The gentleman who wrote a portion of the article in the
last Zoist informs me that when he requested a Medium to
move the table, she sat with her legs under the table, from
which position she would not move. The table, shortly after
the invocation, gave a sudden lurch of about half a yard, and
then stopped. It never attempted to go round, as tables now
do. While all were wondering, another lurch! Some one
now got under the table: no more movements! He went
away : a light was placed and all /ook : no result. The Medium


Want of sound Education. 199


was asked to invoke again, but, the eyes and the light being
unfavourable to the experiment, there was no response.

When the Medium was asked, after the trick had been seen
through, to move the tables, the eyes of the enquirer being
directed to the proper quarter—to her legs, she declined,
declaring that the order of spirits that moved tables was very
unintellectual, and that she did not cultivate them !

All this is totally different from the table-moving now
universal: for the Mediums now beg you to put your hands
on the table, and thus is really produced the ordinary move-
ment. If the Medium believes she does it by spirits, why
does she beg you to touch the table and sit round? She
ought to believe that the spirits do all of themselves. They
rap without your assistance; why not push? Attention
to these Mediums shews a lamentable state of ignorance in
those who are called educated. In fact, the grossest super-
stition pervades every part of the earth inhabited by man.
Even the higher orders and the universities of our country .
are pervaded by it. Here are clergymen of the Church of |
England, educated at Cambridge, avowing their belief in all |
this raving; and one in Essex writing anonymously and |
most disereditably against those who are not so silly as |
himself. His friends also, not more enlightened than himself,
have written as discreditably. But education in Great Britain
is most unsound, or the visitation of the spirit-rapping and
spirit-table-moving would have been repelled harmless. For,
as the cholera and other epidemics find endless victims on
entering districts where there is bad food, bad ventilation,
and all unhealthiness: so does every absurdity of belief, re-
ligious, medical, or whatever else, find endless victims from
the wretched and unhealthy mental state of a very large por-
tion of society. Everything that we observe and experiment
upon is nature. The President of the Royal Society in ad-
mitting Fellows tells them that the Society is for the investi-
gation of natural knowledge. Of the supernatural we can
observe and investigate nothing: all supernatural questions,
such as living again after we are dead, can be determined by
revelation only.*


* Locke says, ‘‘ There are many things wherein we have very imperfect no-
tions, or none at all; and other things, of whose past, present, or future ex-
istence, by the actual use of our faculties, we can have no knowledge: these, as
being beyond the discovery of our natural faculties, and above reason, are, when
revealed, the proper matter of faith. Thus, that part of the angels rebelled
against God, and thereby lost their first happy state, and that the dead shall rise
and live again: these and the like, being beyond the discovery of reason, are
P2


200 Folly of Multitudes.


In examining nature, supernatural fancies are vile in-
truders, rejected by every person of information and common
sense: and not admitted into any philosophical work. A
chemist, an astronomer, a writer on mechanics, optics, or
acoustics, would not think of introducing supernatural expla-
nations and views into a treatise. If he did, his work would
be rejected by any philosophical society to which he might
present it, and he would be properly set down as a mono-
maniac. Many persons are so weak that they no sooner
fancy a thing possible than they feel certain that it is a truth.
Medical men act thus hourly, in giving medical opinions.
When a belief thus formed is outrageous nonsense, and fixed
and active, we call it monomania: and how many are thus
weak, is proved by the experiments in what is absurdly called
electro-biology, which is the artificial induction of mono-
mania.

In truth, this delusion is impairing the intellect of many.
Not merely females, but grown-up men, are yielding to it.
One old gentleman who, it is said, was never satisfied of the
existence of a personal God, and has spent a long life in
unsuccessful schemes, and is so deaf that he cannot hear the
raps distinctly, but trusts to others, is now satisfied that
there is a personal God and a future state, because he is
assured by the rappings made by the spirits of the father of
our excellent Queen, Franklin, and Jefferson, that his schemes
will, ere long, at length be adopted by mankind. The cun-
ning Medium knows how to catch the poor old man. The
spirits, however, do not seem to have improved his views
of God. For, while he considers God to be a spirit, he
considers that all spirits are but finely attenuated matter.
Some have visits from the spirits of their fathers, children,
husbands, wives, calling them up from their blissful abodes


purely matters of faith, with which reason has nothing directly to do.”—Locke,
Essay on Human Understanding, iv., ch. 18.

Bishop Watson says, ‘‘ When I went to the University, I was of opinion, as
most schoolboys are, that the soul was a substance distinct from the body, and
that when a man died, he, in classical phrase, breathed-out his soul, animam
expiravit ; that it then went I knew not whither, as it had come into the body,
from I knew not where nor when, and had dwelt in the body during life, but in
what part of the body it had dwelt I knew not.””—“ This notion of the soul was
without doubt, the offspring of prejudice and ignorance.””—“‘ Believing as I.do
in the truth of the Christian religion, which teaches that men are accountable
for their actions, I trouble not myself with dark disquisitions concerning neces-
sity and liberty, matter and spirit; hoping as I do for eternal life through Jesus
Christ, I am not disturbed at my inability clearly to convince myself that the


soul is or is not a substance distinct from the body.’’—Anecdotes of the Life of
Bishop Watson, p. 14, sqq. .


Wickedness of these things. 201


answer various questions, (often very silly,) and even to write
them letters, off hand, in any room or shop or wherever else
the Mediums may happen to be. I say Mediums, for the poor
creatures have now taken their degrees as Mediums,—to be
able to summon spirits,—conferred upon them by a keen
speculating female, and are styled Mediums. I know of no
communications yet made that are anything but namby pamby
twaddle, or assertions unproved and often unprovable.

The mischief, if not corrected by contempt and ridicule,
may be incalculable among us. Statistical accounts from the
various lunatic asylums in America report 173 lunatics from
this pestilent belief, and 17 suicides. One Medium has the
Bible on the table and begins with a prayer; and declares all
the spirits that obey the other and do her bidding are ‘ bad
spirits ;? while her own are ‘ good spirits.’

‘¢ Damned spirits all,
That in crossways and floods have burial.’’
‘* They wilfully themselves exile from light,
And must for aye consort with black-browed night :’’


“* But we are spirits of another sort.’’
Midsummer Night's Dream.


To the Mediums who declare that they bring spirits from


other regions, the charge of wickedness, gross wickedness
applies. They profess to believe that those spirits have been
judged: that punishment is passed, and happiness is now
their lot. And yet they scruple not to bring them away
from their realms of happiness, in which, if the Medium be-
lieves her Bible, she must believe them enjoying the presence
of God face to face and the communion of saints, to this
wretched world, to rap on tables, and push tables, and utter
all sorts of untruths and childish and ridiculous trash.

The folly and wickedness of the Medium and the dupes
are equal.

JoHn E..iorson.


X. London Mesmeric Infirmary.


Tae Annual Meeting of the Mesmeric Infirmary of London
was held at Willis’s Rooms on Friday the 17th of June, at
three o’clock. Baron de Goldsmid had promised to take the
chair: but, not feeling very strong, he wrote the day before
to say that he should attend, but feared his strength was not
equal to the duties of chairman. The Earl Stanhope was


202 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


accordingly written to, and, though be had been at the
trouble of taking the chair last year, he at once assented,
and came to town in the morning expressly from his seat
near Sevenoaks.

The large room down stairs was engaged, as unfortunately
the very large room up stairs had been previously taken for
the meeting, at the same hour, of the Society for the propa-
gation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts. The room was crowded
to excess, and between one and two hundred ladies and gen-
tlemen could not find admission.

The following report of the committee was read by Dr.
Elhotson :—

“Those who know the truth of mesmerism, and are anxi-
ous that its blessings should be spread far and wide, have
greater reason than ever to rejoice. The steady advance
which it has been making for fifteen years in this country, as
a remedial agent, has at length established it among those
facts which no person of common sense and information ven-
tures to say that he doubts. Many still refuse to admit the
possibility of clairvoyance and other phenomena termed the
higher: but the conviction of the reality of its ordinary phe-
nomena and of its utility in medicine is universal, and is
freely confessed by all except those whose peculiar duty is to
employ it hourly and proclaim its powers and importance
boldly to the rest of mankind, and who, till lamentable ex-
perience proved this to be a mistake, were, as a matter of
course, considered the best judges of its truth and value,
The deadly opposition formerly offered to it has subsided into
careful silence, interrupted by only occasional short expres-
sions of vexation which our triumph must be expected to excite
in men not endowed with more than mortal patience or that
moral dignity which makes the relinquishment of error a
satisfaction. The invariable ignoring by medical periodicals
and treatises of the facts laid before the world every quarter,
year after year, is really ludicrous. Not merely is no allu-
sion made to the daily and acknowledged success of mes-
merism in curing, retarding, and assuaging disease; but the
mighty mass of surgical operations painlessly performed in
India by that noble and intrepid man, Dr. Esdaile—many of
them so gigantic as to have rarely been witnessed in this
country, and equally grand with the Himalayha mountains
themselves,—are most amusingly ignored. Upon the 28th of
only last month, a medical practitioner of Salisbury, named
Martin Coates, published a letter in the Lancet upon the ad-
ministration of chloroform, and the following passage occurs
in it :—


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 208


“This discovery was not an accident, but the direct result of
experiment made by Dr. Simpson on himself and his two friends,
Drs. Keith and Mathews Duncan (see Miller’s Principle of Surgery,
p- 757). I know of few more bold and heroic acts than that of
these three gentlemen meeting together to try, by experiments on
themselves, and at the risk of their lives, to discover an effectual
means of rendering surgical operations painless; yet I cannot learn
that one voice has been raised, calling upon either the profession or
the public to express, by some testimonial, their gratitude for this
brilliant and beneficent discovery. We have monuments raised to the
dead; we have testimonials presented to political reformers, nay, even
to the successful speculator; shall it be thought that we surgeons
who, by this discovery are saved from the painful necessity of inflict-
ing acute agony on our fellow-creatures, and that our patients who
have had conferred upon them such an inestimable boon as exem
tion from pain during surgical operations, are alone destitute of
gratitude? I confidently trust not. I firmly believe that were a
subscription opened for the purpose of presenting to Dr. Simpson a
substantial proof of our gratitude, every surgeon who has operated
upon a patient to whom chloroform has been duly administered, and
every living patient so operated upon, would come forward with do-
nations consistent with their means, and that thus a splendid acknow-
ledgment would be made as honourable to those who contribute as to
this benefactor of his race.

‘I shall not presume to attempt a commencement of such a
weighty enterprize, lest from my incapacity and want of influence
the cause might be injured. I throw out the suggestion in the hope
that some eminent member of our profession will take up the matter
and carry it to a successful conclusion.”


“Not a word of allusion to mesmerism, which never
destroys life as chloroform, though a blessing beyond price,
every now and then does under the best management ; some-
times killing on the spot, sometimes causing the patient to
sink gradually as if he were dying of low fever, which in
truth is then usually alleged to the friends to be the cause of
death, in order that the credit of chloroform and of the me-
dical attendants may be saved: and very frequently chloro-
form leaves behind it, for a shorter or longer period, head-
ache, giddiness, confusion, impairment of memory, or even
a degree of mental aberration. Not a word of allusion to
those heroic men who in vain, for years, amidst obloquy and
injury, urged upon their professional brethren the duty of
preventing surgical agony, and not only pointed out a safe
and pleasant method of preventing it in numerous cases, but
set the example and gave the proof by performing hundreds
of operations in the sweet mesmeric sleep, from which pa-
tients awake refreshed and strengthened, and by which they
recover from the violence of the knife better than if they


204 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


have not been mesmerised. Not a word, therefore, of allusion
to Dr. Esdaile, who stood alone in the East, defying all his
medical assailants, till the non-medical public saw that he
was right, and the Government of the country declared that
he was right and rewarded him as he deserved.


“Since the last Annual Meeting we have had 22 new
donors and 44 new annual subscribers. It is a striking cir-
cumstance that many of our donors and annual subscribers
reside in distant parts of the kingdom, setting an example to
the inhabitants of London, the indigent of which are the
only poor who can be benefitted by us, since we do not
receive in-patients and the poor cannot of course come up
from the country and take lodgings in town in order to at-
tend at our Institution. This shews a real heartiness in the
cause and is beyond all praise. Although they can procure
no gratuitous mesmerism for their poor neighbours, they
resolve that the sick poor who live away from them, but near
a source of mesmerism, shall not find that source dry up.
They know likewise, that, in supporting this Institution, they
are advancing the great mesmeric cause all over the earth,
because this Institution is a grand standing fact, and the
phenomena and cures which are going on in it every day, and
are accessible to the inspection of every body, are solid truths
in nature and art, and cannot be overthrown by the most
numerous and deadly foes.

“ We have, within these few weeks, established, with great
success, a new department in the Institution. Mesmerism
may be perfectly costless or very expensive. If a patient
has a friend who is able by constitution, and willing from
kindness, to mesmerise him, it is altogether inexpensive. If
he has not, but pays for its administration, the cost is not
inconsiderable at the end of some weeks or months—half a
guinea a week at least, and a guinea or more if much above
half an hour is occupied in it or the mesmeriser lives at
some distance. Many patients are unable to pay half a
guinea a week, and yet do not feel justified in receiving as a
charity what is intended for the poor. We therefore supply
mesmerism to such persons for five shillings a week; and
find that a very large number will gladly avail themselves of
this advantage. Separate apartments are provided for them.

“ And here we cannot refrain from proudly,—let the word
rather be thankfully,—remarking, that the shocking language
used by the fierce adversaries of mesmerism, in regard to its
immoral tendency and the depravity of mesmerisers and
patients, is shewn by our Institution to be an utter slander.


London Mesme-ic Infirmary. 205


For three years and a half has mesmerism been carried on
regularly with females and children in their apartments, and
with males in theirs, from 10 o’clock in the morning till 4
in the afternoon ; and invariably conducted on the part both
of patients and mesmerisers with the utmost propriety. No
accusation has even been breathed, although our visitors are
very numerous, and come from all parts of the country and
the world. If a shadow of evil had been visible among us,
certain journals would have discovered it and made the most
of it. On the contrary, all the ladies and gentlemen who
visit the house are delighted with what they see, and in fre-
quent instances are moved to make donations or become

subscribers. -


“To the ladies’ committee our obligation is unbounded. / *


They meet weekly as we do; and one or more of their number
looks in every day. Thus most useful suggestions are conti-
nually made to us ; things noticed and arrangements effected for
which gentlemen are ill qualified ; and a propriety, a respecta-
bility, we might almost say a holiness, imparted to the place.
To one of them we are indebted for an incomparable matron,
who, like the secretary and his family, resides in the house ;
and to two of them for the establishment of domestic dona-
tion boxes, into which small sums may be dropped by those
who cannot afford to place their names in the list of donors
or subscribers, and yet are anxious, like the poor widow,
to bestow their mites*—the whole that they can give. These
boxes have not been long in operation, and yet, when called
in before the late audit, furnished a sum important to us.
Many individuals took a box into their houses who were
themselves unable to become subscribers. The ladies who
suggested this plan, so common among religious societies,
supplied all the boxes at their own cost, and took upon them-
selves the whole trouble and expense of distributing them
and then of recalling them for the audit.

“ We beg to return our warmest thanks to them and all
the members of the ladies’ committee, and to those benevolent
friends who placed the donation boxes in their houses, and
to the unseen donors; and we trust that they again, and also
others, will render the same service to the charity.


“The last General Meeting empowered us ‘to make ar-
rangements for taking another house for the purposes of the


* It is a touching fact, exemplifying the well-known charitable feelings of the
poor, that in these boxes were 35 farthings, and £4 17s. 6d. in pence and half-
pence.—Zoist.


206 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


Institution, or for renewing their interest in the late house,
as we should consider expedient.’ We accordingly took a
lease of a spacious and handsome house, situated in the
corner of Fitzroy Square and Grafton Street, No. la, at
the moderate rent of £110 per annum, that had been vacant
for two years, and was to be hired so cheaply on account of
the difficulty of letting so good a house in such a neighbour-
hood. We did not imagine that any inhabitant of the Square
would think of objecting to our presence, since we receive
no in-patients, nor cases of infectious or acute disease ; since
we never can have a crowd at the door, because all the pa-
tients do not attend at one hour, but succeed each other
* every half-hour, entering the moment they arrive and leaving
as soon as their mesmerisation is over, and after all for six
hours only in the twenty-four; since nobody could discover
any difference between our house and the other houses of the
place, or that it was a charitable institution; and since our
door is not in the Square, but some yards down Grafton
Street : above all, we conceived that we should not be objected
to when we beheld the opposite house in the Square, in the
corresponding corner, having a side door and a visible and
open surgery, or doctor’s shop, in the corresponding street,
into which poor people enter at pleasure ali day to procure
a bottle of physic or have their sores dressed, whereas we give
no physic, dress no sores, nor present any visible difference
from the rest of the Square.*

“Some of the higher inhabitants of the Square have
withdrawn all opposition on observing these circumstances,
and on learning, by themselves visiting or from the visits of
their friends, that all within as well as without is simplicity,
order, quiet, and propriety, fit for any lady, old or young, to
witness at all the six hours of attendance. But the majority
are inexorable, notwithstanding that in such squares as St.
James’s Square, Hanover Square, and Cavendish Square, the
residences of the nobility, from barons to dukes, public in-
stitutions are allowed, and club houses, and in one of them
positively shops. The inhabitants of Fitzroy Square resolve
that we shall not be near them; and we are looking for ano-
ther house to prevent the expense of litigation: although,
had we more funds, we could, according to a very high
opinion, resist with little doubt of success. We had hoped


* The proprietor, we hear, is the most active of the opponents to the In-
firmary, though Dr. Elliotson has attended his family and him as a friend when-
ever called upon: and Mr. Capern, the secretary, went a mile and a half times
without number as a friend to mesmerise this gentleman’s father.— Zoist.


London Mesmeric Iufirmary. 207


that an institution not merely in every respect perfectly un-
objectionable, but fraught with blessings to the afflicted,
would have been a source of pleasure and satisfaction to the
inhabitants.


“Since the last Annual Meeting we have treated 298
patients, 41 being still under treatment, so that the amount
of mesmerism performed daily by the three male mesmerisers
and the two female mesmerisers is considerable.

“Thirty-nine have not improved. But it is to be remem-
bered that many patients soon cease to attend, some indeed
after a very few, even after two or three, visits: some dis-
appointed at not being cured of long-standing diseases off
hand at once, as if by magic; some living at too great dis-
tance to attend with regularity.

“ Fifty-seven have been improved: many of them enabled
to return to their work, and therefore unwilling to refrain
longer from getting their livelihood and to continue with us
till their cure is completed.

“Sixty-one have been cured,—many labouring under
rheumatism and neuralgic affections cured in from one to
three visits. Many of the diseases cured were intense and
of long standing, and had been treated in vain at the great
hospitals and dispensaries, and by the most eminent medical
men, metropolitan and provincial.

‘Eleven of these remarkable cures are recorded in the
last number of The Zoist, most of them testified by the pa-
tients themselves. We will consequently do no more than
refer to them: but the Meeting will not object to our relating
a few others with the view of displaying the powers of mes-
merism.

“Thomas Roberts, 64 years of age, living at No. 34,
Mortimer Street, Cavendish Square, found himself rather
deaf about 30 years ago. Sounds were confused, and at
length he had noises in his ears like the ringing of bells,
water falls, and the rolling of carriages, especially at night
when his head was on the pillow. He then entirely lost the
hearing of the right ear, and frequently was attacked by
pain and giddiness. For three months he had unusual pain
in the left ear: matter was discharged from both, and he then
became totally deaf in both and so remained, still constantly
suffering pain and noises. In that state he began to attend
at the Infirmary in February, always accompanied by his wife,
on account of the danger of being run over in crossing the
streets. But in a short time this precaution was no longer
necessary : at the sixth sitting he had less noise in his head,


208 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


and was well enough to leave us on the 6th of June. Though
for 30 years he could not hear with his right ear, even when
a trumpet was applied to it, he now can, and he has resumed
his occupation as a coachman, which for some time he had
been obliged to give up. In the treatment passes were made
down the head over the ears, and these were breathed into.
Mesmerised water was dropped into them, and cotton satu-
rated with mesmerised oil put intothem. Sleep was never
induced ; but composure.

“ Mrs. Workman, of No. 51, Upper Marsh, Lambeth, six
years ago had an ulcerated sore throat, followed by deafness,
chiefly of the right ear, and constant noises. She was treated
without any advantage by Mr. Curtis, by a practitioner in
Tottenham Court Road, by Mr. Francis, by Baron Macken-
zie, and at length was more deaf than ever. Her hearing
was presumed by her friends and herself to be unlikely ever
to return. She had been deluged with medicines. The late
Lord Ducie sent her to us. She was able to attend with less
regularity than was desirable ; yet when she left us she con-
sidered herself cured. Such was her susceptibility that she
could be sent to sleep in half a minute. Breathing into her
ear through a tube seemed to do her great good. Passes over
her head always occasioned a profuse perspiration. When
she first came she could not hear a vehicle going along the
street, but when she left us she could join in conversation.

“Mary Wyatt, No. 14, King’s Mews, Gray’s-Inn Lane,
had suffered agonizing tic douloureux for seven years. The
pain, she said, was maddening, and searcely left her day or
night. She had been under Dr. Budd and Mr. Huxtable of
Barnstaple, Mr. Thomas Lane, Mr. Joice, and Dr. Newbold,
with but short relief. She had taken arsenic, quinine, bella-
donna, and carbonate of iron. External applications never
relieved her. The paroxysms which we witnessed were hor-
rible. She began mesmerism on the 18th of August, and
left us cured in the latter part of January. Sleep was never
induced. Passes without contact were always made over the
affected part. She called at the Infirmary last month to say
that she had experienced no relapse.

“The following was another case of nervous affection,
but of a different form,—one of the most dreadful instances
of distraction that we ever witnessed. We will give it in the
patient’s own words.

“ William Estlob, 41 years of age, a tailor, was admitted
on the Ist of last December. For the previous six years,
thoughts, having no relation to his occupation, were inces-
santly in his mind. They long.were of a pleasant and bene-


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 209
volent character, but for the last few months, he having
become debilitated, they changed, and he grew incensed with
his most intimate friends, although he did not betray his
feelings. He now had intense head-aches, lasting frequently
for two days together, and he obtained ease only by wrapping
his head in wet cloths or immersing it in cold water. The
head-aches always left him greatly exhausted, and in a state
of irritability approaching to madness. His strength was
impaired, and for the last four years an eruption had dis-
figured his face unrelieved by any measures which Mr. Erasmus
Wilson prescribed. On the day of his admission this erup-
tion was very considerable, and his despair and distraction
came on in paroxysms which were absolutely horrifying. On
the third day of his attendance—a Saturday—a very severe
head-ache had begun and prevented him from going to his
work : but, after he was mesmerised at the Infirmary at two
o’clock, it was completely subdued, and he was able to go to
his work and continue without leaving off till eleven o’clock
at night. He attended daily for three weeks and more or
less for ten weeks; forty-three times altogether; and sleep
was never induced. His cure was complete, and he remains
a healthy and happy man to this hour. Previously to leaving
us he presented himself before the committee with expres-
sions of the warmest gratitude; as patients, we rejoice to
say, do every week. No fresh eruption had taken place in
his face since mesmerism was begun, although before that
time it was coming out every day.

“ And this leads us to trouble the Meeting with an account
of the cure of another case of very severe cutaneous disease.

“ Henry Thomas Brown, a cabinet maker, living at No.
55, Hatfield Street, had been suffering from the skin disease
called psoriasis for eight years. The soreness was at times
such as to prevent him from working. His hands were swollen
and the palms very much cracked. He had been under dif-
ferent surgeons and at the Institution for Diseases of the Skin
in Earl Street,* without any benefit, and become very nervous,
in consequence, he believed, of taking powerful medicines,
though he always had been rather of a nervous habit. He
was incapacitated from many kinds of his labour, and could
perform none without gloves. He began to be mesmerised


* We have learnt that a certain skin-doctor in connection with this charity,
whose wife has consulted Dr. Elliotson, as a friend, and been mesmerised, did,
on hearing from a gentleman that he had brought up his son with diseased lungs
from the country at the desire of two medical men to consult Dr. Elliotson, at-
tempt to dissuade the gentleman from consulting Dr. Elliotson, saying, ‘‘ He
will not do; he’s a mesmeriser.” —Zoist.


London Mesmeric Infirmary.


on the 3rd of February, and on the 19th of April he was
cured and ceased to attend. He called upon us on the 23rd
of May to say that his cutaneous disease still remained cured.

“To give another proof that the sanative power of mes-
merism is by no means limited to functional and nervous affec-
tions, we may briefly mention the cure of a considerable
ovarian enlargement of the body.

“Mrs. Sarah Powell, living at No. 92, Regent Street,
Vauxhall-bridge Road, was admitted on the 14th of January,
1852, with an ovarian tumor, pronounced to be such by the
medical members of the committee and by her former me-
dical attendants. It had commenced in 1850, and she, mistak-
ing its nature, engaged an accoucheur in the October of that
year. As it continued to increase, she became a patient at
the Homeopathic Institution under Mr. Dudgeon: but it
still enlarged. We mesmerised her daily, and she decreased
fifteen inches in circumference in eight months: and now,
after visiting us for a year and a half, considers herself cured.
She was inspected by Dr. Symes at the meeting of the com-
mittee last week.

“We never aim at what are termed the phenomena of
mesmerism, and carefully avoid all circumstances which are
calculated to excite the imagination. Following the sound
advice given by Mr. Monckton Milnes at our first general
meeting in 1850, we never permit or encourage anything like
an exhibition of the wonders of mesmerism. But phenomena
sometimes present themselves spontaneously, and the follow-
ing case exhibits a most satisfactory cure and that not un-
common variety of clairvoyance consisting of an intuitive
impression in the patient as to the course of the disease.

“ A young woman, named Mary Ann Mallows, and living
at No. 13, Aldenham Terrace, Old St. Pancras Road, applied
on the 19th of last January on account of epileptic fits.
From her childhood she had suffered greatly in her head and
stomach. Two years before her application to us, she had
severe pain in the lower part of her back for a month, and
then while washing had an epileptic fit which lasted for three
hours. In six months she had a second, more violent. In
three months a third; and from that period two, three, or
four every week. Before coming to us, she was mesmerised
by Mr. Barth. The first mesmerisation at the Infirmary
produced mesmeric coma. On the sixth this changed to
sleep-waking, and she talked. She predicted by an intuitive
feeling that her next fit would happen on the following even-
ing at six o’clock. Her prediction was fulfilled. The next
day she predicted in her sleep-waking that she should have


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 211


four more attacks, naming the day and hour of the first ; and
she named the day and hour of each in her sleep-waking after
the fit previously predicted had taken place. All her pre-
dictions were fulfilled. When prognosticating the last fit,
she said it would be very violent. It occurred on the 23rd of
March at the very hour she had foretold, and its violence
was awful, requiring four persons during the greater part of
the time to prevent her from injuring herself. Immediately
after it was over, she was mesmerised into sleep-waking, and
declared she should never have another fit. Nor has she.
Her mother called at the Infirmary this present month and
said that she had suffered no attack since the 22nd of March.

“ Besides treating diseases, our secretary gives instruc-
tions to all who wish to learn the method of mesmerising
their friends: and persons, satisfactorily recommended, are
allowed to attend and mesmerise under the direction and
supervision of the secretary or matron.


“The accounts have been very kindly and carefully
audited by Mr. W. Watkiss Lloyd and Mr. George S. Not-
tage (their statement will be found at p. 214).

“We are satisfied that not a sixpence is expended unne-
cessarily.


“The Meeting is no doubt apprised of the death of our
excellent president, the Earl of Ducie. He was very active
in the foundation of the Society: allowed all the original
meetings to take place at his house in Belgrave Square, and,
as well as his brother-in-law, Mr. Langston, member for the
City of Oxford, and the Baron de Goldsmid and Palmeira,
presented us at the very commencement of our attempt with
a hundred pounds. We are anxious to recommend as his
successor the Archbishop of Dublin—a very remarkable man
—great in every particular, intellectual and moral—a model
to clergymen and legislators—an ardent, open, and unre-
served: friend to mesmerism, and whose wife, as all English
mesmerists are aware, effected one of the most splendid cures
in the whole history of medicine—the cure of a blindness
which had existed for six and twenty years. The case is de-
tailed in the Twenty-fifth Number of The Zoist.”


It was then moved by Professor De Morean, of Uni-
versity College, London, and seconded by Mr. H. U. Janson,
of Exeter,—That the report be received and adopted.

By the Rev. Georce Sanpsy, and seconded by Mr.


212 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


Asnurst Masenpiz,—That His Grace the Archbishop of
Dublin be elected President of the Institution.


By Mr. Gzorce Morrat, M.P, and seconded by Captain
the Hon. W. F. Scartett,—That Dr. Gregory, Professor of
Chemistry in the University of Edinburgh, be elected a Vice-
President of the Institution.


By Mr. Monckton Mines, M.P., and seconded by Mr.
Corry Grarran,—That Mr. Goff and Mr. Kiste be elected
members of the Committee in the room of Mr. Briggs and
Mr. Wilberforce ; the former gentleman resigning from in-
creasing infirmities, after most efficient support to the charity
from its commencement, and Mr. Wilberforce not having yet
been able to attend; and that Captain the Hon. W. F.
Scarlett and Dr. Symes, who go out by rotation, be reélected.


By Mr. Frepericx Movat,* surgeon to the 9th regi-
ment of Iufantry, and seconded by Mr. G. S. Nottage,—
That the cordial thanks of the Meeting be given to the Ladies’
Committee for their constant and important services, and
that the Lady Mary Bentinck,t the Dowager Lady Moles-
worth, Mrs. Whateley—the wife of the Archbishop of Dublin,
Mrs. Sandby, and Miss Goldsmid, who have kindly consented
to join the Ladies’ Committee, be added to Mrs. De Morgan,
Mrs. Symes, Mrs. Herring, Miss Brine, Miss Emma Brine,
Miss Wallace, and Miss Swanneck.


By Colonel Bacnoxp, and seconded by Lieut.-Colonel
Tornam, of Her Majesty’s Body Guard,—That the Com-
mittee be empowered to make what arrangements they think
fit in regard to the house of the Institution.


All these resolutions were carried unanimously : and then,
on the motion of Dr. Symes, a vote of thanks to Earl
Stanhope for his kindness in coming up to London to take
the chair, and his conduct in it.

Before this was carried, Mr. Jefferys and Capt. Hudson
of Liverpool addressed the Meeting most energetically upon


* This gentleman bore his testimony to the truth of all the phenomena of the
Okeys, whom he had attentively watched during the whole of their residence in
University College Hospital. He considered it the height of absurdity to enter-
tain a doubt upon the subject, and declared that from that time, now fifteen years
ago, he had been a firm advocate of mesmerism. See this gentleman’s remarks
in a late No.—Zoist.


+ To the Lady Mary Bentinck England is indebted for the first great painless


surgical operation—the amputation of a leg in the mesmeric trance, and the
report of which created such a hurricane in the Medical and Chirurgical Society.
ist. .


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 213


the mighty remedial powers of mesmerism, as manifested in
their own experience, urging upon all to employ it and advo-
cate its employment in the treatment of disease. Captain
Hudson is the great missionary of mesmerism in the North
of England, and by his cures and his lectures beats hosts of
our opponents, and gathers supporters from all classes, espe-
cially among the clergy, and not a few from the medical
profession. He has given 110 lectures in the present year in
some of the principal towns of Lancashire. Last Tuesday
evening he finished a course of 42 lectures in Ashton and
Staleybridge. One man who had lost the use of both his
arms for two years, lifted them up in the presence of the
audience, and thanked God that he had got the use of them
again by mesmerism ; another person, who had been afflicted
with fits for nine years, was put into the mesmeric trance
four months ago, and had not had a fit during that time; a
boy, who could not utter his own name (from impediment in
his speech) before he was mesmerised, can now speak plain :
several others who were present had received benefit during
his stayin the towns, On one occasion he met with a young
female who was walking home lame and in much pain. After
speaking to her about the cause of all this, he paid her a visit
at her mother’s house ; and found her mother about 70 years
of age, who understood nothing about mesmerism. They
allowed him to try to do her good. He presently put her to
sleep. Her mother thought she had fainted. But he began
to sing a hymn, and the girl sang too. This alarmed the
mother. He made the girl’s leg quite straight, and got her
to walk well in her sleep, to his own utter astonishment. At
Preston, Lancashire, he operated on four persons: in the
mesmeric state three of them heard him speak, although the
whole four were born deaf and dumb, and one spoke twice.
The good cause, he added, is spreading rapidly in nearly all
the principal towns of Lancashire, among rich and poor.


VOL. XI.


ow

~~

=

5

©

S

q
>
~

:

s

RMR


Il 6 90¢


‘JOVLLON *§ ZDU0aH L Le
‘ssonpny J ‘QAOTT SSINLV AY NVITTIAY


sitig senbeyoxy oarg


‘Teese s MUVET MOTE 48 soUNTEg OF, “CT oune


“eSsl


G €l SI8F €l SisF


Th ee
8 2 ¢
oro It


Aud uoIUs) 38 soURTEg
aanjusn,y
¥e "see** gswary uo sosuadxgy Mery

* RY | = ‘Suyung ‘Aaau0neg > }
‘a —e ' ane
rm = ‘Bani ‘jeaouley jo sosuedxy cot ots

ce eeee ema, pm soney

** **s198OMIsOyy pus dane jo souvpeg Ag ‘c] oune OL Z F6E
“essl eo ae


*** sroyueg 10g
* sifiq senboyoxg up
—: 4sa19jU]


***** squaeg euros jo syusueg
*** a9 s,oumneg “rp sed syuaqy


steeceeece es greaghin Jo ofeg
cose cces sees saxo sod ONG


te eeees suoreuOg


‘s+ sss -snomduosqng jenuuy oy “c[ ounr


“eSsi


“***yUBg UOTUy) Je sOUNTeG OF “{[][ euns
“SSSI


‘hinusyfuy Nsausapy Uuopuory ay} yj JuNoIID Ut LaMNSDALT, AY. Ig


( 215 )


XI. The omission of important Facts from an American
Document.


We have perused the Report of the Select Committee ap-
pointed by the United States Government, “to which were
referred the various memorials in regard to the discovery of
the means by which the human body is rendered uniformly
and safely insensible to pain under surgical operations.”

The first line in the Report is, “That in the opinion of
the Committee such a discovery has been made.” Seven
years after the announcement of the discovery, and when
the whole civilized world has appropriated it, a committee of
American statesmen gravely assert that in their opinion such
a discovery has been made! They are equally clear that one
of three citizens of the United States is entitled to the credit
and honour of the discovery, but the Committee is not una-
nimous, and therefore the Committee is of opinion “ that
this point should not be settled by Congress without a judi-
cial inquiry.” We shall see presently that there are other
points concerning which there seems to be great unanimity
of opinion. The object of the Committee was to decide who
discovered the method of producing anesthesia by means of
ether, so that Congress might bestow a reward of 100,000
dollars. We find in the first page—the Report consists of
only two pages—the following statement, and we are com-
pelled to remark that we did expect even an American state
document would contain some recognition of the truth :—


** The means of safely producing insensibility to pain in surgical
and kindred operations have been the great desideratum in the cura-
tive art from the earliest period of medical science, and have been
zealously sought for during a period.of more than a thousand years.
At various periods, and in various ages, hope has been excited in
the human breast that this great agent had been found ; but all
proved delusive, and hope as often died away, until the discovery
now under consideration burst upon the world from our own country
and in our own day. Then, and not till then, was the time-cherished
hope realized that the knife would lose its sting, and that blood
might follow its edge without pain.”


We know that the great majority of the members of the
medical profession are very ignorant of the practice of mes-
merism, and that a large number have never heard, or, if
they have heard, do not believe, that surgical operations have
been performed without pain in the mesmeric state. Only a
few days ago we met with an instance of a medical man who
had never heard that an operation had been performed with-
out pain under mesmeric influence. His journal had not


216 American injustice.


chronicled the fact, and he, not being a reading man and not
gleaning his information from a variety of sources, naturally
concluded that his journal would have informed him of such
an important event. Alas! on such érivial matters English
medical journals and American state documents are equally
silent. It is not in these repositories that we are to look for
information, or even a chronicle of the most important facts
bearing on the subject under discussion.

It is most extraordinary that the authors of a Report
presented to the Senate of the United States should not even
mention the fact that, rour years previous to the experi-
ments with ether, eight legs had been amputated and other
surgical operations performed under the mesmeric influence,
and that it was these important facts, and the difficulty which
has almost always been experienced in inducing mesmeric
anzsthesia, which directed the attention of American phy-
sicians to the discovery of some other means by which to
accomplish the required end. So decidedly is this the fact,
that we find, on perusing the remarks appended to this Report,
an American physician in 1845 actually adding to the mes-
meric process the influence of nitrous oxide gas. It is cha-
racteristic of the “go-a-head” and “annexation” system so
prevalent amongst our brethren on the other side of the
Atlantic, to claim for themselves, and if possible to take
possession of, all credit for this great improvement in modern
surgery. But we shall not permit such departure from truth
to pass unnoticed. What says the Report?—“ All proved
delusive, and hope as often died away, until the discovery
now under consideration burst upon the world from our own
country and in our own day.” Surely it is the duty of gen-
tlemen appointed to investigate and report upon a subject to
give facts. What then are the facts? Let us give a short
resumé of the operations performed in the mesmeric sleep
previous to the discovery that ether would produce the re-
quired anzesthesia.


In 1829. Madame Plantin had her breast removed by
M. Cloquet.

In 1837. There were several teeth extracted in Providence,
America, by Mr. Estin.

In 1838. Elizabeth Okey had a seton inserted in her neck
at the University College Hospital, under the care of
Dr. Elliotson.

In August, 1842. The tendons at the back of the knee-
joint were divided by Dr. Engledue.


American injustice. 217


In October, 1842. The leg of James Wombell was amputated
by Mr. Ward, at Wellow, Nottingham.

In 1844. The finger of John Marrion, by Mr. Dunn, of
Wolverhampton.

In August, 1844. The leg of Mary Ann Lakin, by Mr.
Tosswill, at Leicester.

In November, 1844. The leg of Elizabeth ——, by Mr.
Paget, at Leicester.

In May, 1845. The arm of Mrs. Northway, at Torquay, by
Mr. Jolly.

In June, 1845. The leg of Thomas Dysart, by Dr. Fenton,
at Alyth, Perthshire.

In October, 1845. The leg of Mdlle. D’Albanet, at Cher-
bourg, France.

In August, 1846. The leg of John Pepperal, at Bridgwater,
by Mr. King.


IN AMERICA.


In July, 1843. Removal of polypus from nose, at Boston,
U.S., by Dr. Wheelock.

In May, 1844. Removal of tumor, by Professor Ackley, at
the Cleveland Medical College, America.

In January, 1845. Removal of tumor at New York, by
Dr. Bodinier.

In January, 1845. Removal of breast from Mrs. Clarke, by
Dr. Ducas, Professor, &c., Georgia, U.S.

In 1845. Removal of cancer from breast, by Dr. Ducas,
Professor, &c., Georgia, U.S.

In March, 1846. Removal of tumor at Bermuda, by Dr.
Cotes.


In May, 1846. Removal of large tumor at New York, by
Dr. Bostwick.


So that, to cast aside all minor operations, we have a list
of eight amputations performed in England in the mesmeric
sleep—a list of four tumors removed in America—two breasts
removed in America, and one polypus from the nose in
America. Some of the latter operations were performed at
medical colleges and by professors of surgery at the said col-
leges. And let it be carefully noted, that all this was accom-
plished previous to the discovery that the inhalation of ether
would produce anesthesia. This discovery was made in 1846.
We ask what stimulated men to look for some other means
to produce insensibility to pain, if the faets just related did
not? What truth is there, then, in such language as this?
“ But all proved delusive, and hope as often died away, until


218 American injustice.


the discovery now under consideration burst upon the world
from our own country and in our own day.”

All efforts to produce safe anzsthesia failed till mesmeric
investigators proved that this great desideratum could be ob-
tained by mesmeric influence. The fact, that most frequently
considerable time was required and that very often the insen-
sibility to pain could not be produced, directed the attention
of some medical men in America to the inhalation of nitrous
oxide gas and ether. The inhalation of ether has been super-
seded by the inhalation of chloroform. In India Dr. Esdaile
used neither the one nor the other, but he produced insen-
sibility in the natives by means of mesmerism. And we pre-
dict that in Europe and America chloroform and ether will
be superseded by mesmerism in the great majority of surgical
cases, when we have discovered some method of producing
the required insensibility in European organisms with as great
rapidity as Dr. Esdaile and his assistants did in the natives of
India. We do not despair. We believe this will be accom-
plished, and we shall then supersede the use of a drug, which
is frequently hurtful and sometimes fatal, by a health-restoring,
anzsthetic power inherent in man, always at hand and never
injurious. Let us chronicle this prophecy. July lst, 1853.

But if we were astonished at the language of the Report,
we were still more so when we read the following paragraph.
To the Report the Chairman has appended a brief historical
retrospect of the means which have been used at various
times for the purpose of producing either complete or partial
anesthesia. In this historical department the author seems
to have taken the pamphlet published by Dr. Simpson, of
Edinburgh, some years ago, as his text-book. Dr. Simpson,
our readers will remember, published a pamphlet on anes-
thesia, and ignored mesmerism altogether. This was not
from ignorance, because he had been engaged for a long
time in the investigation of mesmeric phenomena, and was
accustomed to invite his medical brethren to his house to
witness his experiments. The pamphlet was published to
illustrate the importance of chloroform, and of course did
not appear till the operations we have chronicled had been
performed. He professed to furnish an account of all known
attempts to produce anzsthesia,—why he failed to include
mesmerism, and the list of important surgical operations, we
must leave him as an honest man to tell his professional bre-
thren at some future day.


“There is no doubt whatever that in slight operations, such as
those of dentistry, that the mentally prepared patient, who has a
right understanding with the operator, can by the force of imagina-


Books received. 219


tion and a strong effort of the will greatly modify the proper phy-
sical effect of an agent such as this (nitrous oxide). Hence the
undoubted success in many cases of mesmerism when used alone in
surgical operations.”


Really this is quite worthy of the magnates who pretended
to discuss the subject at the Medico-Chirurgical Society some
years ago. Slight operations indeed! Under the influence
of mesmeric sleep operations have been performed which no
European or American surgeon has yet attempted with suc-
cess. Dr. Esdaile unquestionably stands forth as the only
surgeon who has performed such a number of extraordinary
surgical operations as cast into the shade all his compeers.
The “right understanding” the poor Hindoos had with Dr.
Esdaile consisted in their witnessing those who had been
afflicted with enormous tumors which rendered their lives a
burthen come forth from the hospital relieved from them,
and by a process which they could not comprehend. They
knew the simple fact that they did not suffer, for they knew
not when the operation was performed. These operations
consisted of some of the most appalling in the annals of sur-
gery, and we speak practically when we say, that we do not
believe a similar result will be obtained, as regards the ab-
sence of fatal cases, by the inhalation of ether or chloroform.
The one is a health-restoring power, the other is a drug—one
enables the nervous system to sustain great shocks without
leaving any injurious consequences, the other produces a
state of profound stupor, requiring great care during its ex-
hibition, and even, with the greatest care, frequently fatal.
The rapid production of mesmeric anesthesia is the great
desideratum of the day, and we believe, that we are not far
from reaching the goal to which all benevolent men have so
long anxiously directed their attention.


BOOKS RECEIVED.


Practical Instructions in Table Moving, with Physical Demonstrations. By a
Puysician. Witha plate. Bailliére, London, 1853.
We turned to this little pamphlet with interest, in the expectation of receiving
some information upon the subject of which it treats: but great was our surprise
upon discovering that it is almost, word for word, a translation from Dr. Felix
Roubaud’s French work, to which Mr. Sandby’s letter has directed our attention.
Of course the arguments and the facts are not weakened by the process of being
transferred into another tongue: yet we think it would have been a more be-
coming, if not a more honest act, on the part of the translator, if he had openly
avowed his obligations to Dr. Roubaud. But the name of this latter gentleman


220 Books received.


is studiously avoided in every page: not a hint is given, either in the Preface or
in the body of the work, that it is not an original treatise, and that that, which
we cannot help regarding as a fraud, has been passed off upon the publisher and
upon the public. Even the plate is a servile copy of that which appears in the
original work, except that French faces are made to look more like English ones.
The few original observations that are introduced, to give a colour as it were to
its authenticity,—for instance, allusion to Dr. Ashburner’s translation of Rei-
chenbach (published, be it remembered, by Mr. Bailliére), only add to the decep-
tion. One line would have been sufficient to represent the real state of the case ;
and its omission on the part of the translator is a proceeding so disingenuous that
we have felt it to be our duty to make the transaction public.


A Review of the Spiritual Manifestations. Read before the Congregational Asso-
ciation of New York and Brockley, of the first Congregational Church,
Newark, New Jersey. By Cuaries Bercuer, Pastor. London, 1853.


This little book was read before the Congregational Association of New York,
and published in accordance with the usages of the Society. It contains a com-
pendium of almost every opinion that has been uttered or printed in regard to
the origin, nature, character and claims of these very marvellous developments.
The spiritual or materialistic character of the rappings,—we ought to say, their
pneumatic or apneumatic character—is given, with the arguments and opinions
that have been offered in favour of each hypothesis : Scripture is quoted at length ;
to say nothing of Pagan and Deistical writers. The author, at any rate, must
have read much on the subject, and has certainly compressed his various readings
into a short compass: but what his own opinions are, it might be difficult to
guess. He finds great virtue in “ Jf.’ Jf the “ Pneumatic movement” be an
error, it is, he says, ‘‘an honest error,’’ (we are not quite so certain of this on
all occasions,) if it be a delusion, it is a strong delusion: and if it be true—
why that is a point ‘“‘ which time will shew, and upon which every man must
judge for himself.” In plain words, though this little treatise may exhibit the
results of considerable study, there is not one single sentence in it upon which
it is necessary to waste the time of our readers.


Midsummer Morning’s Dream. By Mr. F. Starr, of Norwich.


The author has made it a somewhat delicate task for us to give an opinion upon
this book, inasmuch as he tells us in his preface, that time can alone discover
whether his readers will regard the stirring incidents contained therein as ‘‘ LUNACY
Or REVELATION.’ This, it will be admitted, is a startling alternative to begin
with, and certainly narrows the field of critical examination. Why the author
sent a copy to The Zoist we are at a loss to discover; for, assuredly, its subject-
matter does not fall much within our province. If we rightly understand this
“ Midsummer Morning’s Dream,” it purports to be another revelation; and,
verily, revelations of late have been as ‘“‘ plentiful as blackberries.” We have
had the revelations of Swedenborg, the revelations of Mormonism, the revela-
tions of Cahagnet’s lucid damsels, the revelations of the two American girls,
the recent revelations in Queen Anne Street, by which Mr. Owen and other
learned pundits have been converted from Atheism to Deism; and here we have
before us the revelations of Mr. F. Starr, of Norwich; and whether these latter
ones proceed “‘ from the finger of God, or the hand of man,” is the point which
we are especially required to consider.

Mr. Starr writes occasionally with spirit, and is probably an amusing fellow-
traveller. It would seem that he is a commercial gentleman; and that his em-
ployee’s business carried him to Paris in 1850. Of this trip he gives us sundry
incidents, as well as the history of some odd adventures that befel him in London
and its environs on his way back. Among other places that he visited was the
park at Greenwich ; there, overcome with fatigue, he fell asleep, and ‘‘ dreamed
adream.”” This dream, it would appear, lasted siz weeks; at least, so we un-
derstand it: and the communications which were received during its prolongation
form the staple of the revelations.


Books received. 221


There is a melancholy clue to the whole book: at p. 6 we learn, that Mr. S.
had been sometime back ‘“‘ released from a lunatic asylum,’”’ and though there is
‘*much method”’ in what he tells us, and though in many respects he does not
write unpleasantly, but rather with talent, still we fear that the explanation of
the dream is too obvious to need discussion.

But we cannot avoid taking the opportunity of making one remark. It would
appear, that this unfortunate gentleman was at one period under the care of an
eminent practitioner in the City of Norwich, who is notorious for the abuse with
which he everywhere bespatters mesmerisers and mesmerism. Norwich, it is well
known, has greatly fallen from the high position which it once occupied in the
medico-chirurgical world : inferior men are now the leading members of the profes-
sion in that place; but, as we have been informed, if there be a superior man
among them, it is the gentleman under whose care Mr. Starr was placed. Ad-
mirable as an operator, correct in his diagnosis, and judicious in his treatment, of
disease, Mr. has the confidence of a large body of patients; but he has
committed himself egregiously on the subject of mesmerism, and acted in a
manner unworthy of his ability. Mesmerism, which he thus vituperates, he
has probably never studied: but if he had studied it carefully, and if especially he
had seen its salutary effects in cerebral disorders, and moreover if he had himself
tested its powers with certain of his own patients, this unfortunate author, whose
work is before us, would in all probability have quitted his house of reception
with his brain in a far healthier condition, and we ourselves should have been
spared the pain of passing an opinion upon so strange a work as a “ Midsummer
Morning’s Dream.


Mesmerism solved, Divested of mystery, and shewn to be simply an overlooked
branch of Medical Science, to be received and practised as an auxiliary by
the Medical Professors and Heads of Families for curative purposes. Jones.
London, 1853.


What is Mesmerism? The question answered by a Mesmeric Practitioner ; or,
Mesmerism not a Miracle. An Attempt to shew that Mesmeric Phenomena
and Mesmeric Cures are not supernatural. To which is appended useful
remarks and hints for Sufferers who are trying Mesmerism for a cure. By
George Barth. London, 1853.


Spirit ; or the Hebrew terms Ruach and Neshamah, and the Greek term Pneuma.
By William Glen Moncrieff. Edinburgh and London.
Many dreamers would be enlightened by the study of this work; and we
strongly recommend the purchase of it.


Observations on the Nature and Treatment of the Asiatic Cholera. By William
Stevens, M.D.. D.C.L., Oxon. London, 1853.


Notes and Narratives of a Six Years’ Mission among the Dens of London. By
R. W. Vanderkiste, late London Missionary. Third Edition. London, 1853.


Observations on the treatment of Stricture of the Urethra, by an improved
Instrument, with some remarks on Mesmerism. By John Battishill Parker,
M.R.C.S.L. Exeter, 1853.

The world may here learn that, however conscientiously Mr. Parker has given
his patients the benefit of mesmerism, he has not neglected the cultivation of
other medical improvements. Probably his general industry has been increased
by the intellectual habits to which mesmerism leads.


The Christian Examiner and Bible Advocate. No. V1. 1853.


The Exposition of Life and Immortality. Edinburgh. April, 1853.
VOL. XI. R


222 Notices to Correspondents, &c.


El Heraldo Medico.


Madrid, June 2nd, 1853.


The Ladies’ Own Journal and Miscellany for May 28th, 1853.
We are as much disgusted as Mr. Gray can be.


Table Moving ; its Causes and Phenomena: with Directions how to Experiment.
Wesley, London, 1853.

This little work, which is having a most extensive run, contains many interest-
ing details of the subject on which it treats, embracing the best authenticated
accounts of experiments already performed, with engraved illustrations of four
or five different modes of operating.


Spirit Rappings. By One who has tried the Spirits. Ninth Edition.
This deserves to be read by all.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


The “ Leader” and Dr. Ashburner.—QuipnuNc is informed that although
the Leader speaks of Dr. Ashburner’s known connection with The Zoist,” this is
entirely a mistake. That gentleman never was in any way connected with The
Zoist. He communicated a few articles with his name: but that is all. It would
be as correct to speak of his known connection with the Leader.

Mr. Janson is sincerely thanked for his great kindness in advertizing our last
number twice in the Western Times: in which he has also advertized a list of the
benefactors to the London Mesmeric Infirmary, occupying nearly two.columns
and a half,

We have received the communications of Mr. James Mouat and Mr. Chase,
and they will appear in our next. We have received also Mr. A. K.’s verses, an
article 7 S. K., , A.M., M.R.I.A., and M.R.S., and one from Non-Wist.


‘LONDON MESMERIC INFIRMARY,
No. la, FITZROY SQUARE.


NEW DONORS SINCE MARCH.


£8. d.
Brine, Misses, by the. . 816 0
Hill, Mrs., Hanover Square .. 05 0
Law, the Hon. and Rev. Edmund, D. D., Chaplain t ‘to the ‘British
Embassy, St. Petersburg on 10 0 0
Maclin, J., Esq., Surrey Square, Ola Kent Road. eo eee 010 0
Pearson, the Misses, 22 A saath Baker Street . erry 5 0 0
Stirling, W., Esq., Glasgow .. ‘ 10 0 0
NEW SUBSCRIBERS SINCE MARCH.
B., T. L., per Mr. Capern .. Wenatenas apnaavee: “a a
Barrett, Rev. R., King’s College, Cambridge enue : &.2. 6
Bonflower, Rev. Mr., Exeter paeens 1 3-9
Baikie, Dr., 11, Inverness Road, Bay swater .. oe ad te es
Coles, Mrs. J., Beulah Spa, Norwood . ise eheee’. Se. w
Ellison, C. J., Esq., 24, Old Square, Lincoln’ ion Fields TO ae: Te
Goldsmid, Miss, St. John’s Lodge, Regent’s Park . ey ee
Goldsmid, Miss C., St. John’s Lodge, Regent's Park ae Pe
Hockley, W., Esq., 11, Coleman Street, City as ais 110
Mason, Miss, Harmony Hall, Wilnthorpe, W ectmenciana.. ae a ee
Simpson, Mrs., 21, Gloster Place, Portman Square .............. 1 1 90
Spicer, H., Esq. -» 100, Mount Street, Grosvenor ae dwt deus ae
Talbot, G., Esq., Honeybrook, Kidderminster ..... ,& ©
Townsend, 'B., Esq., 5, Kidbrook Terrace, Blackheath . 1 0 0

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. XLIII.


OCTOBER, 1853.


I. Remarkable Cures: three of agonizing Head-aches, two
of Neuralgia of the Stomach, and one of Insanity : with
phenomena in two cases. By a Doctor of Divinity of
the University of Oxford. Communicated by Dr.
Elliotson.


“The GREAT MEN of the day do not consider the truth of mesmerism esta-
blished, but that the phenomena are owing to impressions made upon nervous and
susceptible individuals.’’—The Editor of the Mepicat Times, June 11, 1853;
p. 617.*


Tue gentleman who has favoured me with the following re-
markable cures has written in a manner which shews that he
is not desirous of publishing his name. In taking the liberty
of printing a private letter to myself which accompanied
them, I shall therefore suppress his name: but may not do
wrong in mentioning that his grandfather and uncle were
created, the one a spiritual, the other a temporal, peer,
through their intellectual distinction only.
Joun ELLiotson.


, July 5 | 17, 1853.

My dear Sir,—I take the opportunity of my son-in-law,
Mr. , starting to England per steamer to-morrow,
to send you a few cases culled from my journal, that will
be in good time for The Zoist of October.

The pervading power of mesmerism is most wonderful.
Only a few months ago a poor patient was almost in extremis,
had fearful fits, constipation, cough, and a tumor in the sig-
moid flexure of the colon, so tender that to touch it would
bring on a fit immediately. Dr. R——, who saw her in one


* Mr. Spencer Wells ; house-surgeon to the late Lord Ducie.—Zoist.
VOL, XI. 8


224 Great relief in an incurable case.


of these fits, said that nothing could do her any good but
mesmerism.

I accordingly commenced : the cough ceased, the action
of the bowels became regular, the tumor disappeared and
she could bear to have it rubbed, the fits she had no more
of ; when they were commencing—limbs stiff and head turn-
ing back—one hand on the top of the head, and another on
the epigastrium, completely subdued them, the limbs re-
laxed, and she sank into a tranquil sleep.

All that I could do was to render her last few weeks quiet
and free from pain, and she went off so tranquilly that her
friends were taken by surprise.

I attended the autopsy—a mass of disease, enlarged liver,
heart shrunk, the colon (sunk into the pelvis) exhibited
ulcers, most of which had evidently been only recently healed ;
i. e., since the time that I began. Could I fully describe the
case to you, you would think it (as Dr. R. decidedly did) a
wonderful triumph of mesmerism, and what nothing else
could have effected. But, when all the stamina were gone,
with nothing to work upon, recovery was of course hopeless.

I have only undertaken cases when particularly requested
to do so, and have rarely failed, and always produced an
amelioration where a perfect cure was not to be expected.

I may yet have a few more, but not perhaps many ; for
though I am (thank God) hale and hearty, I am fast ap-
proaching the climacteric of 63, which Cicero speaks of in
one of his epistles. When I can work no more, I must then
say with our old friend Entellus—


” victor cestus artemque repono.”


Believe me to remain, with much esteem, my dear Sir,
Yours very sincerely,


Dr. Elliotson, F.R.S, &c., &c.,
37, Conduit Street, London.


The following selection of cases was communicated to
Dr. Elliotson by an English clergyman, D.D. of Oxford, who
has resided abroad for many years past. He was once a
derider, but has long since become from conviction a firm
believer in the sacred truths of mesmerism, which he con-
siders as eminently calculated, by the Divine Blessing, to
promote the glory of God, by soothing, alleviating, and re-
moving the pains and sufferings of so many of our fellow-
creatures. That this noble cause may still more widely
triumph over the malice and ignorance of its opponents,
many of whom presumptuously and dogmatically condemn


Severe Head-aches cured. 225


that which they scorn to examine or investigate, is the sincere
prayer of


X. Y. Z.


I. Dreadful Head-aches.

Betsy N., aged 18, subject to dreadful head-aches for
three years, scarcely a day without them. At the request of
Dr. H., began to mesmerise her, Dec. 1, 1844.

At the third séance her head-ache entirely removed,
though it returned very slightly, at intervals, till the 14th,
after which she had no return, as I continued to mesmerise
her, by way of precaution, for several days after, during
which she improved in health and appearance.

Nov. 30, 1845. Saw Mrs. N. and her daughter, who has
had no return of head-ache since I mesmerised her, eleven
months ago, and her general health decidedly improved. In
this case there was no decided sleep.


Il. Violent Head-aches.

Mrs. J. B., aged 22, afflicted with violent head-aches for
five years past, rendering her occasionally quite blind, so that
she is obliged to remain in bed all day, and apply ice to the
head, &c.: has tried homeopathy and every drug in the phar-
macopeia without effect. Recommended to apply to me by a
Swedish physician, Dr. T.

During the treatment of this case, if she had head-ache
on arriving, I removed it by making passes from behind,
round the head, and then drawing it down to the back and
the shoulders, which always succeeded. The second time she
slept, as she did afterwards, varying from ten to fifty-three
minutes, occasionally very deep. I mesmerised with the
downward passes, during the sleep, at certain intervals. It
was a work of time and labour.

I commenced Jan. 11, 1845, and continued it for a fort-
night after I had noted her in my journal as “ quite well ;”
and the entry on the 7th of April is, “I consider her, by
God’s blessing, completely cured, and shall discontinue, ex-
cept that she will drink mesmerised water, which she finds
does her good.”

She is quite well up to the present time.


III. Violent Head-aches.

Miss M., aged about 46, has had for many years past
every ten days violent head-ache, which lasts for thirty-six
hours, and an affection of the stomach: formerly suffered
from rheumatism and tic douloureux. Recommended by
Dr. R. to try the effects of mesmerism.


s2


226 Neuralgia of the Stomach cured.


Commenced Dec. 27, 1845. Eyes closed in eight mi-
nutes: partially conscious sleep, but she was unable to open
her eyes or move a limb: a pleasing sensation. Opiates
generally fail to produce sleep with her.

Dec. 29. Has slept better for the last two nights, and
woke without sickness and an uneasy feeling which she had
before. Her last attack of head-ache was Dec. 18.

Jan. 5, 1846. Has had no return of head-ache. Her eyes
were generally closed in from one to three minutes simply by
gazing, after which I made the usual passes. She described
her feeling to be that of a delightful heavenly trance, quite
incapable of motion, but generally aware of anything that
was done or said in the room. At the commencement I
mesmerised her every day, then three times in the week, and
so lengthened the intervals gradually.

March 6. No head-ache for two months.

March 13. Much better and stronger in every respect.

March 22. Perfectly well; no return of head-ache.

On the 25th of April I received a note from her of which
the following is an extract: “I am happy to say that with
one little exception, at the breaking up of the ice, I have
been uniformly well since I was last with you, and now, in
the prospect of quitting , I must once more express
my warmest thanks to you for all your kind labours on my


behalf; for certainly to these labours, under the blessing of
God, do I attribute the unusual degree of health and com-


fort which I have enjoyed since Christmas last, and am still
enjoying.”


IV. Violent Neuralgia at the Stomach.

Mrs. A., aged about 40, has been afflicted for a whole
year with violent spasms in the stomach, sometimes twice a
day, scarcely a day without, and has tried various medical
remedies without experiencing any relief. Came to me by
the advice of Dr. R.

Dec. 20, 1846. Mesmerised for three quarters of an hour,
without any perceptible effect—like a statue—says she feels
nothing.

Dec. 23. Ditto.

27th. Ditto; but says she has been better for the last
two days.

31st. Ditto.

Jan. 2, 1847. Mesmerised for fifty-five minutes; drowsi-
ness, and almost asleep. Her attacks of late much less
severe.

Jan. 4. Ditto; attacks of late less frequent.


Neuralgia of the Stomach cured. 227


Feb. 25. Mesmerised for fifty minutes; during almost
the whole time partial sleep and perfect tranquillity. No
pain. No attack for the last three days. Feels decidedly
better.

Feb. '27. Ditto. Has had no symptom for several days,
and no attack since the 17th.

My last entry is March 8. Mesmerised with brief pauses
for more than forty-five minutes, of which time she slept
soundly for thirty-five minutes.

Has been perfectly well since she was with me last, and no
attack. As she lives in the country, and the roads are very
bad at present, she will not come to me again for some time,
and I trust will not require it.

N.B. She called on the 15th of March, when I was from
home, and told my daughter that she was perfectly well, and
so continued up to Oct. 6, when she called on me to request
my kind offices on behalf of a friend who accompanied her,
Malle. K., aged 41, affected for twenty-five years with violent
head-ache every week, lasting latterly for three days! At
this case I laboured hard for four months, but without effect-
ing a radical cure, only that the attacks were much less severe


and less frequent and the duration of them a few hours in-
stead of days.


V. Violent attacks of Neuralgia at the Stomach—Phenomena.

Mrs. J. W., aged about 30, formerly subject to rheuma-
tism, but for the last two years and a half has been afflicted
with violent spasms and shooting pains in the region of the
epigastrium, extending to the side and back (sometimes last-
ing for twenty-eight hours), formerly every week, and latterly
every other day. Has tried water cure, mineral waters, and
various medical remedies, without experiencing any relief.
Recommended to me by Dr. R.

Jan. 14, 1847. Mesmerised at intervals for nearly an
hour, generally and locally. Visible effect produced in five
minutes, shortly after which she slept tranquilly till the end
of the séance.

16th. Eyes closed in three or four minutes, and partially
turned back; heavy sleep for three quarters of an hour.
Had an attack yesterday, which lasted for nine hours, but
when it was past felt better than on former occasions.

18th. Effect nearly the same as last time: has had no
attack since I saw her last.

21st. Effect produced in less than three minutes: slept
for fifty-five minutes. Had a sharpish attack on the 18th,
which lasted not quite five hours, and another on the 19th,


Rigidity induced.


for two hours ; but felt better than on former occasions when
it ceased.

23rd. Eyes closed in two minutes, and she slept tranquilly
for nearly an hour. An attack yesterday, which lasted about
seven hours, but recovered herself afterwards better and
sooner than before.

25th. Effect as last time. No attack since she was last
with me.

27th. Precisely as last time. Had a very slight attack on
the evening of the 25th for less than an hour,

28th. Eyes closed in one minute without a pass: slept
about fifty minutes, not quite so tranquilly as before. A
sharp attack yesterday, lasting from 8 p.m. till 4 o’clock this
morning.

Soon after this she had a much sharper attack than usual.
Her friends became alarmed, and thought that mesmerism
had done her harm ; but I considered this as the crisis of the
disorder, and urged a continuance of the treatment; and
the result was most satisfactory.

Feb. 3. Mesmerised her in her own room, lying on the
sofa ; still weak from a severe attack on the 29th ult. Eyes
closed in a few seconds. Deep sleep, with partial conscious-
ness, for about forty minutes. During the time feels uneasi-
ness and pain in the right side, which she indicates, and on
putting my hand on the spot the pain is instantly removed.

Feb. 5. Most tranquil sleep for fifty minutes, and feels
refreshed.

10th. Eyes closed in one minute: slept profoundly and
tranquilly for a full hour, and felt refreshed: is better and
stronger than when I saw her last. Not the least symptom
of any attack. After this she came to my house, as before,
three days in the week. The seven following entries, much
as before. Feels better and stronger than she has done for a
long time past.

26th. Placed two small oval spectacle glasses, previously
mesmerised, in her two hands. Eyes closed in less than two
minutes: hands firmly clasped and immoveable, as usual.
Deep and tranquil sleep for more than an hour. No symptom
of an attack for four weeks past. From the beginning (my
usual request) she has taken no medicine whatever, nor does
she require it. Stronger and better in every respect. Con-
tinued the passes and /ocal mesmerism during the sleep.

27th. Same experiment with the glasses and same effect :
slept nearly an hour. As I requested, she yesterday placed
the glasses (which I had previously mesmerised) in her hands,
at a given hour, in her own room. Was asleep in ten mi-


Insensibility and cure. 229


nutes, and slept for thirty-five, and would probably have
slept longer, but woke by a sudden noise at her door.

March 3 and 5. Much as before. Better and stronger
every day. No symptom of an attack for five weeks.

March 7. As before. Slept for an hour. Feels perfectly
well in every respect, and shall leave it off gradually,—have
it but once in every week.

12th. Eyes closed in two or three minutes, she holding the
glasses as before. Dr. R., who was present, pinched her hand
pretty sharply, but she smiled in her sleep and said, “ J do
not feel it.’ JI pricked the other hand with a pin, but no
feeling.* Limbs, as before, rigid, but yielding to my touch.

19th. Eyes closed in one and a half minute. Sound
deep sleep for nearly an hour and a quarter. During the
time lifted up the eyelid, and held a lighted candle to the
eye. She told me, after waking, on my asking her, that she
remembers having perceived a light, as if the sun were shin-
ing into the room, but not painful or unpleasant.t Feels
better than she has done for years, and has quite got rid of her
nervousness. I trust she is perfectly cured, but will probably
come once more, in order to satisfy Dr. R.

26th. Eyes closed in two minutes. Sound sleep for nearly
an hour. Feels perfectly well, and has not had a single
symptom for two months; so that she may now, by God’s
blessing, be considered as perfectly cured.

N.B. The next time that I saw her was in October, when
she came to church to stand godmother to a child, and she
was so improved in size, health, and appearance that I could
scarcely recognize her, and was actually afraid of looking at
her lest I should put her to sleep with the child in her arms.

She came to me again two years afterwards, not having
had the slightest return of her former complaint, but had suf-
fered of late from palpitation of the heart, nervousness, and
low spirits, owing to particular circumstances. She came to
me nine times, more perhaps than was absolutely necessary,
but I always prefer being on the safe side. The effect was
as before, and she was completely recovered.


VI. Insanity—Phenomena.
Mrs, B., aged 354 years. Married in 1836, and has had


* Of course all gross imposition, as in our English patients,—the two Okeys,
Wombell, whose leg was amputated in Nottinghamshire, and every other given in
The Zoist to posterity.—J. E.

t+ The impostor shewed herself again. She was as bad as Wombell, who
excited the disgust of the Medical and Chirurgical Society by saying on his
waking after his leg had been sawn off that he had heard a sort of crunching in
his sleep.—J. E.


230 Insanity : great improvement.


several children, the last born May 2, 1851, which she nursed
herself: but at the beginning of July, from imprudence in
cold bathing, the milk flew to the head, and she became
deranged ; her idée five being that * * * was to drag herself
and children through the streets in chains; and of this she
had a constant dread. She was confined for a time in two
separate establishments; and, when she became somewhat
better, her husband, after his return from England, took her
to his own house again, keeping a strict watch upon her.
When her husband called on me on the 11th of October,
previously to the christening of the child in the church, I
advised him to mesmerise her, gave him directions how to
proceed, and a few books on the subject ; but as, after several
trials, he could produce no effect, I undertook the case at
his request. When I commenced she was taking medicine
TEN times a day, which I ordered to be entirely discontinued.
There had been a suppression of the catamenia for nearly five
months, which several doctors had in vain attempted to bring
on by all kinds of medicine.

Nov. 14, 1851. Mesmerised for thirty-five minutes, pro-
ducing much relief, warmth, and tranquillity. Says she felt
cold when her husband mesmerised her.

Nov. 15. I found that after I left her yesterday she slept
quietly for a quarter of an hour, and felt more comfortable
than she had done for some time past, and, as she expressed
herself, more social, i.e., alive to and interested about her
family, &c. The mesmeric influence was much more powerful
than yesterday ; she slept more than an hour; said she felt
warm and comfortable. Made the usual passes, and specially
mesmerised the episgastrium, back, &c.

Nov. 16. Result most satisfactory ; influence more speedy
and powerful ; answered me in the sleep, but not her husband.
Arms cataleptic, and I could move and place them in any
direction or position, but in his hands were stiff and unbend-
ing, shewing the usual rapport between the mesmeriser and
patient. Slept most tranquilly for about an hour, and felt
comforted and refreshed.

Nov. 17. A wonderful alteration for the better ; her coun-
tenance quite different, and perfectly natural. Yesterday and
this morning, for the first time since her illness, she took and
played with her infant, of whom before she would take no
notice! Every symptom highly satisfactory ; slept tranquilly
for an hour and ten minutes.

At the commencement I asked her how long she would
sleep, and she said, ‘long ;”’ and at the end of the hour her
answer to the same question was “ten minutes ;” and awoke


Clairvoyance, &c. 2381


exactly at the time to a second. The catamenia had not ap-
peared, but at the end of the séance she said she had a pain
in her back.

Nov. 19. Just before I left home I received a note from
Mr. B. saying that “ yesterday morning the long-desired result
took place ;” and on going to the house I found that his wife
had the usual flow, and appeared quite a different being.
Results as before—rigidity, attraction, answered questions,
and said, when half an hour had elapsed that she should sleep
a quarter of an hour longer.

Nov. 21. Effect much the same as before; slept for some
time with her eyes half open, and a lighted candle placed
before them produced no effect upon the pupil.* Named, as
before, the exact hour af waking.

Nov. 22. Slept tranquilly the usual time—three quarters
of an hour, and named the exact time at which she would
wake. Dr. R. present ; had never before witnessed mesmeric
attraction ; i.e., when I lifted up her arms and placed them
in any position, my fingers held at a short distance from her
hands attracted them in any direction, whereas his (Dr. R.’s)
had the contrary effect, viz., of repulsion.

Nov. 23. As usual, named the exact time of waking. I
placed a mesmerised spectacle glass in each hand, that par-
tially drew down the fingers, which I closed. When she
awoke she found herself utterly unable to open her hands or
move her arms till I demesmerised them by transverse passes
and blowing.

Nov. 24. Effect as yesterday. I placed a glass in one
hand, which, when she woke, was stiff and immoveable,
whilst the other was perfectly free.

Nov. 27 and 30; Dec. 1 and 3. Usual effect ; health im-
proved.

Dec. 4. She tells me in her sleep that mesmerism will do
her good, and that she shall be quite well at Christmas.

Dec. 7. Slept about an hour. Arms and legs, &c., strongly
cataleptic. Her husband could not raise them in the least,
but under my hands as tractable as those of an infant. Placed
a lighted candle before her eyes. When she woke, on being
asked, said she remembered seeing something like a red lan-
thorn in the dark.+

Dec. 8. Slept more than an hour deeply and tranquilly.
Effects as usual.


Dec. 10. Ditto. Yesterday the catamenia came off,—a
week before the time.


* Another impostor !—J. E.
+ She must have learn these tricks from Wombell.—J. E.


232 Singular occurrence.


Dec. 12. A singular séance, as shewing the effects of cross
mesmerism. [Dr. W., a German physician, was present.
After continuing the passes, &c., for much more than the
usual time, surprised that she was not yet asleep, and com-
plained of great anxiety. Dr. W., who was standing two or
three yards behind her, leaning against a table, looked very
pale and uuwell, and was very glad when Mr. B., perceiving
his state, asked him to go with him into another room, and
they had scarcely passed the threshold of the door before she
was fast asleep. It seemed as if part of my mesmeric influ-
ence went to Dr. W., and part of his to my patient. Some
time ago Col. P. mesmerised his mother, and as long as Dr.
W. was in the room could produce no effect, although a
powerful mesmeriser; but she fell asleep as soon as Dr. W.
went away. When Dr. W., after recovering himself, came
into the room to see the usual experiments, no bad effect
was produced on my patient.] She named, as usual, the exact
time of waking, and said she should be quite well at Christmas.

Dec. 14 and 17. Effect as before. Appeared much better
in every respect.

Dec. 20. Improving in every respect. Slept about an
hour very quietly. Told me in the sleep that she must be
mesmerised four times more, and wiil then be perfectly well.

Dec. 22. Slept for an hour profoundly and tranquilly.
Told me in the sleep that she must be mesmerised three
times next week. Her husband told me that she had perspi-
ration for the first time since her illness.

Dec. 24, 1851. Slept soundly and tranquilly for a full
hour. Mr. T. present—a firm believer (from having read
different numbers of The Zoist which I had lent him), but
had never seen a case before, and is perfectly satisfied with
what he sees.* Limbs as usual rigid and unbending to every
touch but mine; raise up her leg and back ; perfectly stiff;
she was fast sleep when Mr. T. came into the room, nor did
she know that he was coming, and had only met him once, a
long time ago, in a mixed company. When asked how many
persons (beside herself) were in the room, answered three.
“Who are they?” “John (her husband), Dr. , and
Mr. T.” She twice told me exactly what o’clock it was when
I held a watch to the side of her head, where she could not
have seen it had she been awake and her eyes open: named the
exact time of waking twenty-five minutes before the time. Said
she must be mesmerised fwice more. To the question, “ In


* How could Mr. T. be so silly! He would not be elected to a chair in any
British school of medicine, nor to a fellowship of any medical college.—J. E.


Clairvoyance : cure. 233


how many days shall you be perfectly well?” the answer was,
five days.

Dec. 26. Slept deeply and quietly for about an hour.
Whilst she was in the deep sleep, eyes firmly closed, Mrs.
——, as previously agreed upon, entered with noiseless step,
her head and face covered with a shawl, went behind the chair,
and sat down on the window seat. I asked her some time
after, “‘ How many persons are there in the room?” Answer,
“Three.” ‘Who are they?” “John, Dr. , and Mrs.
—.” WhenI held my watch to the side of her head she
told me the exact hour; when I held a book there she told me
what it was ; when I held up a dark lanthorn she said it was
an inkstand. After Mrs. had quietly left the room, she
told me there were two persons. When asked how many
more times she must be mesmerised, answered once. “In
how many days she would be quite well?” “In three days ;”
exactly corresponding with her former answers. Asked, to-
wards the end, how much longer she should sleep, answered,
“Two minutes,” and woke accordingly at the time.

Dec. 29. Dr. R. and Mr. T. came into the room after she
was asleep, and, as usual, when asked she named them. Dr.
R. was behind the chair, a high Voltaire, and made signs to
me to hold up his watch to the side of her head, and when I
asked her what o’clock it was, she replied, “ That is not your
watch ;” but when I afterwards held np my own, she gave
the exact time. Limbs rigid as usual; slight attraction to
my hand, and repulsion to that of Dr. R., but not so strong
as on a former occasion. When I asked, “ How many more
times she ought to be mesmerised ?” answered, “ No more ;”
and when I asked her, said she would be perfectly well next
week. Named, as usual, the exact time of waking. She
has now been mesmerised twenty-seven times.

A few days will shew whether she is perfectly recovered,
which I think highly probable, both from her constantly
affirming it when in the mesmeric sleep, and also because
the hallucinations which she had before have for some time
past become gradually weaker every day, and her general
health and strength wonderfully improved.

Jan. 7, 1852. Mr. John B. called and gave me a very
favourable account of his wife, who has been much better
since she was last with me, although she still occasionally
mentions being afraid of something, but without any expres-
sion of uneasiness or alarm. This mist which still hovers
over the brain will, I doubt not, be entirely removed and
melt away at the return of the catamenia, which ought to
come on now.


234 Cruelty of Medical Men.


Such, however, was not the case, inasmuch as some time
afterwards her husband informed me that she was enceinte,
and perfectly well both in mind and body. When I next saw
her she was looking marvellously stout and weil. She visited
England and France during the summer, and after her
return in October became the mother of an unusually fine
child, both of whom have continued to thrive up to the pre-
sent time.

I have given this last case more in detail, because I con-
sider it a very remarkable one, and a triumphant proof of the
powerful and sanatory influence of mesmerism.

My only fear has been that of trespassing too largely
upon the valuable pages of The Zoist, to which and to the
noble cause which it so ably advocates, I sincerely wish all
possible success.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.


The cure of the case of insanity is surely deserving of the
attention of all the practitioners in insanity who scoff every
day at mesmerism in society and chuckle at their medical
parties ; being such GREAT MEN as not to consider the truth
of mesmerism established or to feel themselves bound by
Christian duty to give their wretched patients the benefit of


its blessed remedial agency. Those who did not blush to
declare the poor lunatic Mrs. Cumming to be of sound mind,
like themselves, must allow Mrs. B. to have been insane.
The cures of head-aches deserve deep attention. For the
treatment of this form of disease is known by the mass of
medical practitioners to be almost always a failure in their
hands, with mercury, quinine, arsenic, and all the drugs
of their ordinary routine.

Oh! the barbarity of so many of my professional brethren
in exerting themselves from the first of January to the end
of December to prevent the sick from obtaining the blessings
of mesmerism! All the medical journalists co-operate by
excluding from their pages every one of the splendid medical
and surgical facts of The Zoist; and it is a shocking truth
that, when the last Number of the last volume of The Zoist,
mentioning in its index all the facts of the past year, was
presented to the College of Surgeons and to the Medical and
Chirurgical Society, neither of those institutions allowed it
to be placed on the table of their library with the other maga-
zines and new books.

It is most gratifying to mention that all do not follow
their bad example. Sir James Clarke lately was willing that


Puerperal Convulsions. 235


I should meet him in consultation upon the propriety of try-
ing mesmerism in one of his cases, and consented to its use ;
and Dr. Locock has frequently acted in the same way ; so that
the Queen and her Consort have those about them who set a
good example.

It is no pleasure to me to censure, but a very great plea-
sure to bestow merited praise upon, my professional brethren.
Happy should I be were I able to soften the hearts of Sir
Benjamin Brodie, Dr. Copland, Sir Henry Holland, Mr.
Lawrence, and all the others who are chiefly instrumental in
keeping back our holy cause and occasion such a mass of
human suffering to continue which might be cured or allevi-
ated. Reflection upon the sufferings which would already
have been prevented but for them is sufficient to destroy their
peace of mind if they ever reflected.


II. Powerful and remedial influence of Mesmerism in Puer-
peral Convulsions. By James Movat, Esq., Surgeon of
the 9th Regiment of Infantry, now stationed in Ireland.


‘‘We must all bestir ourselves in the cause of medical education, if we ever
wish to see the FOLLIES OF MESMERISM, homceopathy, table-turning, and spirit-
rapping, received by the people with anything like cautious reflection or sound
judgment.’’—The Editor of the Mepicat Times, July 9, 1853; p. 48.


I was sent for in a hurry at 11} a.m. to see Mrs. B., wife
of an officer in the regiment, who had been confined at 6 a.m.
I was informed that the labour had been natural, but rather
tedious, and that some hemorrhage had followed the extrac-
tion of the placenta and left her rather exhausted, and that
half a grain of acetate of morphine had been administered,
which had induced sleep. On my arrival I found her lying
on her back, with a wild confused look, tossing to and fro,
and complaining of her ears, into which she kept thrusting
her fingers: the pulse was rather quick, soft, and feeble :
the pupils were slightly contracted : the skin was hot: respi-
ration hurried. In two or three minutes she became more
restless and excited, and the jactitory movements amounted
almost to convulsions, the hands and teeth being firmly
clenched, and the eyes fixed and staring.

Finding it impossible to quiet her by ordinary means, and
being quite at a loss what measures to adopt, it fortunately
occurred to me to try mesmerism, being aware that she had
once been mesmerised with some success. I took hold of her
right hand with my left, and commenced making longitudinal


236 Immediate sleep and cure.


passes from the crown of the head towards the epigastrium.
In about a minute or so, I observed a slight change in her
countenance, particularly in the eyes. In another minute
the convulsive movements had much diminished, in fact,
nearly ceased, and the eyelids closed. I continued the
passes, and in about five minutes or less had the satisfaction
to find her in a sound mesmeric sleep, with slow, regular
respiration, and a fall of the pulse a few beats. I then de-
sisted, feeling tired and a painful rigidity of the muscles of
the arm.

She continued asleep for about half an hour, when she
suddenly awoke with a start—apparently from some noise ;
I believe from the crying of the child. 1 may here state that,
just before I was called in, she had been suddenly awakened
from a sound sleep by the barking of a large dog, which
occasioned a severe fright. This may have been the exciting
cause of the convulsions. It is interesting to speculate what,
with the tendency to hemorrhage, might have been the
result, had the convulsions remained unchecked. The toss-
ing and convulsive efforts returned the moment she awoke.
She was partially conscious, but looked wild and confused,
complained of her head, and said her ears were full of water
and flies. She likewise complained of thirst, and was allowed
to take a mouthful of cold water.

I recommenced the mesmeric passes, but from the con-
stant movements of the head and limbs, which required two
persons to hold, I experienced more difficulty this time in
sending her to sleep. I however succeeded in a few minutes:
and I left her as before in a tranquil sleep, recommending
her husband to mesmerise her should she shew signs of
waking.

She was again awakened by the barking of a dog. Her
husband tried to mesmerise her but without success.

I again commenced the mesmeric passes, and in a few
minutes again succeeded in sending her to sleep. This time
she remained asleep three quarters of an hour, and on awak-
ing was more calm and composed: the delusions had nearly
subsided, but she still complained of her head.

Her husband again tried to mesmerise her without suc-
cess: and she requested I might be sent for to send her to
sleep again: and I did in about two minutes. I, however,
continued the passes some time longer, and she remained
asleep until 6 p.m., when she awoke quite free from convul-
sion and delusion, and has continued well ever since.

This case needs but little comment. The effects were
marked and obvious, and occasioned no little surprise to the


Shortsightedness of the Medical Times. 237


nurse, who devoutly crossed herself and prayed she might
be protected from harm. I think the nurse’s conduct on
this occasion, in spite of her superstition, more natural and
more rational than that of some professional men, who will
not believe what they see, and whose eyes appear to be as
firmly closed by some mysterious process as those of the pa-
tients are by a natural and obvious one.
J. Movat, F.R.C.S.,

Surgeon H.M. 9th Regiment Infantry.

London, June, 1853.


Note by the Editor of The Zoist.


Mr. Mouat was a student at University College, London,
in 1837-8: and at the late Annual Meeting of the Mesmeric
Infirmary bore public testimony to the truth not of mes-
merism only, but of all the phenomena of the two Okeys,
whose cases he carefully watched during all their stay in the
Hospital. He formerly bore the same testimony inNo. XXV.,
on his arrival with his regiment from India in 1849.

How little does the Editor of the Medical Times appear
when contrasted with him: little either in medical intelli-
gence, or in moral penetration, which when strong sees that
honesty is the best policy. Wolsey at length saw that it
would have been better to have served his God than to have
served his selfish, heartless king. When Mr. Churchill, the
proprietor of the Medical Times, got rid of Dr. Bushnan, we
trusted that he had engaged a very different editor. Great
is his shortsightedness also, though he fancies himself wise
in his generation.


III. Cure of Palsy of the Arm in a few weeks after the
failure of all Lxc1t1mMatE means for several months. By
Mr. Cuast, of West Clifton. Communicated by Dr.
Elliotson.


“To Dr. Elliotson.
‘* Elgin, January 27, 1852.
“‘ Sir,—The following is a copy of a letter which I sent last night to Mr.
Churchill, stopping the Medical Times and Gazette in consequence of its re-
peated attacks on mesmerism. My sympathy is of no great value, and my giving
up the Medical Times and Gazette will have little effect. But, if all medical men
who believe in mesmerism would have the honesty to go and do likewise, very
likely the editor would be obliged to change his tune.


*« Yours respectfully,
‘“H. Macpean, F.R.C.S.


d.’’


238 Castigation of the Medical Times.


“ Sir,—From the commencement, and until now, I have been a constant
subscriber to the Medical Times, but throughout its chequered existence I always
observed that a change of editor brought out a change in medical ethics. In your
leading article of Saturday last, the 24th inst., there is an unmerited attack on
Dr. Davey of Colney Hatch Asylum and against mesmerism; an attack quite
out of place at this time of day and unbecoming a journalist.* It betrays ina
certain scale that species of petty jealousy and narrow-mindedness which unfortu-
nately so often characterize medical men in circumscribed localities, and which is
the reproach of the profession. That there is something in mesmerism no one
of “ sound mind” who has impartially examined for himself can deny, and that
it is a very powerful curative agent is beyond controversy. Can your Editor
explain to his readers why a compound dislocation or some other serious injury
of the thumb or great toe should so frequently terminate in tetanic convulsions
and death? This fact is too notorious, but the explanation is a very different
thing. So it is with mesmerism: the facts which bear on this subject are too
weighty for any one to gainsay, but the explanation of the phenomena is beyond
the limited comprehension of mortals.

** As your Editor is so thoroughly ‘ orthodox’ both in medicine and theology,
I would, with all due deference, remind him of what the orthodox Jews did of
old, and the wholesome advice which Gamaliel gave them in reference to the doings
of the apostles, and which is related in the fifth chapter of the Acts, verses 34—
40, and to which for brevity’s sake I refer him. It is a poor, pitiful spite on the
part of your Editor, and I have no doubt he will yet have to ‘ digest the venom
of his spleen’ behind some obscure shade.

‘* Mesmerism, I mean legitimate mesmerism, will go on to prosper in defiance
of all opposition: and when such men as Sir David Brewster and others similar
are enlisted in the cause, surely your Editor ought in deference to his readers to
suspend his judgment, and let the ‘ poor thing’ alone.

** My reason for writing, however, is to stop the Medical Times and Gazette
in consequence of the repeated attacks on mesmerism. I had hoped that the new
series would cherish in its columns a more liberal view of a matter in its nature
as yet little understood, but of which the existence is known as a stubborn fact ;
but finding that no change has taken place, I am constrained to stop, and forego
the reading of a journal which panders to such bigotted and intolerant ignorance.


I enclose postage stamps to pay the four numbers from January 3rd to 24th,
and am,”’ &c.T


Dr. Elliotson. Vittoria Lodge, West Clifton, Bristol,
June 17, 1853.

Dear Sir,—In the early part of May, 1852, Mr. Hann,
of Marnhull, near Sturminster, called upon me to request
my advice in a case of total paralysis, the invalid being his
eldest daughter, about 16 years of age. His wife and
daughter accompanied him.

Calling my attention to her right arm, which was hang-
ing perfectly useless at her side, they first informed me that
it had been in the state in which I then saw it nearly twenty
weeks. I enquired if she could move it at all. The reply
was, “ Not at all, unless she does it with the other hand;
nor can she move the smallest thing with the fingers of that
hand if it was to save her life.” I said, “ Your daughter
looks remarkably stout, and well in every other respect. Can


* See Zoist, No. XLIII., p. 1.—Zoist.
+ The Medical Times dared not notice this letter.—Zoist.


Palsy of the Arm cured. 239


you account in any way for this affliction?” ‘The only way
in which we can at present account for it, is, that during the
last few years she has grown very fast, and is very weak,
though she looks very well.” “ Have you tried many reme-
dies?” “She has been in Dr. F ’s hands for a long time
(I think they said fifteen weeks). He has tried everything he
can think of. When medicine failed to produce any effect,
he tried galvanism for some weeks, but without the slightest
symptom of benefit. Do you think you could do her any
good, Sir?” ‘“ Well,” I said, “from what I have seen and
heard, I believe that mesmerism is the remedy: my present
conviction is that it will not only restore the paralyzed arm,
but strengthen her in every way.” “ How long do you think
it will take you to perform the cure?” “That is impossible
for me to say. It may be some weeks before she will be
quite well, but I don’t think it will be many days ere she
will find an improvement.” This was very cheering news to
the good folks, for they were beginning to fear it would be a
hopeless case, and accordingly they left her with me in
Shaftesbury. '

The next day 1 succeeded in less than a quarter of an
hour in putting her into the sleep-waking state, and I made
passes for a quarter of an hour over the arm, and for ten
minutes over other parts of the body.

This I continued to do every day.

I ought here to state that Miss S. Smith, the clairvoyante,
examined her, and told me that the blood in the right arm
was not circulating, and looked quite black ; that the passes
would soon put the blood all right, but that it would be some
time before the nerves would be healthy, for they were in a
completely relaxed state; that I had only to persevere, and
the patient would certainly be cured. She also said that the
lungs were a little inflamed, and recommended her to drink
two or three wine-glassfuls of mustard-seed tea daily, and to
bathe the arm with some quite hot, and keep a flannel ban-
dage constantly round it. All this was done.

At the expiration of a week the patient was able to move
her fingers slightly : at the end of a fortnight she could knit :
and so she gradually improved until the right arm became
as strong as, if not stronger than, the left. In seven weeks
the patient was cured, and would have been well before, but
for a little inattention on her part and my being unwell for
a week,

Dr. F., as well as others opposed to mesmerism, said,
when she returned home and they saw the change produced
by such simple means, “ Wait a few days, she will be as bad

VOL, XI. T


240 Irrational and cruel treatment of Epilepsy.


as ever.” I am happy to state that they are disappointed.
More than three hundred and sixty-five days have passed
away, and Miss Hann, a friend who saw her a few days ago
assures me, is in perfect health.

Any one who questions the veracity of the above state-
ment may apply to her parents, or W. Colbourne, Esq., Bank,
Sturminster, Newton, Dorset, to whom the family is well
known.

I have just heard through a person from Dorsetshire that
the patient continues perfectly well; and you may consider
the case deserving a place in the valuable Zoist.

Dear Dr. Elliotson,
Yours respectfully,
C. W. Cuase.


IV. Cure of Epilepsy in a young man. By Dr. Exxiorson.


‘* Dr. Parker, Professor of Surgery in the College of Physicians and Surgeons,
New York, has first frephined the cranium, and then tied the carotid, in a case
of epilepsy. The patient, an Irishman, survived the operation, but the disease
was not removed.”—Medical Times, Nov. 27, 1852. From the New York Journal
of Medicine, May, 1852; p. 48.


On the 13th of February, 1851, a youth, named Edward
William Dovey, residing with his parents at 17, Elizabeth
Terrace, Liverpool Road, Islington, and between seventeen
and eighteen years of age, was brought to me by his mother
on account of epilepsy.

He looked healthy : was of ordinary height and bulk, fair,
and had black hair.

He had laboured under epilepsy four years :—from the
age of 13.

When a child he was subject to head-aches, sickness, and
feverishness every three or four months; and various articles
of diet produced disturbance in him.

The first fit had occurred in the evening of the Sunday
before Christmas-day, 1846, after a dinner of stewed goose
giblets in the middle of the day. Nothing was done for him,
and he was very well the next day. He had frequently eaten
stewed giblets before.

The second fit occurred in a year, on the Sunday after
Christmas-day, subsequently to a dinner of roast pork with
sage and onions: all which also he had often eaten before.

The third occurred in seven months, on a Sunday like-
wise, and was severe.

His parents placed him under the care of a general prac-


Epilepsy unrelieved by ordinary means. 241


titioner—“ an eminent surgeon,” are the words of the ac-
count given to me—in Islington, named Bateman, who treated
him for two years without the slightest benefit. Indeed the
fits became more and more frequent. For the fourth fit took
place in five months, and he then had one every few weeks,
and at all hours, and frequently in the night, bet in truth at
all hours day and night.

The attack in the waking state was usually preceded by
deafness for three or four minutes, and left after it head-ache,
heaviness, giddiness, debility, pains and disagreeable feelings
in various parts of his frame, till the middle of the next day.

Besides the perfect fits he very frequently had seizures of
deafness for a few minutes. These were of course fragments
of fits or imperfect fits; and fragments of fits are very com-
mon in epileptic patients, and are endless in variety.

He was next placed under the care of Dr. Hamilton Roe,
for a year, with no relief.

As his health now began to decline and the fits were very
frequent, his parents tried homceopathy under Dr. Chapmell,
and continued it seven months. But the disease became
more aggravated than ever, so that in the last attack while
under homeopathy he had four fits in seven hours; and he
oftener than ever was seized with deafness when no epileptic
fit occurred.

They were now advised by somebody to try galvanism,
and accordingly applied to Mr. Halse, of Brunswick Square,
who told them that he had never known galvanism cure a
case of epilepsy, and recommended that he should be mes-
merised, but could not inform them of a mesmeriser.

After searching for one in vain, his parents heard of the
Mesmeric Infirmary. But, on going there, they were told
that he could not be received for a length of time, on account
of the very large number of applications still unattended to
from want of funds, the long continuance of mesmerism that
epilepsy in general required, and the excessive proportion of epi-
leptic persons who were already patients there compared with
those labouring under other diseases for which mesmerism is
a most successful remedy. He was therefore brought to me,
and I will, in duty to him for his good feeling, quote the
grateful words of this worthy youth from his own narrative
of his case: “ By the kind providence of God I was led to
apply to yourself, (for whose great and disinterested care and
kindness I return you my most sincere and humble thanks,)
and from that time an improvement in my general health and a
diminution of the fits took place.”

I immediately made very slow passes downwards from

T2


242 Epilepsy cured with Mesmerism.


opposite his forehead to opposite his stomach, at the distance
of five or six inches, looking steadily into his open eyes in
perfect silence: and very soon his upper eyelids drooped, and
he was half asleep. But I had not time to continue the
process for above a quarter of an hour, and, on my leaving
off, he very soon opened his eyes.

I gave him permission to come to my house every evening
to be mesmerised by me with a few other patients in whose
cases I took a great interest. At the end of a week he went
to sleep: and I mesmerised him every evening for three
months, invariably producing sleep in a few minutes. From
this period, as he had to come a distance of about three
miles, his mother mesmerised him every evening, with the
same effect of sleep in about ten minutes, though a week
elapsed when she first took my place before she completely
sent him off. The other patients in my room exhibited
various phenomena, peculiar in each individual: but nothing
ever occurred in him beyond silent sleep; and this generally
ceased of itself in about three quarters of an hour, and he
could be awakened at any time by transverse contact passes
on his brows or forehead.

His mother continued to mesmerise him daily for above
a year, and then two or three times a week only, and she
still repeats the process at this rate.

Although all the drugs used internally and externally
and more or less making him suffer, especially mercury
and blisters (he wisely stood out against issues,) all kinds of
diet, cold shower baths, &c., had failed to do him the least
good up to the very time he was mesmerised, he mended
very soon after the process was commenced. Not only did his
general health improve and become established, his habitual
bilious attacks and head-aches cease, with every sign of in-
digestion, and he grow stronger, but the periods of the at-
tacks became less frequent, and at each attack the fits were
fewer. During the first nine months he had but four attacks,
with three fits in each attack. The last fit occurred on the
30th of November, 1851: and he is in the enjoyment of
perfect health, and has been for nearly two years.

The attacks of deafness, the fragments of fits, or imper-
fect fits, gradually disappeared some time after the perfect
fits had ceased. In many cases the imperfect fits are cured
before the perfect, and in some are entirely cured though
the perfect fits cannot be subdued.


This was a cure of epilepsy with mesmerism if any cure
of any disease was ever effected by any remedy. I defy our


An unexceptionable Cure. 243


adversaries to reject it. The disease was simple and true epi-
lepsy: consisted of sudden fits of violent convulsions and
insensibility, with foaming at the mouth, and, when care was
not taken, with biting of the tongue, followed by deep coma.
There was no hysteria or any other nervous affection. It had
resisted all established medical treatment for three years, and
certainly without any blame attaching to his medical atten-
dants. It had resisted homeopathy for above half a year;
and was worse than ever, and his digestion and general health
were worse than ever, when mesmerism was commenced.
Mesmerism only was employed. Not a particle of any drug
was used: nor any other remedial measure. No change was
made in his diet or mode of life. He continued to live in the
same place and go to his business in the same shop—that of
Mr. Simonds, ironmonger, 82, Goswell Road. He cut no
teeth during the time, nor has he yet more than a small
portion through of two of his wisdom teeth. No visible
change occurred in his frame: none occurred in his habits or
any of his functions.

No harm was done by mesmerism: no pain or even an-
noyance given him.

The cure began very soon after mesmerism was begun ;
and remains perfect to this day—a year and ten months.

Another point deserving of remark is that no phenomena
could ever be induced beyond sleep—no sleep-waking, rigidity,
catalepsy, traction, attraction, sympathy, excitement of cere-
bral organs or of any separate part, or local dissipation of the
general mesmeric insensibility. I have known cases resist
mesmerism in which endless and exquisite phenomena oc-
curred. And the public cannot be too strongly and repeatedly
told that no sensible effect from mesmerism—not even sleep,
has occurred in many cases of the best cures of diseases with
mesmerism. Diseases are frequently cured with local mes-
merism only.

The last point of importance is that the remedy was con-
tinued long after the disease appeared to have been cured :
that it is continued twice a week to this hour, and will be
continued for a year to come.

There is no greater absurdity than to relinquish a suc-
cessful remedy as soon as a disease appears cured, except
the very common absurdity of relinquishing a successful
remedy as soon as there is any improvement, and that of re-
linquishing a remedy before it has time to effect a cure.
Mercury, quinine, and some other drugs, sometimes require
to be given moderately, but regularly, for a year or two, before
certain diseases which have thoroughly got hold of the system


2 14 Frequent mischief of too full diet.


can be completely eradicated. I am often obliged to enforce
perfect abstinence from all fermented and distilled fluids—
all drinks containing alcohol—for very many months after the
cure of an inflammatory complaint ; in some cases even for
years: and in some cases abstinence from flesh food also.

I am certain that thousands of chronic cases occur in
which a degree of inflammation exists, or may be even the
entire disease, and, partly through ignorance of this fact,
and partly through ignorance of the necessity of rigid and
protracted abstinence, continue, and perhaps grow worse and
worse—certain forms of affections of the eyes, head, throat,
chest, abdomen, pelvis, and skin, gout and rheumatism,—while
the patient is plagued with drugs useless in their nature, or
rendered useless by the want of abstinence from alcoholic
drinks, perhaps coffee and tobacco, and even from flesh food.

Indeed I am sure that the majority of mankind would be
better if they never tasted alcoholic drink ; would feel more
comfortable and happy,* and be more vigorous in brain and
muscle, (mentally and corporeally, to use common language,)
—find their sleep, breathing, and digestion better, be more
efficient in their occupations, and more able to regulate their
passions and their tempers, so that those around them and
under them would be happier, especially youth and dear young
children, who would be allowed that constant happiness for


which their period of existence is evidently constituted, but
upon whom school-masters and mistresses, parents and servants
and others, have too often no mercy, indulging their own bad


* Nothing is more wrong than to attempt to drown sorrow by stimulating
drinks. I am convinced that, if I had taken alcoholic drinks and gone about all
day ever so little feverish and retired to bed hot, I could not for fifteen years
have borne up against the unprovoked persecution of my professional brethren,—
the abuse and ridicule bestowed upon me in all the medical journals and other
works and in the daily conversation of medical men among themselves and with
their patients—the cessation of so many medical men to consult me in town and the
provinces who previously sent for me continually and professed to regard my sa-
gacity as superior to that of any other physician and to have the highest opinion
of my knowledge and good sense—and, what is more than this cessation, their
unceasing attempts to prevent my being called in when patients or their friepds ex-
pressed a wish that I should be consulted,—so that my professional income was
really reduced to one-third. But these were not my only nor my greatest afflic-
tions: for a man in whose judgment and honour I had confided, and whose posi-
tion, acquired by himself, I thought precluded the possibility of his being fool
enough to play the rogue, occasioned me losses equal to those in my profession :
and, what was worse than all, those whom I had loved from infancy and whom I
could never have suspected of falsehood or malice, unexpectedly turned upon me
without any provocation whatever and conducted themselves in a way which no-
thing but jealousy and positive mental aberration can explain. Happily, I have
lived through all this, and, I am persuaded, from abstemiousness : and I trust that
my sufferings will be for my benefit, so that I shall be able to say, “it is good
for me that I have been afflicted.’’ .


Mischiefs of alcoholic drinks. 245


tempers and dispositions, and forgetting while they swallow
alcoholic stimulants how irritable they render themselves.

At the same time I know that some persons require a
little stimulus habitually as well as food. But most of such
persons would, I am persuaded, find equal benefit from sti-
mulants which nature has provided in abundance without any
alcohol in their composition—spices of all kinds, cinnamon,
ginger, cloves, caraways, mustard, pepper, and endless others.
Unalcoholic stimulants, while answering every purpose, in-
duce no disease in the textures of our organs, when taken in
the quantities likely to be taken by any one, and leave no
exhaustion. From such stimulants I exclude narcotics, to-
bacco, coffee, and tea. The former is a decided poison, and
its use in any mode is filthy and disgusting, and in any but
the smallest quantity it occasions debility, irritability, loss of
appetite, palpitation, tremors, &c., and may prevent a local in-
flammatory state from subsiding. Tea and coffee in modera-
tion are innocent, but injurious if taken strong: and coffee
even in moderation frequently injures the dyspeptic and those
who have an inflammatory condition of any part. At the
same time I know also that alcoholic stimulants are requisite
in many serious diseases with exhaustion, and I frequently
give wine, malt and spirituous drinks, continually and even
in large quantities.

The crimes occasioned by drinking are terrific. The suf-
fering to children and youth from the ill temper engendered
by the habitual use of alcoholic drinks is also frightful. The
mothers among the poor scold and cuff them from babyhood
till the arrival of youth, and fathers are savage to children
and youth. ‘Tolerable tempers are made bad, and bad tem-
pers rendered cruel, by the feverishness of alcoholic drinks.
Far happier, more peaceful and moral, are the families from
which they are banished. Were they generally banished,
how much less crime should we have! How much happier
would youth and dear children be, to whom our duties are
most solemn! The youth of both sexes are disposed to good-
ness and affection if well treated and managed: and little
children are positively heavenly beings, far superior to our-
selves in moral excellence—affectionate, confiding, disposed
to truth, anxious to learn everything for which their faculties
are calculated. Youth and young children are, I am con-
vinced, the most persecuted, both at home and at school and
elsewhere, of all human beings.

I never go to sleep at night without a pang in reflecting
upon the ignorance and unfeelingness usually displayed
towards the innocent and naturally joyous young, whose


246 Cruel treatment of the young.


faults are chiefly the result of bad management, and who
require only good example, good advice, with regularity
and firmness so that they may know as much what to expect
as the engineer from the fixed laws of inanimate matter
or as culprits should be able in the administration of the
laws of the country, without flogging, caning, even slapping,
or any infliction of bodily pain—an infliction which dis-
graces, not to say Christianity, but civilization, and engen-
ders bad feelings in the young victims, is most cowardly, is
the lowest cowardice, gratifies a bad, low, brutal passion
in the inflicter and renders him during his gratification
as hideous and disgraced a spectacle as a drunken man.
Poor dear children cannot have recourse to newspapers, can-
not draw up petitions, nor can they call public meetings, or
defend themselves in any way against their cowardly grown-
up inflicters of blows and other barbarities, and their perse-
cutors with needlessly sharp words and passionate scolding,
heavy tasks, and other severities.* All should be done by
kindness and firmness united. Because some acuteness and
great verbal memory are displayed, allowance is not made for
the tenderness of many of their intellectual and moral powers,
of their comprehension, memory of things and time, and
self-restraint: and the little failures of these from time to
time in the day, like the exhaustion from time to time of their
muscular strength, are never thought of. They are overtasked,
and regarded far, very far, too much as not so different in
powers from adult persons as they are. They are not only
overworked, but taught much that is useless, especially girls:
and much that they should be taught later. Girls and boys
are often overdone in order to make a great show for the
benefit of their instructors. They require more fresh air,
relaxation, and repose than are allowed them. Children
should sleep in the middle of the day till they are six years
of age, and never sit up beyond an early hour in the evening.


* The custom of fagging in some of our public schools is a disgrace to the
nation. It destroys the happiness of the poor little boys who ought to have the
full enjoyment of what is intended to be their sunny period of existence, and
injures their natural good feelings : and it works mischief upon the bigger boys
who perpetrate the /ow barbarities, for it inflames the worst parts of their
nature and habituates them to what is vile. When I reflect upon the number of
clergymen who encourage this and corporal punishment, or who are concerned
in the misappropriation of funds left by the kind-hearted for charitable and educa-
tional purposes; and reflect upon the intolerance of feeling that pervades reli-
gious society, and the absurd doctrines, fancies, and practices of so many of the
numerous religious denominations which flourish here, and upon the cruelty of the
medical body in opposing the spread of the blessings of ism, I think
England should not vaunt herself as she does upon her morality and her religion,
nor regard herself so much above the cruel partizans of slavery.


Injurious effects of ill treatment. 247


Dulness of comprehension and crossness of temper and little
naughtinesses are the common result of over fatigue and
want of rest ; and the poor child is punished when he ought
only to be put to bed. We are conscious how many little
things regarding health make us cross, but no allowance is
made for the young. Children are every day punished as
naughty when they are only ill, and perhaps very ill.* Girls
are confined far too much: and in many cases allowed no
other exercise than a joyless, formal walk, and that perhaps
so long, to make up for its infrequency, that they are fatigued
and injured rather than benefitted. Children and youth
require better food, more of it, and more frequently, than is
supposed by many; though they should not taste fermented
drinks, except as medicines. How absurd ever to give them
wine as a treat and make them feverish, when some simple,
innocent, fluid would be as great a treat and they would be
contented and happy with water or milk! Then children are
overdosed and incessantly dosed by their mothers, nurses, or
the family doctor: and not a thought is bestowed upon the
torment of the poor things by giving them horridly disgust-
ing physic. A few grains of calomel with sugar, or a little
jalap in tea or weak coffee would be tasteless: but they have
rhubarb or senna-tea, and frequently take other filthy medi-
cines, to no useful purpose, two or three times a day. And
how often are they mercilessly and uselessly blistered !

I see instances of fits and various nervous and other affec-
tions from exhaustion by overwork or unhappiness inflicted by
hard masters, parents, and nurses. ‘Terror is no uncommon
cause of nervous affections. Refined cruelty is far more com-
mon than is supposed. Nervous affections are often not re-
cognized, but punished as obstinate faults. St. Vitus’s dance,
local twitchings, debility of an arm or leg, pains, and nervous
tenderness, are often supposed to be a bad habit or shammed.
Momentary fits of unconsciousness that are fragments of epi-
lepsy procure scoldings, nothing being noticed or done by the
patient during the seizure, nor what was said to him during it
being afterwards remembered by him. So, little paroxysms
of insanity causing anger or absurdity for a few minutes or
longer, and the rarer occurrence of spontaneous attacks of
sleep-waking for a few minutes or longer, are often not recog-
nized, and, if there is no subsequent recollection, the child is
thought a liar and probably punished accordingly.t


* What barbarities are practised daily in public receptacles of the poor and
the convicted when they are ill and declared to be shamming !
x + See my former remarks upon the treatment of children in Nos. XXXIV.
XXXV,.


248 The Cure was safe and pleasant.


The present youth was happy in having kind parents and
a kind master, and my efforts to cure him had thus no draw-
back. Happy was he in being spared all filthy physic and
disagreeable measures: and above all for being subjected to
the innocent and perfectly agreeable treatment of mesmerism,
and cured, instead of having a piece of his skull sawn out
and one of his carotid arteries tied by Dr. Parker at New
York and of remaining uncured after all.*


V. Examples of the great benefit of Mesmerism as a domestic
remedy. By Mr. Joun James, New Ross. In a letter
to Mr. Janson. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘* During the fire which consumed the Eddystone Lighthouse, near Plymouth,
in the winter of 1755, Henry Hall, who was 94 years of age, but remarkably
active for his time of life, had, with two other men, the charge of the Eddystone
Lighthouse. About two o’clock on the morning of the 2nd of December, the
fire which consumed the lighthouse broke out in the lantern. Hall, who was at
the time the only man upon the watch, attempted to extinguish the fire, and,
in order to reach it, had to throw water four yards higher than his head. As he
was looking upwards, to see the direction and success of some water he had
thrown, a quantity of molten lead fell in a torrent from the roof upon his head
and face, and over his clothes, and part of it made its way through his shirt-
collar, and very much burnt his neck and shoulders. From that moment he had
a violent internal sensation, and imagined that a quantity of the lead had passed
down his throat into his body. As the rage of the flames increased, he, with
his companions, had to retire downwards, from room to room; and at ten
o’clock, after the fire had been burning eight hours, some boatmen, who had
come to their assistance, found them almost in a state of stupefaction, in a cave
on the east side of the rock, to which they had retreated to avoid the falling of
the timber, red-hot bolts, etc., upon them. The boatmen being unable, on
account of the surf, to land upon the rock, threw a coil of small rope upon it.
The lighthouse men laid hold of the rope, and having fastened it, one by one,
round their waists, jumped into the sea, and were towed into the boat. They were
immediately taken by sea to Stonehouse, near Plymouth, a distance of about
fourteen miles, where Hall was attended by Dr. Spry. ‘He invariably told Dr.
Spry (who constantly administered the proper remedies to such burns and hurts
as could be perceived) that if he would do anything effectual towards his recovery
he must relieve his stomach from the lead which he was sure was within him ; and
this he not only told Dr. Spry, but those about him, though in a very hoarse
voice; and he also said the same thing to Mr. Jessop (the surveyor), who went
to see him several times during his illness. The reality of this assertion seemed,
however, then incredible to Dr. Spry, who could scarcely suppose it possible that
any human being could exist after receiving melted lead into the stomach, much
less that he should afterwards be able to bear towing through the sea from the


* See motto, p. 240. The Medical Times mentions the facts without any
remark of reprobation. Such practice, where there is nothing surgical in the
case, cannot be too strongly reprobated. In medical books, other instances of
the abomination of taking out a piece of the skull, and of tying the carotid
artery, for the cure of ordinary epilepsy, are mentioned. The gross ignorance of
the nature of the disease and of all sound physiology and pathology, and the
wanton cruelty of such practices, would almost disgrace the professors of medi-
cine among the Kaffirs or the Ojibbeway Indians.


Barbarous experiments at Plymouth. 249


rock, and also the fatigue and inconvenience from the length of time he was in
getting on shore before any remedies could be applied. The man did not show any
symptoms, however, of being either much worse or of amendment, till the 6th
day after the accident, when he was thought to be better. He constantly took
his medicines, and swallowed many things, both liquid and solid, till the 10th or
11th day, after which he suddenly grew worse; and on the 12th day, being seized
with cold sweats and spasms, he soon afterwards expired.’

“The following is the account given by Dr. Spry of the condition of the
stomach :—

‘**« Examining the body, and making an incision through the left abdomen, I
found the diaphragmatic upper mouth of the stomach greatly inflamed and ul-
cerated, and the tunica in the lower part of the stomach ‘burnt; and from the
great cavity of it took out a great piece of lead,’ weighing 7 oz. 5 drs. 8 grs.

“On the 19th of December, 1755, Dr. Spry transmitted an account of the
case to the Royal Society; ‘ but that learned body thinking the circumstance very
unlikely and extraordinary, and, doubting the truth of it, the reading of the
paper was deferred until a further elucidation was received.’

“Dr. Spry, when his word was thus doubted, made various experiments on
dogs and fowls, for the sake of re-establishing his character for veracity.

“ He poured molten lead, by means of a funnel, down the throat of a small
dog, which had eaten nothing for twenty-four hours, and kept the dog afterwards
without food or drink. The next day the dog was very brisk, and, on being killed,
six drachms and one scruple of lead were found in its stomach. The stomach,
Dr. Spry says, was much corrugated, but its internal coat was not excoriated.

“In another experiment, he gave a large dog half a pint of milk, and very soon
afterwards poured, in the same way, molten lead down its throat. Very soon
after swallowing the lead, the dog, according to Dr. Spry, ate freely of milk, as
if nothing ailed him; and continued to do so daily for three days, when it was
killed, being at the time very lively. Six ounces and two drachms of lead were
taken from the stomach. ‘The pharynx and cardiac orifice of the stomach were
a little inflamed and excoriated, but the cesophagus and stomach seemed in no
manner affected.’

‘* Dr. Spry performed similar experiments on fowls with a like result.

‘*Having transmitted to the President of the Royal Society an account of
these experiments, and having offered further to establish, by the oaths of him-
self and others, the truth of the facts stated in his paper, the paper was read to
the Society, and afterwards published in the Society’s ‘ Transactions.’

‘*A few years ago these experiments of Dr. Spry were confirmed by other
experiments made in France by M. Bretonneau.

“In one of M. Bretonneau’s experiments, three ounces of boiling water were
poured into the stomach of a young dog. The dog immediately uttered frightful
cries, and vomited violently several times. The next day it appeared languid
and oppressed, drank with avidity, but refused food. The third day conva-
lescence commenced, and made progress up to the seventh day, when the dog
was killed. The evening before its death, it caressed its master, and rolled at
his feet in play. When the body was opened, the mucous membrane, the sub-
jacent cellular tissue, and, over a large space, the muscular coat of the stomach,
were found in a state of gangrene.

‘In another experiment, four dogs had, each of them, eight ounces of boil-
ing water injected into the stomach in such a way as not to injure the cesophagus.
Three days afterwards, they played together, and snatched from each other food
that was thrown them; and one of them lined a bitch that was confined in the
same place. They were then killed; and in their stomachs were marks of
injury, like those observed in the former experiment.”—Medical Times, May 21,
1853. A Lecture by Gzorce Bupp, M.D., F.R.S.


Bannow Grammar School, New Ross,
County Wexford, April 14, 1853.
My dear Sir,—I feel exceedingly obliged by your great


250 Gratifying instances of mesmeric good.


kindness in sending me another number of the “ valuable
Zoist,” as Mr. David Holsgrove, whom I envy the possession
of “fourteen of them,” in p. 29 justly styles this periodical.
This number of The Zoist is truly, as you say, “a noble
one,” and must greatly tend to open the eyes of the public
to view mesmerism and its opponents in a proper light.

I have the pleasure to inform you that I am turning to
very good account in a small way the little knowledge and
experience I possess, as scarcely a day passes that I do
not meet with opportunities of relieving sufferers of various
small ailments. 1 have removed pains and aches from all
parts of the body; but I have most frequently to deal with
head-aches and rheumatism. My exertions are not confined
to the inmates of the family and the pupils of the school, but
are given to persons of all classes in the neighbourhood. I
have besides given advice and instructions by letter from
which some benefit has arisen.

I beg leave to mention in particular a few cases which
struck me from the plain and undeniable evidence they pre-
sented of the immediate benefit of mesmerism.

A young gentleman (Percy Julius Deverill) came to me
with asore arm. There was a red swelling in the fleshy part
of the fore-arm, from which the inflammation extended all
over the limb. The pain was excessive, and the sensibility
so great that he could not bear even an article of clothing to
touch any part of his arm. He stated that the complaint
began with an itching sensation on the preceding day. I
considered it to be the beginning of an erysipelas. A few
passes in contact in one minule took away all feeling of pain
except on the spot of the inflamed swelling, and I could even
press on that without causing much unpleasant feeling.
Again, at night, I made passes for about another minute, and
that was all: there was no return of pain, and the inflamma-
tion speedily subsided.

Another young gentleman (George Wilson) from chilblains
in his toes suffered the most excruciating pain I ever wit-
nessed : words could not describe the agony I saw him endure.
I was informed that every night after he had been a few hours
in bed his torments began, which kept him awake and crying
throughout the night. I tried the effect of mesmerism by
pointing my fingers to the place, moving them round ina
circle, and sometimes drawing them away with slight contact.
For some time the limb continued quivering with excessive
agony: but in about five minutes the pain was quite gone. 1
continued about five minutes longer, and then, with tears in
my eyes and feelings of the most heartfelt pleasure, I settled


Painful experiments upon living animals wicked. 251


the poor patient comfortably in bed, and in a few minutes
he was in a sound sleep. For some nights afterwards when
the pain came on I removed it in like manner; and subse-
quently made a few passes each night on his going to bed in
order to prevent the pain. On all those occasions he slept
well and felt no further inconvenience.

The statements are not of so important a nature, or given
in a sufficiently condensed form, to suit the pages of The
Zoist : but I will hope that the opportunity may be allowed
me at a future period to present something worthy an appear-
ance in that publication.

I am, dear Sir,
With grateful acknowlegments,
Yours very truly,
H. U. Janson, Esq., JoHN JAMEs.
Pennsylvania Park, Exeter.


P.S. The two cases I have stated were witnessed by about
twenty persons.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.


1 prefixed the motto to this article for the purpose of ex-
emplifying the incredulity of the profession and of philoso-
phers upon well-attested facts, and the mischief which
sometimes arises from such incredulity. The mischief here
was the perpetration of experiments so barbarous as to dis-
grace a Christian country and the medical profession, and
which no society, lecturer, or author, should refer to without
an expression of horror and shame. Dr. Spry might have
been contented with the assertion of the truth and waited
for the sure result of time. But he made his horrid experi-
ments from sensitiveness as to his reputation. The following
was prefixed to his account of them, addressed to Lord
Macclesfield, then President of the Royal Society :—


“*My Lord,—Your Lordship may depend upon it, that, so far
from my asserting anything in the least degree uncertain; as I
always have, I shall always act with so much circumspection and in-
tegrity, especially in these tender points (where my character is at
stake), as to be able easily to prove, what I may assert, as in the
present case, so very extraordinary, that scarce any of the faculty
(unless particularly acquainted with me) would give credit to, till I
demonstrated it by the above experiments.”—Phil. Trans., 1756,
vol. xlix., P. ii.


The trifling good which has arisen from barbarous medical


5 The Medical Times abuses us again.


experiments upon living animals, compared with the torments
of the poor innocent dumb creatures, makes me condemn
all such experiments as disgraceful to men who make it their
boast that the purpose of their life is to lessen suffering.


VI. An account of the admission of the truth and power of
Mesmerism in a standard American medical work upon
the Practice of Medicine: with remarks upon the author's
superficial knowledge of the subject. By Dr. Exxiorson.


‘* The Sophistry of Empiricism. pp. 84. London: 1853. This book is a
very good one, and, if duly perused and pondered over, it is calculated to open
the eyes of many victims to the chicanery which it exposes and denounces. It
is written in a calm, argumentative spirit, and is by no means tinged with dog-
matism. It attacks quackery en masse, and groups together mesmerism, with
its subdivisions of phreno-mesmerism and clairvoyance; homeeopathy, hydro-
pathy, Coffinism, herbalism, bone-setting, etc., as so many species belonging
to a single genus—empiricism, the origin of which is to be traced to the love of
the marvellous and the supernatural, inherent in the human mind, the success of
which is in exact proportion to the credulity of the dupes and the unscrupulousness
of their deceivers.

“It is lamentable, in the present age, which boasts to be one of peculiar en-
lightenment, to be compelled to expose fallacies so palpable as those contained in
the published works of the empiric. Notwithstanding the general diffusion of
the Baconian philosophy, and in spite of the universal taste for the exact sciences,
it appears as if the principles of sound reasoning were only inapplicable when
applied to that science which concerns man most nearly,—namely, that which
regards his own health. But we are not in despair for the cause of legitimate
medicine, which will still triumph when the absurdities of quackery are consigned
to the shadows and the oblivion of the past.

‘* The author of The Sophistry of Empiricism need not have been ashained to
avow his name, for he has written a work which does him very great credit, and
bears internal evidence of having been composed by a member of our profession,
of which he has proved himself altogether worthy, by the soundness of his views,
the liberality of his mind, and the cogency and closeness of his arguments.’’—
Mr. Spencer WELLs, Editor of the Medical Times, July 23, 1853; p. 97.*


Tue grave mention of mesmerism in the most recent, and
by far the best, work upon the practice of medicine ; the
mention of its functional effects as indisputable truths—of the
insensibility under the most painful surgical operations, with
the other phenomena, long published in vain to the world by
mesmerists—and the mention of its remedial powers, is an


* Mr. Spencer Wells, now that his patron, Lord Ducie, is dead, and he has
entered into the humble service of Mr. Churchill, the bookseller, is coming out
“very strong,” and seems resdlved to outshine Mr. Wakley. It shall not be
our fault if what is intended to please the doctors is not made known to the
general public. The initials of Spencer Wetts—S. W.—are also the initials
of Seconp Waktey. While Dr. Semple was editor between the departure of
Dr. Bushnan and the entrance of S. W. into Mr. Churchill’s service, there was
none of this absurdity and impropriety.— Zoist.


Wilful ignorance of the medical world. 253


event which was always foreseen by mesmerists to be inevitable,
though it has occurred later than mesmerists who held too
high an opinion of human nature expected. The third edi-
tion has arrived in England of a book published in Phila-
delphia, and entitled, “A Treatise on the Practice of Medi-
cine. By George B. Wood, M.D., Professor of the Theory
and Practice of Medicine in the University of Pennsylvania ;
President of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia; one
of the Physicians of the Pennsylvania Hospital ; one of the
Authors of the Dispensatory of the United States of America ;
&e., &e.” It consists of two vols. large 8vo.: the first con-
taining 847 and the second 853 pages.

Blumenbach spoke in his Physiology, nearly half a century
ago, of “ the singular and undeniable effects attributed to ani-
mal magnetism and other phenomena—attributed by F. Alex.
von Humboldt in 1797, and Henniker in 1800, to a kind of
sentient atmosphere surrounding the nerves,—as affording a
probability to the idea of a peculiar nervous fluid.” —§ 225.
But, notwithstanding the various demonstrations of these
facts by good and truthful men, and the cures effected and
painless operations performed for a long succession of years,
its contemptuous rejection by nearly all the medical and
surgical practitioners in public hospitals and private prac-
tice, by all the lecturers of the rising generation, and all me-
dical journalists, up to the present hour, are notorious facts,
and will stigmatize with imperishable disgrace the medical
profession of the middle of the nineteenth century, who
have had such opportunities of full information and proof
on the subject as were never before enjoyed. There have
been incessant demonstrations of all the phenomena in
London and the provinces and the colonies, at which the
medical men present have usually conducted themselves like
men devoid of common sense and information and un-
trained to the proprieties of social life. There has been
the quarterly publication of this great and imperishable
work—The Zoist, for ten years and a half. There have been
many able courses of lectures as well as demonstrations. Nu-
merous excellent mesmeric works have issued from the
press. There have been hundreds of surgical operations
performed, many fearful and gigantic, without pain, in the
sight of all who desired to witness them, and with infinitely
more success in regard to both painlessness and recovery—
painlessness of the operation and sound sleep being moreover
at command at every dressing and every moment after the
operation—than can be boasted of by the gross minds which
were impervious to the beautiful and exquisite living pheno-


254 Their eagerness for grosser means.


mena of mesmerism but wildly enraptured with the pal-
pable inanimate narcotic drugs called ether and chloroform,
with sounds made like other sounds by cunning tricksters
upon inanimate substances, and with movements of inani-
mate hats and tables, taking all pains to investigate these
movements, which are indeed well worthy of investigation,
but not condescending to waste their time upon mesmerism,
which Mr. Faraday conceitedly says is not philosophy, yet the
importance of which to the sufferings of mankind makes
their neglect of it equally criminal as stupid.

After treating of ordinary, spontaneous, or idiopathic, som-
nambulism, Dr. Wood in his second volume, p. 677, pro-
ceeds to instruct the medical world in mesmerism,—to instruct
the ripe and practising, and the unripe youth who are anxious
to imbibe with the confiding innocence characteristic of the
young all that their elders know and declare to them to be
true.


** Artificial Somnambulism.— Animal Magnetism.—Mesmerism.—
This affection bears a close analogy to the preceding, and, though it
has been observed in a much greater variety of phases, is probably
identical with it. The methods usually employed to bring indi-
viduals into this state are too well known to require description. I
believe that it is of very little consequence what manipulations are
used, provided the mind of the patient be impressed in that peculiar


manner which appears requisite to the production of the results.
A steady look of the operator, with an expression of earnest convic-
tion upon his face, as if he had that full power over the nervous
system of the one acted on which he claims to have, will very often
be sufficient. The subject of the operation soon begins to be sen-
sible of a not unpleasant heaviness ; the eyelids usually close ; and,
in a period of time varying from less than a minute to twenty mi-
nutes or more, a state of apparent sleep resuits. But examination
shows that the condition is very different from that of ordinary sleep.
Thus, a cataleptic state of one or more of the limbs will sometimes
be discovered on attempting to move them ; and curious phenomena
in relation to the power of muscular motion, or the loss of it, may
be observed. Sensation is strangely modified. The patient is often
quite insensible to painful impressions ; so that a tooth may be ex-
tracted, or a surgical operation performed, without perceptible un-
easiness. This has been too frequently tested to admit of reasonable
doubt. But, while general sensibility is thus blunted, the special
senses are often more acute than in health. The slightest sound,
such as generally escapes notice altogether, is heard ; touch is occa-
sionally exquisitely sensitive ; and there is reason to believe that
vision is remarkably acute. As in spontaneous somnambulism, it
appears that all objects do not make an equally strong impression ;
but it is impossible to determine what principle it is that regulates
this diversity of the sensorial function. The patient loses all con-


Mesmerism admitted into Wood’s Practice of Medicine. 255


sciousness of his real situation; but evinces in various ways consi-
derable, and sometimes extraordinary mental activity. Present events
apparently excite trains of thought, which have no relation to the
actual condition of the patient, but seem to be merely successive
actions of the cerebral machinery, mental vibrations as it were, ne-
cessarily following the impressions from without. Thus, an indi-
vidual acquainted with craniology, upon feeling the touch of a finger
upon the part of the cranium corresponding with one of the supposed
organs, will often set off into a most ludicrous series of actions
illustrative of the operations of that organ. A slight sound, which
no one else notices, suggests a course of thought in accordance with
the cause of that sound, which strikes spectators sometimes as little
short of miraculous. This property of somnambulism, connected
with a wonderful sharpening of the memory, so that things long
forgotten, and even circumstances that at the time of their occur-
rence seemed to make not the least impression, are recalled vividly,
accounts satisfactorily for those phenomena, which, superficially
viewed, have led to the most extravagant notions as to the myste-
rious powers imparted by this strange condition of the nervous
system. The patient may often be induced to rise and walk about
the apartment, and sometimes does so spontaneously, in order to
act out the course of thought with which the mind may be occupied.
The actions, corporeal and mental, appear to be under the ealilitas
of principles entirely differing from those which characterize the
individual in health; as if another spirit, with different views and
feelings, had taken up a temporary residence in the body. Thus, I
have seen a little gil, on all occasions diffident and even bashful in
health, become in this morbid state pert and forward, joking with
her elders and superiors, as if quite on a footing with them; and
this change of character uniformly took place whenever the affection
was produced. Along with the nervous phenomena above men-
tioned, there is a change in some of the organic functions, which if
there were any doubt upon the reality of the state, would of itself
be sufficient evidence. The pulse is generally accelerated, and there
is an increased production of moisture, which is especially observable
in the hands.

“* Very different opinions have existed as to the nature and causes
of this affection. Many suppose it to be a peculiar condition of the
nervous system, produced by the influence of another nervous
system, in a manner analogous to the electrical changes which take
place, when an excited electric is placed in the near vicinity of other
bodies. Now this is not altogether impossible. But I hold it to be
unphilosophical to adduce a new principle in the explanation of phe-
nomena, which admit of explanation upon principles already esta-
blished. I see nothing mysterious in this magnetic or mesmeric
state, as it has been called; at least nothing more so than in hy-
steria, catalepsy, epilepsy, &c., in all of which there is much that
we cannot understand. It is merely one of the different phases of
nervous disease, and is induced by the mental condition of the indi-

VOL, XI. U


256 Dr. Wood’s ignorance of Mesmerism.


vidual affected; as an attack of hysteria is often induced by a fit of
vexation.

“The subjects of the disease are usually persons of nervous tem-
perament, and generally in a position of inferiority, either physically,
mentally, or by position to the operator; who, therefore, has a
greater influence over their imaginations. The mysterious manipu-
lations, the peculiarity of the occasion, the steadfast gaze of the
operator, appearing as if he had no doubt of his own powers, excite
in the susceptible brain of the subject a feeling of the strange, the
mysterious, perhaps even of the awful, which appears to unhinge
some connexion in the brain necessary to keep the nervous machinery
in its due order, and causes it to work for a while in a wholly new
direction. Young women and children are most easily affected ; and
at each successive trial the effect is, in general, more readily pro-
duced ; so that at last, in certain very susceptible individuals, a look
is sufficient to throw them into the magnetic state ; and, indeed, the
patient may fall into the state voluntarily, or spontaneously without
any exercise of will. I have met with one instance in which a boy,
who had been frequently acted on, was attacked with an affection in
all essential respects similar, without apparent cause, and did not
recover until, after two or three days of fruitless attempts by other
means, a blister was at length applied over the whole scalp.

** Artificial somnambulism may sometimes be usefully employed
as a remedial agent. Nervous head-aches, neuralgic pains, morbid
vigilance, great restlessness, and various hysterical disorders may
sometimes be removed, at least for a time, by bringing about this
condition of system. The surgeon and dentist may also sometimes
avail themselves of the insensibility to pain which it occasions, to
perform their operations with less suffering to the patient. But,
when it is understood that the person acted on is thrown inte a con-
dition, in which, while passions may be developed, control over the
conduct, and the influence of habitual principle cease, the practice
must strike the reflecting mind as extremely hazardous, and fraught
with the possibility of so much unmitigated evil, that it can scarcely
be justified as a remedy, and is altogether unjustifiable on any other
score. Besides, the nervous system is rendered morbidly suscep-
tible, and a tendency to diseases of this system consequently fos-
tered, by the frequent repetition of the process.

“The morbid state, if left to itself, gradually subsides ; but the
restoration of the patient may be effected more speedily by artifical
means. Among the most efficient apparently is a rapid motion of
the hand near the patient, so as to bring a current of cool air in
contact with the face. Probably a cup of cold water thrown upon
the face would have a similar effect. In obstinate cases, it might
sometimes be advisable to induce sound sleep by means of an opiate.
This would imitate natural somnambulism, in which the individual,
upon returning to his bed, falls asleep again, and awakes as usual
in the morning. I have already mentioned*one case in which a
blister to the head appeared to me to be requisite.”


Dr. Wood’s errors pointed out. 257


It is curious to read Dr. Wood declaring that “ the pa-
tient is often quite insensible to painful impressions ; so that
a tooth may be extracted, or a surgical operation performed,
without perceptible uneasiness: this has been too frequently
tested to admit of reasonable doubt :” yet in another place
that it causes only less pain to be felt by the patient. Still
it is gratifying to find him above the immorality, common in
the profession, of denying established facts. But it is really
lamentable that he should have presumed to take upon him-
self the mesmeric instruction of others, especially the young,
who will exercise for themselves a far more important influ-
ence upon mankind than the already ripe practitioners.


“ The patient loses all consciousness of his real situation.”
This is sometimes the case, but sometimes not. I could
shew Dr. Wood as many cases as he could desire in which
the mesmeric sleep-waker is as perfectly acquainted with his
real situation as in his ordinary state. The veriest beginner
in the study of mesmerism would laugh at reading such ig-
norance in a university professor. I have detailed the mes-
meric cures of my* own patients whom I always threw into the
sleep-waking state; but all except twot were fully aware of
their real situation, and conversed as reasonably in accordance
with this knowledge as if they had been in their natural and
ordinary condition. Nay, one among these who was insane
and ignorant of her situation and all around her, became,
when thrown by me into sleep-waking, perfectly sane and
acquainted with her situation and all around her.t


“Thus, an individual acquainted with craniology, upon
feeling the touch of a finger upon the part of the cranium cor-
responding with one of the supposed organs, will often set off
into a most ludicrous series of actions illustrative of the opera-
tions of that organ.” This is true: but not the whole truth.
Not only a most ludicrous series of actions, but a most grave,
and a most affecting, series of actions may be induced, sufficient
to occasion deep reflection in the truly philosophical man; such
manifestations of the holiest feelings of veneration, affection,
benevolence, and integrity, as cause tears to trickle down the
cheeks of the feeling and right-minded. Moreover, it is not
necessary that the individual be “ acquainted with craniology,”
or feel ‘the touch of a finger upon the part of their cranium


* Nos. III., pp, 300, 314; IV., pp. 407, 457; IX., p. 39; XI, p. 339;
XIX., p. 234 and p. 240; XXIII., p. 212; XXXIV., p. 157; XL., p. 347.

+ Nos. III, p. 340; VI., p. 194.

t No. IV., p. 435.


u 2


258 True mesmeric excitement


corresponding with one of the supposed organs.” If Dr. Wood
will consult Nos. V., pp. 71, 78; VI., p. 225, he will find that
distinct cerebral organs may be excited by merely pointing the
finger to them individually, at the distance of an inch or two,
the patient’s eyes being firmly closed in sleep-waking, or ban-
daged, and the operator standing behind his or her chair ; and
the operator and the patient may both be totally ignorant of
craniology. As the third number of The Zoist is now to be
procured with difficulty, I will not apologize for a long ex-
tract from an account by myself :—


“When therefore phrenological experiments are made in the
mesmeric state, there should be no contact, nor anything which can
communicate to the patient what is expected; or, if there is con-
tact, we ought to be absolutely certain that the patient is ignorant
of the nature and situation of the organs. Then, again, the power
of the will of the mesmeriser probably may do much. I myself
have never produced any mesmeric effect by my will. But so many
persons have related experiments to me which appear satisfactory
that I must admit its influence. I therefore allow that there has
been extreme fallacy in the views of experimenters, and much injury
to both phrenology and mesmerism: that unreal organs have been
thought to be discovered, and false views taken of mesmeric influ-
ence. Still there can be no doubt of the fact of excitement and
stupefaction of individual cerebral organs by mesmeric influence.

‘It would be strange, were this not the case. For the brain is
but an organ of the body, and its separate portions like so many
separate portions of other organs. A great fault has been committed
by physiologists and pathologists in not viewing the brain aud its
functions exactly like those of all other organs. Its composition
and organization are peculiar; but still it is an animal compound
and organization, has blood circulating most abundantly through it,
and possesses bloodless vessels and fibres, and pulpy matter; and is
of necessity subject to all the general laws of structure and function
with all other organs, both in health and disease. If, therefore,
other parts and portions of other parts can be excited and stupefied
or relaxed by true mesmeric means—by an occult influence, it would
indeed be singular if this were not the case also with the brain. If
phrenology is true, and if mesmerism is true, then we might pre-
sume that individual cerebral organs would in many mesmeric pa-
tients be acted upon like the individual parts of an extremity or the
individual organs of sense; but not in all, because we cannot affect
every other organ or every portion of every other part, at pleasure,
in every patient. To be certain that the effects on the cerebral
organs result from mesmeric agency, I conceive,—

“‘1. That the subject should have no means of knowing what is
intended ; that not a word should be uttered or anything done which
could by the slightest possibility suggest to him the expectation of
the operator. There should not even be contact over any organ,


of Cerebral Organs. 259


unless it is known with absolute certainty that he is totally unac-
quainted with phrenology. Thus will suggestion, association, ima-
gination, be prevented from acting.

“2. The operator should will nothing: he should, if possible,
not know to what cerebral organ he is pointing, that the will may
be prevented from acting.

“* If the subject is ignorant of the cerebral organs, or ignorant of
the spots over which the influence is being exerted, and the operator
does not will or know what organ he is influencing and the estab-
lished faculty is excited always, or as often as any other mesmeric
effect, or a vital effect of any kind from any cause is produced, I
should consider the proof complete.

** Now these conditions I have seen fulfilled times innumerable.

**1. In some subjects, I or any one else can mesmerise distinct
cerebral organs without any contact, but by merely pointing to the
organ behind the subject’s back, the subject being in perfect som-
nambulism with the eyes closed and bandaged. If it is said that
the subject can feel the temperature of the finger, I reply that this
is very unlikely through the hair; that the effect ought to come at
once, as when there is contact, whereas it comes slowly, not perhaps
for one, two, or more minutes; and that the temperature of the
finger of the operator is the same as that of the subject’s head. I
have breathed with my warm breath and blown upon or held very
cold substances close to the head of patients, far more sensible of
temperature than in the natural state, so that they felt the cold or
warmth, though they had no sense of touch, but without effect ;
and the moment there has been contact, the organ has gone into
action. Again,—some of these very patients have not believed that
anything was touching their head, while it was touched, and the
effect came. Sometimes the effect lasts some time after you have
ceased to point at or touch over an organ; and sometimes the effect
of the manipulation comes on very slowly. If time is not taken,
but the operator hurries on to manipulate another organ, the effect
may continue while he is thus engaged, or may not come on till he
is so engaged ; and thus there will be confusion, and he may pro-
nounce that the experiments have failed. This is common in mes-
meric experiments on other parts, and was one cause of poor Mr.
Wakley’s blunders, when he presumptuously made experiments and
drew conclusions in perfect ignorance of the science.

“These effects have as regularly ensued, when I ascertained to
a certainty that the subjects were not aware what cerebral organs
were manipulated ; and in other subjects in whom contact is requi-
site I carefully ascertained the same ignorance to exist, before I first
made any experiments upon them.

«2. My will has hitherto been powerless in all mesmeric experi-
ments. I have never yet accomplished anything in mesmerism by
it alone. However long and strongly I have willed, I have hitherto
done nothing without the eye, manipulation, contact or approxima-
tion with respect to the subject, or some substance afterwards
brought into contact with or approximation to him, or by the
breath or saliva, which are substances originally in contact with


260 Proofs of true mesmeric


oneself. Nay, I have never satisfied myself that I have increased
the power of other proceedings by the most intense will, or impaired
the result from not willing at all. A daily proof that the will is
not the great cause of mesmeric effect is, that their varieties come
out in different subjects quite unexpectedly; and when persons
manipulate who know so little of the matter as not to comprehend
what they find themselves produce.

**I have willed the excitement of distinct cerebral organs, but
always in vain. I have looked intently at the situation of distinct
cerebral organs, and willed powerfully, but always in vain. In
mesmerising distinct cerebral organs, I have willed nothing; but
talked and thought of other things and looked carelessly in other
directions ; and the effect has come as soon and as perfectly as when
I willed to the utmost at the same time.

** The inefficiency of the will was strikingly shewn in one of my
cases. I had a patient, an epileptic young gentleman, in whom I
could excite certain faculties by breathing on the respective organs.
I had another, an epileptic young lady, in whom I could excite
them by contact or pointing. Finding that result in him, I attempted
to excite them by breathing on them in her; but always in vain,
though I have often breathed till I was nearly spent. On the con-
trary, when they are excited, breathing instantly stupefies them as
it does in all my other subjects excepting him.

** Again; in her I touched over or pointed to the organs, ex-
pecting to find the manifestation resemble that in other subjects;
but soon found that I affected the side only of the brain at which
I manipulated. I could scarcely believe my eyes; but 1 found that
if I took her hands in one of mine, and manipulated one organ of
Pride, the corresponding hand only was forcibly withdrawn from
mine; and if I manipulated one organ of Friendship, the corres-
ponding hand only squeezed mine violently and carried it up to her
bosom. ‘To my further astonishment I discovered that the two
halves of her brain would act oppositely at the same moment :—
that if I took both her hands in mine, and pointed to the organ of
Pride on one side and of Friendship on the other, the one hand
would be forcibly withdrawn from mine, and the other carry my
hand to her bosom, at the very same moment. So far from willing
all —_ I was taken quite by surprise. Yet such is always the case
in her.

*‘One day I was shewing these facts to a friend and pointed to
one organ of Pride. We began to converse earnestly and I to look
at him and almost forget my patient. To my surprise, the hand of
the side opposite to that in which lay the organ to which I had begun
pointing was violently withdrawn from mine. But I presently found
that, from not attending to what I was about, I had unconsciously
moved my finger over the middle line of the head, and that it was
actually pointing to the organ of the other side.

“When Dr. Engledue was with me one day, and she in mesmeric
sleep with her eyes closed in a high chair, I took her hands and sat
looking at them only; he stood behind her chair, looked the other
way, and pointed at random to what he guessed might be the situa-


excitement of Cerebral Organs. 261


tion of one organ of Pride. Presently, b0¢h her hands were violently
withdrawn from mine. We looked at her head, and found that Dr.
Engledue who, it turned out, had pointed with two fingers, had by
a strange chance pointed exactly over the middle line, so that a point
of a finger was over each organ of Pride.

“* After a number of mesmeric experiments, a patient often be-
comes altogether insusceptible of more of that kind; sometimes
insusceptible of all mesmeric impressions; so that he remains
wide awake, and fatuitous and delirious for a longer or shorter
time. Experiments with mesmerised metals after frequent repe-
tition during an hour or two will often utterly fail. By waiting a
little, sometimes they will act again; but if the experiments have
been numerous, they may not act again during that day. Ignorance
of this was another source of poor Mr. Wakley’s ridiculous conclu-
sions. Now this holds good respecting the cerebral organs. After
many experiments, no more mesmeric impression may be possible.
But a curious occurrence took place in my patient whose organs can
be excited separately in either half of the head. I had accidentally
made my experiments on one half of the head only, and, after com-
plete success, I could produce no farther effect,—the organs I had
acted upon ceased to be impressible. I then began with the organs
of the other side, and all my experiments succeeded as beautifully
as they had done on the exhausted side. This is a perfect argument
against those who would explain the ultimate failure of mesmeric
experiments by the fatigue of the patient’s volition.

** Again, persons totally ignorant of phrenology, and even of the
reason of their pointing or touching, produce the effects. After the
experiment with Dr. Engledue just related, he and myself put a
minute piece of paper over each organ of Pride, and I desired a
man-servant, who was perfectly ignorant of phrenology, to come
into the room, stand behind her chair, and point with one finger
over either of the piéces of paper he chose. I took both her hands
in mine, and Dr. Engledue and myself looked aside, carefully avoid-
ing to see to which organ of Pride the man was pointing. At length
one of her hands withdrew forcibly from mine; we looked at her
head, and found the man pointing to the organ of the same side.
The experiment was repeated with the same result. The man does
not to this hour know why he was desired to point. The patient,
too, was as ignorant of phrenology as the man, and, perfectly igno-
rant of what we were doing.

* Just as the point of the nose is often more susceptible than any
other spot covered by skin, I have often found the point of the
operator’s nose act more rapidly than the points of his fingers in
producing the ordinary mesmeric effects; and so have I found it in
her with respect to the cerebral organs. This shews a peculiarity of
influence, and yet what is done by contact of the operator’s fingers
over the cerebral organs can be done by contact with other things,
though less vigorously. In all my cases I can excite the cerebral
organs by the contact of a paper cutter or the corner of a book.
Whether this could be done in subjects whose cerebral organs have


262 More of Dr. Wood’s errors


not been previously excited by contact of the fingers I am ignorant.
It cannot be urged that any thing is conveyed from the operator's
hand through the substances held by him, because, if he moves the
patient’s head so that the situation of the organ shall be brought
against any hard body, the effect occurs as readily as if a hard sub-
stance is brought into contact with the head. But I have never
been able to produce effects by pointing with any thing else than the
living body. Mr. Atkinson observed the effect of such contact of
inanimate subjects long before I did, and ascribes it to the sympathy
of the brain with the pressed surface.”

“Sometimes just as persons who have been mesmerised with
effect can have such local effects induced as rigidity or palsy of the
extremities, without being brought into the general mesmeric state,
so distinct cerebral organs of those who have been mesmerised with


effect can, it appears, be excited by local mesmerisation in the
natural state.”


“ The actions, corporeal and mental, appear to be under the
guidance of principles entirely differing from those which cha-
racterize the individual in health; as if another spirit, with
different views and feelings, had taken up a temporary resi-
dence.in the body. Thus, I have seen a little girl, on all occa-
sions diffident and even bashful in health, become in this morbid
state pert and forward, joking with her elders and superiors, as
if quite on a footing with them.” This change often happens,
and is recorded by me in my pamphlet on Surgical Operations
without Pain and in many parts of The Zoist—the patient
acting naturally and not conventionally, displaying his true
character, and his true opinions respecting those whom he ad-
dresses and upon all subjects, without the concealment which
renders our behaviour in society so much acting. Still, proper
reserve is frequently observed in the sleep-waking state, and
it is often impossible to extract any particular information :
and the difference from the ordinary state may be too slight
for a stranger to discover; possibly there may sometimes be
no perceptible difference.

Dr. Wood wrote evidently from very limited experience
and reading. The expression, “as if another spirit had
taken up a temporary residence in the body,” can, I trust,
be meant as only figurative—as the ordinary shallow language
of society. Every case, not to say of insanity, but of slight
deviation from the ordinary condition of the feelings and
voluntary muscular movements, totally unconnected with
mesmerism or spontaneous somnambulism, might as reason-
ably be thought to look as if “ another spirit had taken up a
temporary residence in the body.” The whole is mere func-
tional change in various portions of the nervous organs: and


pointed out. 263


this must be Dr. Wood’s view, for further on he rationally
says, “ I see nothing mysterious in this magnetic or mesmeric
state ; nothing more so than in hysteria, catalepsy, epilepsy,
&c., in all which there is much that we cannot understand.
It is merely one of the different phases of nervous disease.”

But when he adds to the words nervous disease, “and
is induced by the mental condition of the individual affected,”
he is displaying great want of information: as he likewise
does when continuing in the same strain, “The subjects of
the disease are usually persons of nervous temperaments,
and generally in a position of inferiority, either physically,
mentally, or by position to the operator ; who, therefore, has
a greater influence over their imaginations. The mysterious
manipulations . . . excite in the susceptible brain of the subject
a feeling of the strange, the mysterious, perhaps even of the
awful, which appears to unhinge some connexion in the brain
necessary to keep the nervous machinery in its due order, and
causes it to work for a while in a wholly new direction.” Here
again we have the “vulgar error” of ignorantly fancying
that all mesmeric effects are produced through imagination.
This has been so abundantly refuted in The Zoist that to re-
fate it.again may be to weary and disgust our readers. Who-
ever writes thus shows himself ignorant of the most ele-
mentary facts of mesmerism. So recently as October, 1851,
Mr. Sandby furnished Tlie Zoist with an able article, entitled,
The Westminster Review, and its doctrine of Imagination ex-
amined,


“The Westminster Review,” he remarks, ‘‘ professes to be the
friend of progress, to advocate improvement, and to be the foe of
prejudice in every branch of physics. How is it, then, that a journal
with such soaring pretensions should forget its principles and desert
its standard? How is it that the good of the people should be for-
saken, and the advancement of knowledge laid aside or resisted? or
rather, how is it that the editor can permit an ignorant and shallow
writer* to foist his crude opinions upon the public, and to reiterate,
as a settled point, the crambe repetita of obsolete and refuted fan-
cies? The very character of the journal is at stake.”


Persons are every day sent to sleep by mesmeric means,
and into sleep-waking too, who are not aware of what is
doing or that anything is doing; and some who never heard
of mesmerism and do not know what the term means.


** Foissac,” says Mr. Sandby, ‘‘ mentions the case of a child,
aged 28 months, who was placed in somnambulism. In the Fifth


* Are not the initials of this writer’s name H. S.? and is he not discernible
in antimesmeric remarks in a newspaper as well as in a review ?—Zoist.


264 Siill more of Dr. Wood’s


Volume of The Zoist, is an account of a blind gentleman being mes-
merised, when there was no possibility of his being aware of it.
Children are easily mesmerised: and some deaf and dumb persons
have also been thrown into the sleep, though not cognizant of what
was going on.

** Will these sage reasoners, also, reject the evidence presented
by the brute creation? Miss Martineau’s good but ‘ unimaginative
cow,’ —Mr. Bartlett’s bull,—the Duke of Marlborough’s dogs,—and
the animals at the Zoological Gardens, whom Dr. Wilson (late of the
Middlesex Hospital) mesmerised? Or are these facts beneath the
study of our sublime and philosophical opponents ?

**A curious case happened to a medical friend of mine—a most
determined sceptic,—whom I had long, and in vain, endeavoured to
convince. He proposed to mesmerise the servant-girl of a lodging-
house, where an acquaintance resided. ‘Let me try and put you to
sleep,’ he said. She stoutly refused. ‘Sleep!’ she cried, ‘1 don’t
want to go to sleep, I want to go to my work, I’m after my work!’
However, they insisted, and commenced operations : she was in the
deepest coma almost immediately, without time being given for
‘ fixing the attention ;” while her imagination was all the other way,
being directed to her work, for the neglect of which she was fearful
of being scolded. My friend said that so deep was her sleep and so
insensible her condition, that he could have performed upon her the
most serious operation without her knowledge. It need not be
added, that my friend ceased to be sceptical and to talk any more of
‘ imagination.’

“‘ However, I do not propose to give an elaborate treatise on this


subject, but simply to offer to the Westminster Reviewer a primd
facie case in reply to his reasonings. It is for him to follow this
statement out: at any rate, it would be but decent in him to assume
that mesmerisers are far too numerous and too well informed a body,
not to have well considered their position before they adopted such
language in the maintenance of their views.”


Hundreds must have seen the Okeys, at the period of their
highest susceptibility, sent off, when chattering with the
greatest glee, by a single pass made at a distance, and behind
them, when their perception of it was physically impossible.*

Sleep is not sleep-waking, and yet the /Jatter is produced
by the same processes. But there may be more than this.

For the various wonderful phenomena of mesmerism may
take place without the patient thinking of them or even ever
having heard of them, and even when the operator is not
thinking of them.* The imaginationists forget all this.


* In great susceptibility coma often unexpectedly occurs from the continued,
unintended and unnoticed contact of the head or hand, &c., of the patient with
any part of the operator, even should the patient be a child. The removal of pain
by local mesmerism is the same fact on a small scale—an effect of the torpyfying
influence of mesmerism.


errors pointed out. 265


“Dr. Esdaile,” also says Mr. Sandby, “in his admirable work,
p. 41, mentions his first mesmeric experiment in India,—where ima-
gination was also out of the question. The points to notice were
the purely accidental and unpremeditated nature of the experiment,
the want of consent between the parties, the operator’s want of belief
in his own power, and the absolute ignorance of the patient. Dr.
Esdaile has recently arrived from India, and is now in Scotland :
here is a physiologist for Dr. Bennett to encounter, if he be willing.
Has the Westminster Reviewer studied Dr. Esdaile’s facts and his
Mesmerism in India? and if he have not, is he competent to write
on the subject ?

‘Dr. Esdaile’s experiments with the ignorant natives of India
reminds me of a case which is probably new to most of your readers,
and well worthy of perusal. I received it from my valued friend,
Captain John James, of Littlebourne, Kent: and it was communi-
cated to him in a letter from a friend, of which the following is an
extract :—

“**T feel sure you will be interested in one part of a letter I had
yesterday from Charles in Van Diemen’s Land. A few only of the
Aborigines remain in the colony, and these are now located at a
place called Oyster Cave, and put under the special care of Dr. M.
Shortly before he wrote, Charles had accompanied Dr. M. in a ride
to this station, which is twenty-three miles from Hobarton, and
their conversation, as they rode, turned on mesmerism, on which
the doctor was very sceptical. They passed the night at the station,
and the next morning Charles, wishing if possible to convince his
companion that there was something in it, selected one of the female
natives, and proposed to Dr. M. himself to mesmerise her, shewin
him how to proceed. The doctor agreed, and the woman it
readily into the state of trance. Pricking her hand had no effect
upon her: but, Charles taking her hand and making the savages
prick him, she immediately withdrew her hand and rubbed it as if in
pain. A dog’s paw was put into her hand, and the animal’s ear
pinched, when she immediately began rubbing her own ear, and
seemed greatly distressed. Charles, holding her hand, put some
honey in his mouth, when Dr. M. asked her what she tasted, and
she said, “sugar.” He then put a quantity of salt in his mouth,
when she made all sorts of faces and seemed almost inclined to vomit.
The natives looked on with awe, and Dr. M.’s scepticism was
shaken.’

**T should, indeed, think that the doctor’s scepticism was shaken :
and so will be the scepticism of every other doctor, who will venture
to look at our facts. However, the point to notice here is this: in
what way were the passes ‘ useful in communicating suggestive ideas’
to an ignorant untaught savage ?”


Dr. Gregory also furnished an able paper on the theory
of imagination as explanatory of mesmerism in No. XXXVIL.,
and I appended a note to it, remarking that, though very


* See, for instance, community of taste, &c., in Mrs. Snewing, No. XIX.,
pp- 238, 243, &c.


266 Mesmerists aware of the force of Imagination.


able, it is calculated for the backward inhabitants of Edin-
burgh rather than for the English, who are very far in ad-
vance of them in mesmeric science. Dr. Gregory urges,
1. That persons of the most lively imagination are the least
impressible to mesmerism. 2. That in the occurrence of
many phenomena no appeal is made to the imagination :

persons in common sleep being very susceptible,* sleeping
children and brutes being strongly affected by simple gazing,
and the report of the French Academy of Medicinet+ admit-
ting in 1831 that physical mesmeric effects are produced
without the knowledge of the patient and asserting that the
theory of imagination is quite inadequate to explain mes-
merism. 38. That persons who have been mesmerised, and
have become very susceptible, are very commonly sent to
sleep without their knowledge. 4. That blind persons may
be sent to sleep without their knowledge. Dr. Esdaile gives
an instance of a blind man whom he could at any time throw
into the coma without any idea that he was acted on, and
this, not only through a wall, but at the distance of 80 yards.t
5. Mesmeric sleep-waking, being identical with spontaneous
somnambulism, in various persons exhibits various powers
unknown to their natural state,—the power, for example, of
distinguishing water mesmerised or subjected to the influence
of a magnet, crystal, &c. 6. The perception of luminous
emanations from magnets, crystals, the human face, hands,
and breath, and even in some degree from all natural objects.
7. Sympathy of sensation with other persons. 8. The pe-
culiar disagreeable effects of the proximity of certain indivi-
duals and inanimate objects unseen, which occasion antipathy,
and which therefore must send forth some influence. 9. The
peculiar effect of certain metals when it is impossible for the
sleeping patients to know what they are, or are even led to
suppose that they are other metals which do not affect them.
10. Clairvoyance as to objects which from their situation or
concealment are invisible. 11. Clairvoyance as to very dis-
tant persons and objects. 12. Clairvoyance in the form of
introvision.

Mr. Sandby, in a truly admirable article in No. XL. upon
some portions of Sir Henry Holland’s Chapters on Mental
Physiology, makes this writer appear extremely silly in his
vain and worldly attempts to explain all mesmeric phenomena
by expectant attention.

Mesmerists need not be reminded of the power of imagi-


See No. IX.,


p.4
Mr. Colquhoun has published it in his Isis Revelata. See also No. I., p. 65.
See No. XVII., p. 5


Bad treatment suggested by Dr. Wood. 267


nation. They are all much better acquainted with it than
are their adversaries. ‘‘ Throughout The Zoist I have stated
my conviction of the power of imagination being marvellous,
far greater than is generally conceived by medical men; and
that, if a mesmeric effect has been once produced—an effect
of unquestionable mesmeric agency,—we cannot be sure,
when it recurs, even under mesmeric processes, that it is not
the result of imagination if the patient is aware of mesmeric
means being employed in order to induce it.’’*


“ The nervous system is rendered morbidly susceptible, and
a tendency to diseases of this system consequently fostered by
the frequent repetition of the process.” This is no more ob-
jectionable in mesmerism than the ill-managed use of any
medicine or measure of regimen. During fifteen years of ample
experience I have never done any harm with mesmerism ; al-
though in some cases I have seen that, without the proper
amount of regulation which is requisite in all treatment of
disease, the patient would have been inconvenienced.


“* I have met with one instance in which a boy, who had been
Srequently worked on, was attacked without apparent cause
with an affection in all essential respects similar, and did not
recover until after two or three days of fruitless attempts by


other means ; a blister was at length applied over the whole
scalp.” If Dr. Wood had continued to wait and prevented all
access of the mesmeriser to the lad and omitted the blister,
the effects would to a certainty have ceased just as well, and
the poor child been spared the barbarity of the blister to the
whole scalp. The truth would have been “ cunctando restituit
rem.” In another such instance, I advise Dr. Wood to re-
frain from practising in a case for which he is incompetent,
and to send for a person thoroughly acquainted with mes-
merism.


“In obstinate cases it might sometimes be advisable to in-
duce sound sleep by means of an opiate. This would imitate
natural somnambulism, in which the individual, upon returning
to his bed, falls asleep again, and awakes as usual in the morn-
ing.” In such cases also waiting is sure to be followed by
success: and the state is sure to wear itself out. No opium
or other drug is required, any more than “a blister to the
whole scalp”? in the other circumstances. Dr. Wood sees,
however, the proper plan of action in the induction of sleep.


* No. XL., p 357.


268 Mesmeric Cures as permanent as others.


Mesmerists in such cases diligently use all the mesmeric
means of deepening coma; and at last invariably succeed.
When they have succeeded, the sleep is most refreshing, and
followed by activity and buoyancy ; not, like the sleep of opium,
by thirst, feverishness, head-ache, costiveness, heaviness, or
some of the disagreeable effects of which we are daily com-
pelled to hear patients complain after a dose of this drug.


“ Nervous head-aches, neuralgic pains, morbid vigilance,
great restlessness, and various hysterical disorders may some-
times be removed, at least for a time, by bringing about this
condition of system.” But when it is understood, that the per-
son acted on is thrown into a condition, in which, while pas-
sions may be developed, control over the conduct, and the in-
fluence of habitual principle cease, the practice must strike the
reflecting mind as extremely hazardous, and fraught with the
possibility of so much unmitigated evil, that it can scarcely be
justified as a remedy.” “ Removed at least foratime!” The
cures with mesmerism are as permanent as those by any of the
measures employed in medicine. If Dr. Wood had studied
all the volumes of The Zoist, as was his duty, before he pub-
lished his last edition, and as is the duty—the solemn duty—
of every writer upon the practice of medicine and surgery,
and every teacher, aye, and practitioner, he would have es-
caped the vulgar error which suggested that remark.

In 1845 I incidently wrote :*—


‘Through this perseveranee with mesmerism, not one of my
own similar cases has suffered a relapse. Hannah Hunter (Vol. L.,
p- 300) and Maria Pearsey (p. 427) remained ever afterwards per-
fectly free from their complaints, and died at length of consumption.
Master Salmon (p. 314), Mrs. Brett (p. 329), Elizabeth Kell (p. 334),
Miss Cohen (p. 335), Miss Melhuish (p. 429), Mary Grimes (p. 453),
Miss Spong (p. 457), Miss Critchley, now Mrs Hall (Vol. II.,
p. 42), Miss Barber (p. 194), Miss Abbott, now Mrs. Brooks (Vol.
III., p. 39), have had no sort of relapse to this day. Except
what are in this number, I have recorded no kind of cases mesmer-
ised by myself besides four cases of St. Vitus’s dance; Vol. I., p.
195, Vol. III., p. 281), and not one of these has suffered a relapse
since I published them: nor recorded any case mesmerised under
my direction, except two of St Vitus’s dance and three of insanity,
and in none of these have I heard of a relapse.”


I can repeat these assertions in September, 1853, and make
it in reference to every other case which I have subsequently
recorded. He would also have learnt that diseases are cured


* No. XI., p. 354.


Advice to Dr. Wood. 269


every hour with mesmerism without bringing about this con-
dition of system. Rheumatism, neuralgia, ulcers, &c., &c.,
yield to local mesmerism. As to the patient being thrown
into a condition in which passion may be developed, self-
control and habitual principle be lost, and there being extreme
hazard or the state being fraught with the possibility of un-
mitigated evil, why, bless the poor professor! when a doctor
is called in, his doings may be extremely hazardous and
fraught with the possibility of unmitigated evil. He may
bleed, and physic, and mercurialize, and insist upon low diet,
and give stuporifics when he ought to do none of these things,
and may cause the patient to grow ten times worse and, at
last, to die. He may give meat, strong soup, wine, brandy,
or porter when these are all pernicious. He may give bitter
for sweet, and sweet for bitter: and moreover may torment
the patient, perhaps a little innocent sensitive child, with
useless blisters, moxas, issues, setons, fiery liniments, inces-
sant nauseous draughts, and cruelly harass the poor creature
who is unfortunately in his power through poverty, or, as is
very common among all ranks, through ignorance of his in-
capacity,—an ignorance which renders innumerable patients
infatuated with the grossest blockheads who were ever licensed
to practise and do mischief “ impune per totam terram.” Such
objections are absolute twaddle. I have seen none of this
fabricated mischief of mesmerism. I say fabricated ; because
I believe that doctors who make these objections generally
know better, and are playing a worldly part, which they re-
gard as sagacious, but which high-minded men despise.

Let Dr. Wood visit our Mesmeric Infirmary, and let him
examine the case books from their beginning, and see if any
of his ridiculous objections are justified. He will discover no
ill effects, moral or medical. He will find all proceeding
quietly, decently, and in order; ladies of the highest charac-
ters superintending the most respectable female mesmerisers
of women and children ; and everything just as satisfactory in
the men’s rooms. Visitors, both ladies and gentlemen, from
all parts of the country and of the globe, are there daily,
and all on leaving it express the highest gratification.

Mesmerism is too strong a fact, and too surpassing a
measure of relief and cure, and of cure in a far greater
variety of diseases than those in Dr. Wood’s meagre list, not
to overpower all the selfishness, all the twaddle, and all the
malice of the combined forces of the various divisions of the
medical profession in all countries.

JoHn ELLiorson.


( 270 )


VII. Captain Hudson's successful labours :—Cures of Inflam-


mation, Stammering, Rheumatism, Head-ache, Deafness,
Fits, Palsy.


‘MEDICAL REFORM.
“‘ To the Editor of the Daily News.

‘¢ Sir,—Your excellent endeavours to further the cause of medical reform have
met a hearty response in various parts of England, where your paper is perused
with much interest. Chancery and the dock-yards have undergone a fumigation
which will make them smell sweet for some time. But is there any one to put a
long brush into the cobwebs of the College of Surgeons and College of Physicians ?
—the great encouragers now of illegitimate practice, and the great sources of all
the evils that beset the profession, and through it the health of the public. Lord
Aberdeen and Lord Palmerston have given the question much consideration, and
now, if they wish to give the utmost satisfaction to all the better-thinking portion
of the profession, they will introduce the measure of Sir Charles Hastings, and
allow it a free discussion in the House of Commons and House of Lords. If it
be given up for another year, the most dire cruelty will be practiced on hundreds
of young medical men who have no earthly means of competing with the plague
of ‘table movers,’ mesmerists, homoeopathists, caloripathists, coffinites, &c.,
that like locusts are now eating up the practice that should for public benefit
belong to the properly educated man—the education of the latter costing him in
apprenticeship, hospitals, &c., fully £1,000; the education of the quacks simply
a large amount of impudence and want of principle.


** Yours, &c., A Puysictan.
“ May 25, 1853.’’*


TO THE EDITORS OF THE ZOIST.


June lst, 1853.
GenTLEMEN,—I am happy to have it in my power to send
you an account of my past labours and abundant success in
the cause of curative mesmerism.

In Lancashire and Yorkshire I have given 318 lectures;
often to large audiences: in Rochdale from the first I have
given 60 lectures; in Todmordan, 17; in Hebden Bridge, 4;
in Halifax, 22.

In the latter town I operated upon several persons for cure.
One was Mr. Denton, chemist and druggist, who had suffered
severely from the bite of a rabid cat. His hand was very
much swollen and in severe pain, so that he could not use it.
After three sittings he could use it and write nearly as -well
as he ever did. Since that time he has enjoyed good health,
and we have corresponded together.

I had another case in the same town ; that of a boy whom
I cured of stammering. I had him on the platform several
times before the public.

In Bradford I gave 12 lectures in the Mechanics’ Insti-
tute. In Liverpool I gave 46 lectures in the Concert Hall


* We have a right to expect better things of the Daily News than the
admission of such a letter as this.—Zoist.


Captain Hudson’s great merit. 271


and Assembly Rooms. In Preston, Lancashire, I gave 26
lectures in the Corn Exchange Rooms.

In this town many persons received benefit. I put four
persons who were deaf and dumb into the mesmeric state,
three of whom heard me speak ; one acted under the influence
of music, and one spoke twice; many others also received
much benefit.

In Ormskirk I gave 6 lectures ; in Bury 28 lectures in the
Athenzum, and generally had large attendances, and several
persons were operated on for various diseases. At Blackburn
I gave 44 lectures in the theatre, which was sometimes
crowded to excess.

In this town a large number of persons were operated on
for cure, there being 180 in all on the books. Among the
number are the following :—James Councel, who writes, “I
have been afflicted in my right arm for two years anda half,
so that I have not been able to work for my family. W. H.
Hornby, Esq., late Mayor of Blackburn, gave me recom-
mendations at two different times to go into the Manchester
Infirmary, where I was for eighteen weeks, including both.
I was discharged as incurable. Since that time I have been
in the greatest distress, for want of means to provide for my
family. I applied to Captain Hudson; he mesmerised my
arm until I had the power of raising it to my head under the
first operation,—a thing I had not done for two years and a
half before. I continued to gain strength ever since, and can
now lift two 56-pounds weights, and work for my family. I
give this statement truthfully; and Captain Hudson may
make what use of it he thinks proper for the good of mes-
merism, and the great blessing to be derived from it.

* 30, Knuzsden Brook, Shadworth, Blackburn.”


Miss E. Keneally, of Nova Scotia, Blackburn, had a
gathering in her face for two years. After being mesmerised
by me for one month, is now cured. She was several times
on the platform at my lectures in the sleep.

Mr. Thomas Woodburn, of Cross Street, Blackburn, had
been afflicted with rheumatism for eighteen months ; after being
operated on for five weeks is now perfectly cured. He appeared
before the public, shewing what benefit he had received from
mesmerism.

Mr. George Ellison, Chapel Street, Blackburn, had re-
ceived a severe bruise in the head, and had suffered very much
from it for three years. After being operated upon for six
weeks is now quite restored to health.


Mr. William Thornbrough, of Chapel Green, Blackburn,
VOL. XI. x


272 Captain Hudson’s


had been suffering from a violent head-ache for nine years.
After being operated on for two weeks is now enjoying perfect
health, and freedom from pain.

Miss Mary Ann Lofthouse, Old Square, Blackburn, had
been suffering from pain in the head (arising from nervous
debility) for three years; after being operated on for three
weeks 1s now cured.

Mr. J. Alston had been deaf for six years. After being ope-
rated on for sia weeks has now completely recovered his hearing.

Miss Ann Baron, of Brookhouse, Blackburn, subject to
fits for nine years, several in a day ; after being mesmerised
for six weeks, she is now entirely free from them. Since that
time she has been in public, and up to this date (June 5th),
now nearly four months, she has not had a fit or the least
symptoms of one, and is now enjoying good health.

During my visit to Blackburn I had sometimes eighteen
females and twenty males mesmerised all at once on the
public stage; many of them patients upon whom I was ope-
rating for the cure of disease. I had the attendance of cler-
gymen, doctors, magistrates and manufacturers. On some
occasions numbers had to return home for the want of room.
No public opposition was manifested. The question has now
become settled, as to its truth and general utility. During
my stay I gave a benefit for the Mechanics’ Institute, which
was numerously attended.

At Bolton-le-Moor I gave a second course of eight lec-
tures in the Temperance Hall, which were all well attended,
and got several subjects out of the audience. One young
person I found enjoying good health I had operated upon
previously to this visit, about eighteen months before, for fits ;
although she used to have four or five fits per day, she has
not had one since.

I had the pleasure of seeing the man who was cured of
lock-jaw, by Mr. J. Hughes, mentioned in The Zoist of Janu-
ary 1853. He has had no return of it, and is now working
for his family. In Rochdale I gave eight more lectures
this year, where I had been so successful last. During my
stay I operated on Miss Mary Shepherd, who had been afflicted
for four years with inflammation in the nose and face. She
had been under five doctors in the above town, and all had
failed to cure her. She had quite lost all hopes of being
cured until she tried mesmerism. I put her into the sleep
several times, to the astonishment of herself and friends,
and now she is quite relieved and free from pain. She used
the mesmerised water very often, from which she received much
benefit. She now enjoys health and comfort in her mind.


striking Cures. 273


At Ashton-under-Lyne I have just finished a course of
twenty-eight lectures to very numerous audiences. During
my stay there I had above a hundred persons applying to me
to try them for the cure of all kinds of complaints. Some
of these I may mention. Mary Ann Johnson, from Duck-
enfield, with very sore eyes. She came on the platform from
the audience under the influence; afterwards I operated on
her in private, and gave her mesmerised water to drink. In
a few days she came back to me quite cured.

Mr. Bullock had been afflicted by palsy, so that he lost
the use of his right arm and side, and could not walk without
a stick. After a few times mesmerising he lifted his arm on his
head, took his hat and put it on, to the astonishment of all
his friends, and left off the use of his stick. He is well
known to the inhabitants of the town.

Sidney Herbert, a young man 16 years of age, who had
had an impediment in his speech for many years, so that I
could not well understand him, after being mesmerised a
few times before a large audience, answered questions fluently
to the great surprise of his friends, who confirmed the fact
of his cure by their previous knowledge of his affliction.

In conclusion I may observe that clergymen of the town
attended my lectures very often, and verified many of the
cases I brought forward.

There is another person who has been cured. He lost the
use of both his arms two years and a half ago by rheumatic
pains. His medical attendant, — Cosgrave, M.D., Staley-
bridge, sent him to me. The following certificate has been
given to me from a benefit society about the man.


“ Staleybridge, July 23rd, 1853.

“ Sir,—This is to certify that Isaac Yates is a member of

our lodge, and has received 90 weeks’ sick pay from our

society ; and we return you our thanks for the benefit he has

received at your hands, hoping you will prosper in your

* undertaking.

“T remain yours on behalf of the society,

“Joun Hamppen Wi1p, Secretary.”


Hoping I have not given too long an account, but feeling
assured the cause in the hands of Providence will continue
to be a great blessing to the community at large,

I subscribe myself,
H. Hupson.


6, Nile Street, Liverpool.


( 274 )


VIII. Popular Letters on the Odic Force, and on Magnetism.
By Baron Reicuensacn. Translated by William Gregory,
M.D., F.R.S.E., Professor of Chemistry in the University
of Edinburgh.


(Continued from the last number.)
Letrer VI.
The Human Frame considered in reference to Od.


You have seen that when I place my right hand in the left
hand of a sensitive, an agreeable coolness is produced; but
that when I do the same with my left hand, an unpleasant
sensation of warmth is excited. This may be inverted, and
the grateful coolness produced by placing my left hand in the
sensitive’s right, while my right hand in the right hand of
the sensitive, causes the disagreeable warmth. Here we have
a law; namely, that the contact of like-named hands (left in
left, right in right) is warm and unpleasant, while that of
unlike hands (right in left or left in right) is cool and pleas-
ing. Let me now beg you to recall the remark in my first
letter, that there are people who dislike the taking of their
hands by others, and tear away their own if held for some
time. Now we usually hold out our right hands on both
sides, and therefore have contact of like-named hands, which
is warm and unpleasant, and becomes painful, and at last
intolerable to the sensitive, who break the contact by tearing
away their hands.

Take a step farther: place your right fingers on the ieft
arm, shoulder, axilla, temple, loin, knee, foot, or points of
the toes of a sensitive, and everywhere it will be felt grate-
fully cool. These are all contacts of unlike-named parts.
The same results follow, if you use your left fingers on the
right side of the sensitive ; for these are also combinations of
unlike-named parts. But if you make the same trials on the
left side of the sensitive with your left fingers, or ontheright _
side with your right fingers, in every case the sensation will
be unpleasantly warm; and these are all combinations of
like-named parts.

You may test my statements by another very common
form of combination. Place yourself close to a sensitive, as
close as soldiers stand in rank and file. Here your whole
right side will touch the whole left side of the sensitive, and
he will make no complaint: but if you turn round, so that
your left side touches his left side, he will immediately com-
plain of the unpleasant tepid sensation, and if you do not
soon return to your first position, he will not be able to hold


The human system and odic force. 275


out, and will leave his place. It is obvious that at first you
formed a combination of unlike-named, and afterwards one
of like-named parts.

Try another method. Place yourself close behind your
sensitive with your front to his back, or before him with your
back towards his front. In both cases your right side comes
to be next his right, and your left next his left. This like-
named combination on both sides the sensitive is unable to
endure, and, if you do not change the position, he will do so
by moving away. I must again ask you to refer to the pas-
sage in my first letter, in which I pointed out, that there are
people who cannot bear that any one should stand close behind
or before them, and who, for this reason, avoid all crowds,
assemblages, markets, &c. You now see that these persons
have good reasons for this.

I know men—young, vigorous and active—who dislike
riding. This is almost unnatural in man: for to the vigour of
youth, the curvettings and plungings of a spirited horse afford
intense enjoyment. But in riding we have our right side on
the right of the horse, our left on his left; so that the case
is the same as when one man stands before another, back to
front. All those men, in whom I have observed this dislike
of riding, were sensitive. As examples I may name Barons
August and Heinrich von Oberlaender.

There are also women who cannot carry a child on their
backs, not even in sport for a few minutes. This case is the
same as the first; and all these women I have found to be
sensitive.

Many persons are utterly unable to sleep two in a bed ;
in fact these “mauvais coucheurs” have become proverbial.
The reason is plain from what has been explained.

Lastly, the universal custom among civilized nations of
giving the right side to the person who is to be honoured, by
placing ourselves on his left side or holding him by his left
arm, is deeply grounded in the odic peculiarities of our frame.
It has indeed been said, that this custom arose from the de-
sire to leave the right hand of the honoured person free to
use the sword, &c. This may have had some share in it,
but the influence of sensitiveness has had infinitely more.
When two persons stand side by side, they give off mutually
their od each to the other. The person on the right hand
receives from the other a charge of negative od; the one on
the left hand receives a charge of positive od. The former
gains as much in negativity as the latter loses; the latter
gains as much in positivity as the former loses. But the ne-
gative state, that of greater odic negativity is, as you know,


276 Mesmerism.


the cool and grateful one; the positive state the tepid and
unpleasant one. When we place a lady on our right, she
gains as much in comfort as we do in discomfort. The key
to this ancient custom is therefore not merely in tradition
but is founded on a truth in our inmost nature.

Innumerable similar cases occur in life, in infinitely va-
ried combinations ; but all may be explained and appreciated
according to the law above illustrated. We may also per-
ceive, from these facts, how well founded are the claims to
consideration put forth by the sensitive, whose sufferings in
general meet with no compassion.


Letter VII.
Mesmerism. Passes. The Physicians.


You will now ask what, from our point of view, is the so-
called magnetizing of a person; and you may perhaps think
this the turning point of these letters. This is by no means
the case ; but still the subject forms an important department
of the odic phenomena. It has acquired a high degree of
practical value, and has led to what is called Mesmerism,—
that is, to a method introduced by Dr. Mesmer into the prac-
tice of medicine of using the odic force or dynamide as a cur-
ative agent in diseases. Mesmer, according to the state of
knowledge of his day, took it for magnetism, and called it
animal magnetism. The terms od and mesmerism will not
clash ; the former belongs to physical science, and designates
a cosmic force or influence ; the latter is applied to a special
application of this force in therapeutics, and belongs to me-
dicine.

Let me now refer to the fifth of these letters, in which I
invited you to make, with the light of the theory we had
reached in your hand, a rapid excursion with me through the
confused domain of the so-called animal magnetism.

You know, that wherever you may touch a sensitive with
your fingers, an appreciable sensation, accompanied in the
dark by a visible one,—namely, by light,—is produced in
him. But it is not necessary that contact should be esta-
blished ; for the mere approach of your fingers causes notable
effects. The emanation which, in the dark, visibly extends
far beyond the fingers, instantly reaches the object to which
it is approached, and acts on it. At the distance of several
inches you can still produce very decided results; but these
are perceived by persons of middling sensitiveness also at the
distance of a foot, or even of several feet. In the case of the


Contact and Motion. 277


highly sensitive, the action extends much farther,—to the
length of a room, for example; nay, I have had cases where
the action was plainly felt at the astounding distance of
twenty, thirty, and even more yards.

Hitherto we have considered contact without motion ; but
now I request you to perform a progressive motion from any
one part of the sensitive person to any other, with the points
of your fingers, with your open hand, with the pole of a crys-
tal, or with that of a magnet. For example, you may place
the fingers of your right hand on his left shoulder, and draw
it gently and slowly downwards to the elbow joints, or to be-
yond the points of his fingers if you will. As formerly, when
there was contact without motion, so now, when there is mo-
tion with the contact, you will produce a certain effect all the
way down,—namely, the sensation of a cool streak, which
may be regarded as a chain of innumerable cool points. This
is called by physicians a pass. If you do the same with other
parts, as the left side of the head, or of the trunk, or the left
leg down to the foot, the same coolness will result. And if
you perform the same motions with your left hand on the
right side of the patient, the same result will still be obtained ;
for in all these cases unlike-named parts are combined. If,
now, you make the motions or passes with both hands, each
on its proper side, and from head to foot, the whole person
of the patient will experience a most agreeable sensation of
coolness and repose. And what you have just done is what
the disciples of Mesmer and all magnetizing physicians call a
zo0-magnetic or mesmeric pass. You can now magnetize or
mesmerise.

It is evidently indifferent here, whether the passes be
made with the hands or with the poles of crystals, or with
those of magnets ; whether they be made in contact with the
skin, or above the clothes, or at the distance of half a span,
a yard, or even more; in all cases the same kind of effect
will be produced, only its amount will diminish as the dis-
tance is increased.

The influence, therefore, of the unlike-named odic ema-
nations from another source on the system of the sensitive
constitutes the essence of what is called magnetization or
mesmerisation. When the passes are made in absolute dark-
ness, the sensitives see the flaming luminous pencils from the
fingers passing along their person; they see, moreover, on
the places to which these flames directly point, a luminous
spot appear on the surface of their body, which follows the
course of the hand that makes the pass. From this luminous
appearance, as well as from the cool sensation, it follows that


Mesmerism noi a lie.


the operator exerts a stimulus on the organism of the patient,
—which stimulus must be regarded as a most important one,
that the od which flows out of the former with blue light, acts
on those parts which possess the red odic light, and stimulates
these (that is, the unlike-named parts) in a peculiar and very
remarkable way. And since the human body is a powerful
source of od, and consequently odic influence has a great
share in its inmost peculiarities, it is easy to see how odic
passes may strike deep into the physical and mental economy
of man. The production of sleep or of restlessness, beneficial
or injurious influence on diseased states of the system, effects
produced by “ imposition of hands, passes and the like,” are
not therefore “a miserable labyrinth of lies, imposture and
superstition,” as a certain authority has ventured to pro-
nounce them ;* but are physiological facts quite according to
natural laws, and well grounded on experience and observa-
tion. It is only those who have never taken the trouble to
test them, who can permit such immature judgments on the
subject to escape them.

But if you ask me for the actual advantage derived by
medicine up to the present time, from the method of odic
passes, I am indeed convinced that this advantage may be-
come inestimable, when the physical and physiological his-
tory of od shall have been fully developed ; while I must con-
fess that at present it appears to me both limited and insecure.
If we read of or listen to the magnetizers, they are still, as
Mesmer was 80 years ago, able to cure almost all diseases.
Every physician, to whatever school he belong, imagines,
when the patient recovers, that he and his art have cured
him; why then should not the magnetizer be equally satis-
fied? We know, indeed, that out of twenty who are cured,
nineteen recover spontaneously or in spite of the doctor. But
this much at least I have found established, that, on every
spot of the body where contact or passes are made with unlike-
named parts, an intensification of vital activity is produced,
and this not merely superficial but such as soon penetrates to
the deepest seated organs. Wherever, therefore, local de-
bility or numbness exists, there we can introduce life and in-
creased activity. This is a great and comprehensive general
result, which sagacious physicians will know how to appre-


* M. Johannes Mueller, in his Manual of Physiology. We erroneously as-
cribed this disgraceful conduct and deplorable ignorance to M. Dubois-Reymond
at p. 125. The equally bad language used by the latter was not against mes-
merism, but against the views of Reichenbach. M. Dubois-Reymond is an imi-
tating and humble disciple of M. Mueller: and detests mesmerism and odism
equally. See Reichenbach’s Preface to his Second Edition of P. 1.—Zoist.


Chemical Action. 279


ciate. In particular, I regard the influence of od on spas-
modic affections as decided ; I have, times out of number, at
will excited or repressed spasm. But when I have seen phy-
sicians operating, I have observed that, with few exceptions,
they used motions so opposed to a rational principle of appli-
cation of a force like od, that it was impossible to expect any
benefit to the patient.* Without any knowledge of the force
of its laws, and by mere groping in the dark, what could we
hope to see achieved? We may trust, however, that when the
nature of od and of its relations to the other forces of the living
organism shall have been ascertained by accurate researches
and brought into a scientific form, physicians will begin, in-
stead of the chance work hitherto employed, to bring under
fixed laws the action of od in the diseased body, and thus to
procure for mankind some real benefit from these wonderful


influences, from which the world has so long and so justly
expected it.


Lerrer VIII.
Chemical Action.


I have now explained to you what is understood by ani-
mal magnetism ; it is not a truly magnetic but an odic action
on the human body, which may be exercised by numerous
other sources of od, quite as well, frequently better, than by
the magnet, which acts only as a source of od and not as a
magnet. We shall here drop the inappropriate term of ani-
mal magnetism, which arose at a time when men had the
most obscure and confused ideas of these things, and is no
longer compatible with the present state of our knowledge.
But before I lead you deeper into the subject in this direc-
tion, I must make you better acquainted with the real im-
portance and extensive diffusion of od as a natural force.

You are acquainted with it, as flowing perpetually and


* The ordinary method here employed, which has evidently been
derived from experience, is not by any means so irrational as the author
seems to suppose. The two hands of the operator are slowly moved
down the unlike-named sides of the patient, so that the effect is the
combined result of the odic influence of both hands. A few such
passes often produce the mesmeric state. Again; the action of up-
ward passes, in arousing the patient, is strictly according to the
physical laws of odic excitation. It is perhaps not going too far to
say, that in the case of susceptible or sensitive persons, no means of
acting on the nervous system is nearly so powerful as the use of
mesmeric passes.—W. G.


280 Odic force displayed


unchangeably, though from an entirely unknown origin, out
of the poles of crystals; as flowing also from a source, how-
ever, which is gradually enfeebled and finally dried up, from
the poles of steel magnets; and lastly, as flowing from a
temporary but living source, namely, from organized living
structures. I shall now introduce you to od, which suddenly
blazes up, and is soon again extinguished ; that is, to the od
evolved in chemical changes, or from chemical action, which
we must here distinguish from chemical attraction or affinity,
the latter being the force that produces the former.

If you open a bottle of champagne in the dark before a
sensitive, he will be astonished and delighted to see a stream
or beam of fire following the flight of the cork from the mouth
of the bottle to the ceiling. The whole bottle also will appear
bathed in a bright white glow, as if of shining snow, and a
luminous wavy cloud will play over it. As you see nothing
of all these splendid fireworks, you know that this must be
an odic phenomenon, and if you would enquire into it you
must follow me in a few experiments.

Throw a spoonful of powdered sugar or of decrepitated salt
(still in absolute darkness) into a glass of water. The sensi-
tive, who previously saw little or nothing of either, will now
see, especially when the mixture is stirred, that the water
and the glass immediately become luminous. If he hold the
glass in his left hand he will feel it become very cool. Hence
mere solution evolves od, or is a source of od. Now place a
wire of iron, copper or zinc, in a glass with diluted sulphuric
acid. The wire will exhibit throughout a kind of glow, and
a luminous appearance will issue from its upper end, like the
flame of a candle, but incomparably feebler in luminous in-
tensity. Above, this flame passes into a feebly luminous
smoke or vapour, mixed with many small sparks which stream
upwards. The wire will feel to the sensitive left hand much
colder than it was before. The act of chemical dissolution, as
distinguished from that of simple solution, is therefore also a
source of od. Next make an effervescing draught. First,
dissolve in the dark the bicarbonate of soda in half a glass of
water, it will at once bécome luminous (to the sensitive).
Dissolve the tartaric acid in another half glass of water; this
will become also luminous, and even more so than the first.
When both have ceased to shine, after a few minutes, mix
the solutions together. Instantly the mixture will become
brightly luminous; it will feel icy cold to the (sensitive) left
hand, and a large, whitish, feebly shining cloud will rise
above the glass. Here, chemical decomposition (along with
combination, W.G.) evolves od abundantly and energetically.


in Chemical Action. 281


Prepare a solution of acetate of lead, and add to it one of
alum ; the whole liquid will at once become visible in the
dark. Bring the two wires of a voltaic apparatus into a vessel
of water; as soon as the decomposition begins, the sensitive
will see the water become gradually more and more luminous
while the vessel feels cold to his left hand. All chemical
changes, therefore evolve od; chemical action is an energetic
source of od, suddenly excited but quickly again subsiding,
as the play of chemical attractions comes to its natural ter-
mination in the repose of equilibrium.

When the stopper is removed from a phial of alcohol, or
better, of ether, of caustic ammonia, or, best of all,one of pure
eupione (a volatile carbohydrogen, formed in the destructive
distillation of organic matters) of Sp. G. 0°65, in absolute
darkness, and if the air be still, and care be taken to avoid
disturbing it by the breath, the sensitive person sees a column
of light rise from the mouth of the phial, and this, more
rapidly in proportion to the tension of the vapour of the sub-
stance. At the same time the liquid in the glass becomes
luminous. Not only, however, substances, which evaporate
so rapidly as those above named, but others less volatile, and
even mercury, with its very low tension, send up a luminous
vapour through the opening of the phial. Solids such as
camphor, and above all, iodine, give out a brightly luminous
smoke or vapour, and become also themselves luminous.
Hence evaporation, even spontaneous, and consequently also,
distillation, go on with a continual evolution of od.

Every fermenting saccharine solution is thus luminous,
and the bubbles of gas rise in it like glowing pearls of light.
The juice of the grape, during its fermentation, is such a
liquid, in a state of chemical activity, and is constantly
luminous in the dark to sensitives. You can now explain
how your champagne appeared to be resolved into fire and
flame.

But putrefaction is also a process analogous to fermenta-
tion, and hence all putrescent matter is luminous. This
indeed, we all know, in the shape of what is called phos-
phorescence ; but we have not yet shewn how closely this is
allied to odic light. When we, who are not sensitive, are
unable to detect a trace of light in putrescent bodies, sensi-
tives yet see them in the full odic glow.

Since we are occupied with putrefaction, we are not far
from the dead. Follow me for a moment into the realms of
the departed, on my promise to bring you back soon, and
enriched by an instructive glance into their nocturnal activity.


282 Grave-lights explained.


You surely know that the departed souls wander for a time,
in a fiery shape, over their graves, till they have thrown off,
or expiated all of earth that still adheres to them, and have
thus attained everlasting repose? You look doubtfully at me
as I ask this; but I am in earnest; for these spirits or ghosts
are seen, and abundance of witnesses will testify to the fact.
But you have no doubt heard from your nurse that it is not
every one who has the gift to see the ghosts or souls of the
departed, and that only certain people have been selected for
the privilege of beholding them. All this struck me forcibly,
when I was trying good sensitives with putrescent animal
matter. I wished to try whether I could not make acquaint-
ance with the dead in their fiery shapes. Mdlle. Leopoldine
Reichel consented to go with me on a very dark night to the
churchyard of Griinzing, near Vienna, not far from my resi-
dence. She saw, in fact, on several graves, fiery appearances.
Being subsequently taken to the enormous cemeteries of
Vienna, she saw a number of graves covered with moving
lights, which moved uniformly back and forwards, almost
like dancers or lines of soldiers. Some were tall, and almost
like men, others smaller, and creeping along the ground like
dwarfish goblins. But all of them were over the newer
graves, the old ones having no fiery sentinel. Mdlle. Reichel
went timidly towards them; at her approach, the human
forms melted away, and she saw that they were nothing more
than luminous clouds, such as she had seen a thousand times
in my darkened chamber. She went still nearer, and saw
only a feebly luminous vapour ; she even was bold enough to
enter the vapours, which reached to her neck ; and she could
cause them to yield and flicker by the motion of her clothes.
Thus the dances and military exercises over the graves were
resolved into the effects of the wind or of currents of air,
which played uniformly with all these lights. Another time,
I sent four sensitives to the cemetery at Sievring. It was so
dark, that several of them fell down in going thither. But
they all saw the ghostly appearances more or less brightly,
according to their degrees of sensitiveness. They saw these
like luminous air over new graves; and one having drawn
lines with a stick on one such grave, the lines remained visi-
ble in a stronger light. Now what is all this? It is nothing
else than the putrescent miasms, given out by the graves,
and which rise into the air over them, where the wind plays
with them, and fear interprets their motions as the dances of
ghosts. It is carbonate of ammonia, phosphuretted hydrogen,
and other products of putrefaction known or unknown, which


Sound. 283


in evaporating, evolve odic light. As soon as the putrefac-
tion is complete, the lights cease to appear, that is, the guilt
of the dead has been expiated.

But now, my dear friends, we have an apology to make
to our old women, an injustice towards them to make good.
The fiery spirits over graves exist in truth, and their presence
cannot be denied ; this we must concede, nolentes, volentes.
Nay we must, with shame and contrition, confess, that these
ghosts, as the old ladies aforesaid always told us, cannot be
seen by all, but only by certain chosen and privileged per-
sons, that is, by the sensitive. It is not their fault, I mean
that of the old women, that we have so long been unable to
comprehend what has been steadily asserted for many cen-
turies.

(This ought to serve as a good lesson to us, never to reject
statements of facts merely because they have been somewhat
disguised by ignorance. Men of science ought long since to
have separated, in this case, the well attested fact of the
luminous appearances over graves, from the ignorant theory
which ascribed it to ghosts or spirits ; instead of rejecting the
fact because of its dress. Had they done this, we should,
long ere this, have been well acquainted with the odic phe-
nomena, and with the important fact of the existence of sen-
sitiveness. This is by no means a solitary case; for it is
certain that all firmly established popular beliefs, however
apparently absurd at first sight, however disguised by passing
through centuries of tradition, were originally founded on a
true observation of some natural fact. Let us carefully avoid
the error of the wholesale rejection of such popular beliefs,
and endeavour, in every case, to discover the truth on which
they rest, which, as in the above example, may be of the
highest value.—W. G.)


Lerrer IX.
Sound. Friction. Running Waters.


In my last letter we attacked superstition, after hunting it
out in a lurking place where it had lain concealed for ages.
We shall to-day inflict on it another similar blow. Let us
further examine the extent in which od is diffused in nature.
In October, 1851, I had the mechanician, Enter of Vienna, a
person of middling sensitiveness, in my dark chamber, and
wished to try, whether any relation could be traced between
sound and od. I took a glass bell jar, held it by the knob,
and struck it gently with a key. As it sounded, it became


284 Friction.


visible and luminous. The harder the blow, the brighter was
the light. A rod of metal or a horse shoe magnet, struck so
as to ring, became more luminious than before. A metallic
bell, of strong and penetrating tone, being struck for some
time continuously, became so luminous, that a bright stream
extended throughout the room, and was seen by all sensitives,
When the bow was drawn across the strings of a violin, not
only the strings, but the entire sounding board, became
luminous. Sounding bodies were not only themselves in a
glow of odic light, but they also diffused a brightness around
them, and appeared as if surrounded by a halo or the glory
of a saint. When I struck a glass with a knife as we some-
times do, in the absence of a bell, to summon a servant, the
glass acquired a covering or external layer of light, which was
brighter as the tone given out was more acute. The light
exhibited a perceptible tremor, like the sound itself. The
spot struck was invariably the brightest of all.

I now caused sensitives to place their hands, separately,
within bells or bell jars, avoiding contact ; and when I now
struck the bell so as to produce the sound, the left hand felt
a cool, the right a tepid influence. Here the odic sensations
were produced, and this in the sense of the blue solar ray, of
the upper crystalline pole, and of the northward pole of the
magnet. I had, in short, the satisfaction of discovering, in
sound, a new and very powerful source of od.*

Another time I investigated the subject of friction. In
July, 1844, I gave to Mdlle. Maria Maix a copper wire in her
left hand, to the farther end of which I had attached a small
board. When I rubbed a similar board on this one, warmth
flowed through the wire into the sensitive’s hand. When,
in the dark, I rubbed the wire itself on a grindstone in the
turning lathe, the whole wire acquired the odic glow, and
clothed itself with a luminous halo; while from the end fur-


* It would be very desirable to ascertain the effect produced on
sensitives, in the dark, by musical sounds, in the forms of both
melody and harmony. It is very probable that both consecutive
sounds, as in melody, and sounds combined in harmony may prove
still more powerful sources of od, and that this may have some con-
nection with the action of music on the system. Those who feel
music deeply must often have observed, that passages of exquisite
melody, and rich, full harmonies, produce sensations which though
delightful, almost approach to those of faintness, and that the
listener trembles and turns pale under the pleasing influence. This
is not unlike some of the effects of the odic current ; and it is well
known, that persons in the mesmeric state, who are always sensitive,
are peculiarly susceptible to musical impressions.—W. G.


Running Waters. 285


thest from the grindstone there rose a light like the flame of
acandle. As another test, I took a barometer tube of glass,
placed one end of it in a glass of water, and rubbed the other
on the quickly revolving grindstone. The whole tube, as well
as the glass of water, became luminous. ll sensitives found
the water, on tasting it, tepid, bitterish, and nauseous, and one
whom I persuaded to drink off the whole glass, soon after-
wards was attacked with violent and repeated vomiting. It
was therefore beyond a doubt that od is abundantly and
vigorously developed by friction.

The application of this observation led to a result which I
feel sure will give you pleasure. I wished to ascertain whe-
ther the friction of liquids also evolved od. And I found, in
fact, that closed glass vessels, containing alcohol, ether, oil of
turpentine, creosote, &c., all became, with their contents,
luminous, when shaken in the dark. Water also, when
shaken in stoppered bottles, became luminous, and felt tepid
to the left hand of sensitives, but when at rest, it became in
a few seconds invisible, and from the reaction felt cool to the
left hand. A strange idea now occurred to me: do not be
alarmed, but it was neither more nor less than the despised
divining rod; while the water seekers, the spring finders, rose
to my remembrance along with it. If, thought I, water when
shaken evolves od, may not perhaps running water do the
same? To test this, I wrapped up part of a glass tube
thickly with paper, gave the covered part of it into the left
hand of sensitives, and poured water down the tube out of a
glass vessel through a glass funnel, in a continuous stream,
All the sensitives felt that warmth came through the paper
as long as I poured, and that coolness returned as often as I
ceased to pour the water. When I made the experiment in
the dark, the water in the funnel first, and then along the
whole tube became luminous. There was no doubt, then,
that water, in merely flowing through a tube, developed od ;
and my hope was strengthened. I now took Mlle. Zinkel,
who was of middling sensitiveness, out to the park which sur-
rounds my country-house. I knew the direction of a pipe,
conveying water, which is carried under the surface of a large
forest meadow, but is quite invisible on the surface. I now
caused my sensitive to walk slowly across the meadow, in
such a direction that her path must cut the line of the water
pipe. When she drew near it, I saw her stop in her progress,
step backwards and forwards, and finally stand still. Here,
she assured me, she felt, up to her knees, especially in the
left foot, a disagreeable tepid sensation, which had not oc-
curred in any other part of the meadow. She was standing,


286 Heat.


in fact, precisely over the water pipe, which brings the water
of a spring from a distance of nearly two English miles to my
farm. I repeated this experiment with several other sensi-
tives, all entirely ignorant of the existence and situation of
the pipe, and always with the same result. Here, then, the
divining rod rises from the deep degradation to which ignor-
ance and unmerited ridicule had reduced it! Not perhaps,
indeed, the rod itself; for that may have been but the dress
in which the truth was disguised; but so much the more cer-
tainly the inmost nucleus of truth, which lay concealed
within it, and which has been hitherto unable to obtain accept-
ance with mankind. It is nothing else than the action of the
od set at liberty by the friction of the moving water, on the
sensitive nervous system.

Monsieur Sourcier,* in France, the celebrated spring
seeker, or rather spring finder, who is sent for to all parts of
the country, and has brought the discovery of springs of
water to an admirable degree of practical perfection, is doubt-
less nothing else than a highly sensitive person. As often as
he passes over subterraneous running water, he perceives its
odic influence on his excitable frame; he can, according to
the greater or less stimulus, conclude as to the less or greater
depth of the water from the surface, and has acquired, by
practice, so much dexterity and certainty in this, as to have
secured the admiration and gratitude of half the French peo-
ple. His mystery, which has always been an enigma to him-
self, and which he was quite unable to explain, is now cleared
up, and we shall probably soon have, both in Germany and in
England, hundreds of spring finders, male and female, since
all highly sensitive persons will be found, after a little prac-
tice, highly adapted to this occupation. From henceforth, the


divining rod is no longer a mystery, and is the common pro-
perty of mankind.


Letter X.
Heat. Electricity. The Material Universe.


It is unnecessary for me to point out to you the part which
those powerful agencies, heat and electricity, must play in
reference to od. But here the matter becomes rapidly so
complicated, that I see no room for it within the narrow


_ _™ Surely this must be a name indicating the profession of this
individual, and not his real name. I have read of another name,
whose owner is perhaps called M. le Sourcier.—W. G.


Electricity.


bounds of these letters, and must therefore confine myself
to a few facts, very briefly stated. If you bring a pan of
glowing charcoal towards a highly sensitive person ; or if you
set fire to spirits of wine before him; or if you place him in
front of a wood fire, at the distance of some paces; or if in
front of him you throw some globules of potassium into water,
and then ask him what the sensations are which all these
combustions excite in him, you will no doubt expect him to
answer, Heat, or warmth. But both you and he will be
astonished, you to hear and he to feel, that coolness, not
warmth, is the predominating sensation. Now give him a
rod of light wood, about a yard long; let him hold one end
in his left hand, and set fire to the other; he will find that
as it burns it becomes cold in his hand at the other end.
Next give him a bar of iron, a glass rod or a porcelain tube,
and let him, holding one end of these in his left hand, heat
the other over the chimney of an Argand lamp ; he will shake
his head, and tell you that they all become cold to his hand.
The explanation of this apparent anomaly in the laws of heat
is simply this: that the heating of substances, as well as the
act of combustion, developes od. Conduct one end of a
metallic wire, of the thickness of a straw, into the dark
chamber through a hole in the door, excluding carefully all
external light. Now heat the outside end of the wire over a
charcoal fire; as soon as this is begun, the sensitive in the
dark will tell you of the appearance of a small bright flame
from the end of the wire beside him.

Without dwelling longer on this matter, although it be
one of great importance, I must hasten on to electricity, and
dismiss that also in a few brief sentences. The predominating
sensation perceived by all sensitives, where brought close to
bodies highly charged with positive or + electricity, is cool-
ness. But an electrophorus, when rubbed with fur, gives a
tepid sensation, while the fur emits coolness. If you strike
a cake of resin strongly with a fox’s brush in the dark before
the sensitive, and cause him to look at it from the side, he
will tell you that he sees a flame-like undulating light rise
from it, generally to the height of about eighteen inches.
The brush looks like a roller of white light. After a few
minutes the flame of the resinous cake disappears; but while
it plays it gives off a luminous smoke, which rises to the ceil-
ing, and there causes a large illuminated space, like that
described in the case of crystals and magnets. I possess a
very large electrical machine, which, with its support and
the conductor, rests on the floor; the whole forming a bulky


apparatus. When it is in repose, persons of middling sensi-
VOL, XI. Y


288 Electricity.


tiveness see hardly anything of it in the dark; but if the
plate be set in motion, although so slowly that ordinary elec-
tric light is nowhere visible, the whole apparatus notwith-
standing becomes visible in white odic light. Some sensitives
compared it, strangely enough, with a cartload of quick lime,
which it appears presents to them an entirely similar appear-
ance. A charged Leyden phial appeared throughout lumi-
nous. A long iron wire, passing through the dark chamber,
with both ends outside, through which I passed, from with-
out, the shock from a Leyden phial, became, after each shock,
white and luminous on its entire length for the space of four
or five minutes. At the moment of the discharge, a brighter
flash, as rapid as lightning, was seen by the sensitives to pass
along the wire, and they were able to give the direction in
which it passed, which was from the interior metallic coating
to the exterior one. Of the voltaic battery I shall only here
say, that the wire, when the circuit was closed, not only
becomes itself visible, exhibiting the odic glow, but is also
surrounded with a coil or screw of light, which rapidly moves
round the axis of the wire. It might be supposed that this
fact by itself (as well as that of the narrow stripe of red light
near the violet end of the odic spectrum, formerly noticed,)
would be sufficient to excite the liveliest interest of electri-
cians and men of science generally. It is well known that,
according to Ampére, the wire conducting the voltaic current
owes its magnetic properties to a current of something revolv-
ing in the form of a coil or screw in continual motion round
the axis of the wire. Now this conclusion, which Ampére and
others have attained by an infinite expenditure of acuteness
and sagacity in observation and reasoning, any sensitive child
can, so to speak, lay hold of and describe as an object of
sense, with all the accompanying circumstances. And surely
at last there will be found some sensitive electrician, as I
have already found at least a dozen sensitive physicians, who
will see this beautiful phenomena with their own eyes. But
how long it may be before the interest of these philosophers
becomes roused, is more, I must frankly admit, than I can
say


Heat and electricity are therefore powerful sources of od ;
but I must renounce the idea of here explaining the numerous
and varied phenomena to which they give rise.* Instead of


* The reader will find details on these subjects in my work
already quoted, The Imponderables in relation to the Vital Force,
of which two translations have appeared in England.


The Material Universe. 289


attempting this, I shall introduce you to the last and most
important of the sources of odic influence.

M. Anschiitz, a captain in the Austrian army, a good
sensitive of the middling degree, was confined to bed by ill-
ness in Baden. At this time his sensitiveness had become
very much increased in consequence of his indisposition.
While lying sleepless on his bed, it struck him that whenever
the nights were very dark he saw the lock, the hinges, and
other metallic parts of the door opposite to him, while yet
nothing else was visible in the room. He recognized that
these objects gave out a light ; that they were self-illuminated.
Others, but these of the highly sensitive class, saw all metallic
ornaments on furniture, all locks, all gilt objects in their
rooms, nay, every nail in the wall, shining, and giving out
either small flames or luminous smoke. I now arranged a
pattern card of several metals, which were found by all the
highly sensitive to be feebly luminous, some more, others less
so, but all were visible. A glass cabinet filled with silver
plate appeared, in the dark, and the more decidedly the longer
the sensitives remained in the darkness, full of a delicate fire.
When I tried other substances, such as charcoal, selenium,
iodine, sulphur, all these were also found to be luminous.
As in the case of phosphorescence, the aspect of these bodies
was like that of red hot matter, so that they appeared trans-
lucent, and the sensitives could see into them. Besides this
glow, the highly sensitive saw round these bodies the same
flame-like emanations, terminating in luminous smoke, which
has already been described in connexion with other concen-
trated emissions of od. Here, as there, the flame could be
set in motion, and made to flicker by the breath or by
currents of air, and in many cases illuminated the fingers
which held the substances. In the colour of the light these
substances were by no means alike, and this supplied a sure
means of controlling the accuracy of the statements made by
the sensitives.* Thus everything made of copper appeared
red hot, and clothed in a green flame; tin, lead, palladium


* The reader will at once see that this form of experiment con-
firms what was said in a former note. If a large number of sensitives
be separately examined as to the colour of the light from many differ-
ent bodies, and if, while quite ignorant of what the others have said,
each give the same answers, the conclusion is irresistible, that these
colours are external and objective, not internal and subjective, or
fanciful only. Were the latter the case, such perfect agreement as
is actually found would be both morally and physically impossible.


.


y 2


290 The world is full of luminous matter.


and cobalt were blue ; bismuth, zinc, osmium, titanium, potas-
sium, were red; silver, gold, platinum, antimony, and cad-
mium, white; nickel and chromium, greenish with a tinge of
yellow ; iron almost variegated, with rainbow colours ; arsenic,
charcoal, iodine and selenium were red; sulphur was blue,
and this substance was even frequently seen by sensitives of
the middling degree to be blue. Compound bodies also were
luminous, and some remarkably so ; for example, theobromine
was white, parabanic acid of a bright and beautiful blue;
quicklime, red. I placed several hundred chemical prepara-
tions in a closely arranged portable collection, kept it in the
dark (to avoid all chance of phosphorescence), and only opened
it in the darkness of the dark chamber. Those of middling
sensitiveness saw only some substances, but those of high
sensitiveness saw all without exception shining more or less
brightly. Even the stone walls of the dark chamber, after
the sensitives had been very long in the dark, appeared in a
delicate white light, and this at last reached such a point,
that my sensitives saw everything in the room as in a kind
of twilight, and even took me, who could see absolutely
nothing, by the arm, and led me with perfect certainty about
the room among my apparatus.

Thus all things are luminous; literally all. We live ina
world full of lumimous matter. As we have in the sun a very
intense emanation of light, so, on the earth, does a very feeble
luminous emanation proceed from everything that surrounds
us. The bodies which shine most feebly are those of light
and porous texture, such as cotton goods, woollen cloth, wood,
or loam; all stones shine distinctly; among amorphous
bodies, the metals and the simple bodies generally give out
the brightest light. This source of light, namely, from all
material bodies, is of lower and feebler intensity than all those
previously mentioned, but it is, on the other hand, to com-
pensate for this, infinite in extent.

And this light is odic? It is; because it has all the cha-
racter of odic light, and produces the peculiar sensations of
all forms of od. Place any metal, or sulphur, iodine, char-
coal, or graphite, on a small board, say of limewood, and
cause very sensitive persons to hold over it the hollow of the left
hand; you will hear that they are affected by it with agreeable
coolness, or unpleasant warmth, and most powerfully by those
which give out the brightest light, most feebly or not at all
by those whose light is feeble. Or give to them alternately,
to hold in the left hand, with or without gloves, bodies of all
kinds, alone, or in bottles, solid, liquid, or gaseous; they
will feel each differently, cooler or more tepid, more unplea-


Examples. 291


sant, or more grateful, and often with peculiar effects, belong-
ing to certain bodies. Try in this way sulphur, bromine,
bichromate of potash, oxygen gas, arsenic, mercury, or cop-
per. All will produce some effect, and the sensitives will be
able to distinguish, and even to classify all according to the
odic sensations they produce.

Not only, therefore, does od, in a concentrated form, flow
from special sources, but it is also a universal property of
natural bodies ; an unequally, but universally diffused dyna-
mide, or imponderable, just as heat, electricity, chemical
attraction, gravitation, and the like, are. It penetrates and
fills the frame of our universe in its smallest as well as in its
greatest parts.


Lerrer XI.
Examples from the Material World.


Do you still remember how I told you that frequently the
fairest maiden shuns her looking-glass? You will have ob-
tained, from my last letter, the explanation of this strange
fact. Quicksilver is one of those metals which causes in sen-
sitive persons the most intense sensation of unpleasant warmth.
If a sensitive approach the surface of a large mirror, he feels
over the whole body the painful action of the mercury as it
were poured over him. It is as if a nauseous tepid breathing
played upon him ; he feels as if repelled and driven back : and
if he resolves to defy this influence, he is attacked by pain at
stomach, nausea, head-ache, even vomiting, and is compelled
to remove from before the glass. This becomes so intensified
by repeated experience, that highly sensitive persons cannot
approach the mirror without shuddering, and cause it to be
covered up if they cannot remove it.

We may also glance back to the dislike of spoons made
of packfong, argentan, German silver, Chinese silver, and
similar alloys. Copper, which is the chief ingredient of all
of these, is a peculiarly intense odic body, having a very
strong tepid and offensive influence. It may be silvered as
thickly as we please ; all is in vain; the odic action of the
copper passes through, so as to become intolerable even to
those of middling sensitiveness, and in the highly sensitive
often to cause pain at stomach and spasms of the tongue and
mouth. I have often been told by sensitive ladies, that they
can wear no gold ornaments, which are painful and distress-
ing to them; that they cannot use a metallic thimble, but
must have one of ivory; that they can use no steel corset


292 Orefinders.


plate, no steel comb, nay, not even steel hair pins in their
head dress ; and all this entirely on account of the tepid and
nauseous odic action of these bodies.

To sensitive female servants, occupied in domestic mat-
ters, brass mortars, copper stewpans, above all, metallic
smoothing irons, are objects of aversion and horror. The
respected manufacturer, M. J. Fichtner, of Azgersdorf, near
Vienna, a good middling sensitive, has banished from his
kitchen all brass utensils ; for he cannot endure food or drink
prepared in vessels of brass or copper. In the case of the
highly sensitive, we may conceal metals under paper, linen,
or any other light covering; but they can always, without
contact, from the mere sensation in the hollow of the left
hand held over them, point out the spots where the bits of
metal lie. Now does not this involuntarily recall to you the
ninth of these letters, in which I spoke of running water
and of M. Sourcier? Suppose there lay in the ground, not
very far under the surface, in a cellar, for example, metals
or money, buried in considerable quantity, there can be no
doubt whatever that a highly sensitive person would detect this
by the sensations produced, sooner and more easily than
those of middling sensitiveness did the running water in my
park. Take now the case of a vein of lead glance, copper
pyrites, or red ore of antimony, lying not far from the sur-
face, and such veins often occur but a few feet below the
turf; a highly sensitive person, walking over the ground
with some attention, would, as you cannot for a moment
doubt after what has been said, perceive the sensation, and
point out accurately the spot where the ore lies. Even other
matters, such as the outcrop of coal beds, must act on such
persons differently from the sandstone or the slate clay, in
which they are stratified. The sensitive, if he have previously
noticed and become familiar with the sensations caused by
masses of coal, will at once discover when he passes over
such a stratum. Ordinary people will perceive nothing what-
ever, but the highly sensitive will say with full confidence,
“ here or there lies under the soil this or that mineral,” and on
digging, the apparent miracle will be found true. This has
hitherto appeared the more astounding, because the ore-finder
himself has been utterly unable to account for his success
even to himself, and far less to others. The mystery is now
no longer such; it is simply the purely physical influence of
the odic dynamide on the human (sensitive) nervous system.
It acts like an obscure sense, of which we can give no ex-
planation, and a number of instinctive phenomena in the
lower animals will ultimately be explained in the same way


Their power increases by practice. 293


as I now explain the secret of the metal and ore-seekers.
And now you have the last mysteries of the divining rod, not
indeed of the rod as such, taken literally, with its bendings,
turnings, and pointings, (for all that was probably only the
hocus pocus added for the sake of the curious many, to whom
the wonder-worker was obliged to give something tangible,)*
but the true nucleus of the matter, hitherto deeply buried,
but now brought to light.

You see from this what highly important practical value
sensitiveness must acquire, and what a part it has yet to per-
form. The sensitives, at whose extreme point we find the
cataleptic, somnambulists, and lunatics, will soon be sought
for, well paid, and reckoned benefactors to their neighbours,
their district, their country. This discovery promises first of
all to give a powerful impulse to mining enterprize; not only
in the discovery of new veins, &c., but in the internal work-
ing of existing mines; it will enable us to ascertain when the
vein or bed fails, or shifts, or is exhausted. Whither shall
we turn, to open new excavations? Where shall we find
again the lost vein, in the vertical or in the horizontal rock ?
In all such matters, the most rational system too often leaves
the miner in the dark; and it is certain that very often a
sensitive, in some degree practised in discriminating odic
sensations, will at once assist the miner, and put him on the
right track.

The sensitive feeling, or sensé for the odic influences, is
capable of remarkable development and improvement by cul-
tivation. When I try new sensitives, their statements are
occasionally strikingly variable. But after two or three sit-
tings, all becomes clear and precise. Longer practice, how-
ever, gives more distinctness and readiness, and I have some
middling sensitives, who, after six or seven years familiarity
with odic sensations, have acquired a certainty in discrimina-
tion often superior to that possessed by the highly sensitive,
when new to the subject. Such persons will hereafter be
found most useful in reference to the adulteration of goods.
Even now a sensitive can easily distinguish pure gold or silver
from that which is alloyed with copper. But the sense can
be developed for mixtures of all kinds, so much so, that the


* I am far from certain, that the rod itself is so utterly devoid of
importance as is here stated. When we consider that all matter is
odic and affected by od, including plants and wood, there may be
something more. The author has of late turned his attention to the
motion of tables, and has obtained very interesting results, which I
hope to be able hereafter to communicate.—W. G.


294 Dr. Esdaile’s appeal


drugs in an apothecary’s shop can be so examined as to teach
us whether they retain or have lost the active principles.
And I shall perhaps hereafter shew you what astonishing
results may be obtained by applying the sensations of healthy
sensitives to the examination of diseased states.


(These Letters will be concluded in the next Number.)


IX.
SUUM CUIQUE.


The Protest and Petition of James Esdaile, M.D., Surgeon
H.EI.C.S., to the Members of the American Congress,


Resrectrut.y sheweth,—That the writer, a British subject,
and a surgeon in the East India Company’s Service, has read
with great astonishment the following statement in a Report
of the Select Committee appointed by the United States
Government, to decide who discovered the anesthetic virtues
of ether, so that Congress might bestow upon him a reward
of 100,000 dollars. The Report says :—


** At various periods, and in various ages, hope has been excited
in the human breast that this great agent (the means of producing
insensibility to pain) had been found ; but all proved delusive, and
hope as often died away, until the discovery now under consideration
burst upon the world from our own country and in our own day.
Then, and not till then, was the time-cherished hope realized, that


the knife would lose its sting, and that blood might follow its edge
without pain.”


In defence of truth and justice, I must take the liberty
to inform Congress, that this statement is not only incor-
rect, but is perfectly untrue, and that your Committee have
been grievously misled by culpably ignorant or corrupt wit-
nesses,—corrupt to the extent of suppressing important evi-
dence opposed to what is stated in the Report. In support
of this assertion, I have respectfully to represent to Congress,
that in April, 1845, having succeeded on the first trial in
performing a painless operation upon a person in the mesmeric
trance, I prosecuted the subject still farther, and with such
success, that in eight months I had performed seventy-three
painless operations, many of them of the gravest descrip-
tion ; an account of which was published by Messrs. Longmans
and Co., London, in 1846. This work is called Mesmerism
in India, and was immediately reprinted in America. In
July, 1846, I reported to the Government of India, that I


to the American Congress. 295


had performed upwards of one hundred painless operations,
and offered “ to satisfy any number of persons, in whom the
Government had confidence, of the truth of my statements.”
The Government hereupon appointed a Committee to report
upon mesmeric operations to be performed by me in their
presence. Six severe operations were performed by me in
the presence of the Committee during a fortnight that they
sat, and the Committee arrived at the following general result
on the question of pain during the mesmeric surgical opera-
tions witnessed by them :—


“That in three severe cases, there is no proof whatever that
any pain was suffered ; and that, in the three other cases, the ma-
nifestations of pain during the operation are opposed by the positive
statement of the patient that no pain was experienced.”


The Government in remarking upon the Report of the
Committee to the Chairman, said :—


*‘So far has the possibility of rendering the most serious sur-
gical operations painless to the subject of them been, in His Honor’s
opinion, established by the late experiments, performed under the
eye of a Committee appointed for the purpose, as to render it in-
cumbent on the Government to afford to the meritorious and zealous
officer, by whom the subject was first brought to its notice, such
assistance as may facilitate his investigations, and enable him to
prosecute his interesting experiments, under the most favourable and
promising circumstances. With this view, His Honor has deter-
mined, with the sanction of the Supreme Government, to place Dr.
Esdaile, for one year, in charge of a small experimental hospital,
in some favourable situation in Calcutta; in order that he may, as
recommended by the Committee, extend his investigations to the
applicability of this alleged agency to all descriptions of cases, me-
dical as well as surgical; and all classes of patients, European as
well as native.”


During the year of experiment, forty capital mesmeric
operations were performed in the Mesmeric Hospital, and at
the end of the year, my success was acknowledged in a
minute of the Governor-General in Council, and I was re-
warded by being made a Presidency Surgeon of Calcutta
that the natives might continue to enjoy the benefits of
mesmerism. So that painless surgery by means of mesmerism
had been reduced by me to a regular every-day system in
Bengal, long before ether had been heard of. Of which fact,
Congress may still farther satisfy themselves, by referring to
Dr. Huffnagle, Consul for the United States, at Calcutta,
who in October, 1846, assisted at the removal of a scrotal
tumor weighing 103 lbs.; of which the patient was quite un-
conscious, and ultimately perfectly recovered.


296 American Committee very ignorant.


The simple and notorious fact is, that painless surgery by
means of mesmerism, years before ether was heard of, was
as common in my hospitals as it has since become in Europe
under the influence of chloroform, and nearly three hundred
capital mesmeric operations had been performed by me before
leaving India, two years ago.

This being the actual state of the case regarding the his-
tory of painless surgery, the American Congress will perceive
that I am fully justified in asserting that their Committee
have been misled by ignorant or corrupt witnesses ; and that,
however deserving of reward the discoverer of ether may be,
he was only copying by a drug what had been already done
by myself and others, by a much safer and pleasanter natural
power mercifully implanted in the human constitution. Con-
gress will, I doubt not, be indignant at the daring and un-
principled suppression of evidence that I have exposed to
them, and will be at a loss to imagine the motives for such
an offence. As politicians, the members of Congress must
be aware of the perverting, distorting, unfair representations
of party spirit, by which history itself has become “a lie,”
according to a celebrated English statesman. Unfortunately
this vice is not confined to politics, but exists in all profes-
sions, and in an intensely disgraceful degree, I lament to say,
in that of medicine.

Mesmerism from its birth has been excommunicated by
the doctors without knowledge or examination, and all the
medical journals having rashly and ignorantly pronounced
against it, afterwards conspired together in defence of their
wrong doing, and trusted to extinguish the obnoxious doc-
trine by keeping the medical profession and the public in
total ignorance of the matter. They have hitherto succeeded
so well in this, that it is possible the medical witnesses ex-
amined by your Committee may only have been labouring
under the most gross ignorance in giving their evidence; but
the American Congress will not lower itself so much in the
eyes of the civilized world as to adopt the verdict of an ig-
norant and incompetent jury. If, on the other hand, it shall
appear that important evidence has been deliberately sup-
pressed by the witnesses, then the world will expect that
Congress in its wisdom and justice will repudiate the Report
of its Committee, and severely punish those who would have
misled it.

It is with no intention of competing for the dollars in
question that I have taken the liberty to address you, (al-
though the man who proved that painless surgery could be
practised on a whole people, might look for some reward,) as


Folly of the Leader. 297


these seem irrevocably destined to “ one of three citizens of
the United States,” who had the sense to seek for some drug
by which to imitate what I had already done by mesmerism.
But in the new judicial inquiry recommended by the Com-
mittee, to determine which of my three imitators is to be the
lucky winner of the dollars, I respectfully petition Congress
to be permitted to adduce proof in support of what I have now
advanced, by which an honourable opportunity will be af-
forded for correcting the errors in the Committee’s Report,
and Congress will be saved the shame of sanctioning by its
high authority another of the lies of history.
I have the honour to be,
Your most obedient servant,

James Espaitz, M.D.

Fairmount, Perth, Scotland,
8th August, 1853.


*,* In connexion with this flagrant dishonesty, we remind
our readers of Article 11 in our last Number.—Zoist.


X. Cure of a case of severe pain, chiefly in the arms, with
general debility, after the failure of legitimate treatment :
cure of Spinal Irritation and Palsy of the Legs after the
failure of legitimate treatment: cure of Palsy of the Face :
and an instance of unquestionable Clairvoyance. By Mr.
S. D. Saunpers, of Clifton.


“You assure me solemnly that you do not tell the Medium anything: I
declare unequivocally that you do. IJ¢ is the same in cases of clairvoyance: you
tell all, and fancy you are told. You do not tell it in so many words, but uncon-
sciously you are made to communicate the very thing you believe is communicated
to you.”—Leader newspaper, March 12, 1853.

“When Bulwer and Dumas introduce clairvoyance as a part of their ma-
chinery and make the events depend thereon, doing so as if clairvoyance were an
undoubted element in our human life, then the rebellious understanding rejects |
as impertinent what it recognizes as false.” —Ibid., Dec. 11, 1852.

“The calm verdict of reason is against the acceptance of the mesmeric mar-
vels, and no amount of congruity or historic coherence will make reason accept
them.”’—Jbid., Oct. 2, 1852.

“In The Zoist for this month, in spite of Dr. Ashburner’s known connexion
with the work,” &c.—ZJdid., April, 1853.


Penrose Cottage, Clifton, Aug. 3, 1853.


Cure of severe Rheumatism of the Arms.
Asout the beginning of last spring twelvemonth, I was called
to attend a young lady suffering severely from rheumatism,
particularly in the arms. She was also labouring under ge-


298 Cures of Rheumatism, Palsy,


neral debility, though, in all appearances, she was in perfect
health, having an exceedingly ruddy complexion. She had
been for some time under our first physician, but obtained no
relief, and therefore determined to try mesmerism. At the
first sitting I sent her into the sleep in about four minutes,
and she remained unconscious for about three quarters of an
hour. During this time I acted upon her spine and her
arms. When she awoke she felt rather better. I continued
to mesmerise her daily for about a month, and she then felt
herself well, and has remained so up to this time.

In a note which I have this day received from her, asking
me if it would hurt her to mesmerise a friend who was ill,
she says, alluding to her own case, “I suffered particularly
from pains in my arms. After the first sitting I was never
unconscious, but in a state more like torpor than regular
sleep: for though I felt I could not speak, I knew what was
going on around me, and could hear very plainly what was
said by persons in the room. I think, too, I ought to say
that, though exempt from the acute rheumatic pains which
I previously suffered, it is this winter and this year espe-
cially that I seem most fully to reap all the benefit I had
derived from your mesmerism. For I have been perfectly
free from pain and never felt better in my life than I do now,
and I am very grateful.

“ After I had been mesmerised four times I met my me-
dical adviser when I was out walking, and, upon mentioning
to him that I was being mesmerised for the rheumatic pains
in my arms from which he had not cured me, and which I
already felt were diminishing through the use of mesmerism,
he made answer, ‘ You surely don’t believe sucn sturr will
cure you; it ig HARMLESS ENOUGH’ and, laughing, shook
hands with me.”


Spinal Irritation and Palsy of the Legs.

A medical gentleman brought me one of his patients—
a lady suffering from partial paralysis of the lower extremi-
ties, for the purpose of being mesmerised. She came ina
wheel-chair, and was unable to walk across my room without
putting her hands upon the table and chairs. She had also
pain at the top of the head, and considerable tenderness in
the lower part of the spine. She also suffered from a sensa-
tion of sinking in the pit of the stomach. I tried to induce
sleep; but rather increased, than otherwise, the irritability
of her head. At her second visit I acted entirely upon the
spine, and also at the third visit, without producing any bene-
ficial result. Indeed the pain in the lower part of the spine


and Spinal Irritation. 299


was augmented, and her walking remained just as bad as
ever, though the pain in her head was somewhat relieved.
From this time I made the passes from the upper part of the
spine, over the hips and down to the feet, with occasional
passes over the stomach. Improvement began to manifest
itself; and in about three weeks the patient was able to walk
comfortably without any assistance. Her digestive organs
were much stronger, and the pain on the top of her head
had quite left her.

Feeling so well, she relinquished mesmerism. But, about
nine months afterwards, upon making use of a shower-bath,
she suddenly lost the use of her limbs ; and, upon being sent
for, I found her as bad with regard to her walking as she
was when I first attended her. I mesmerised her as before
for a week, and again restored her; so that she was able to
use her limbs with freedom and comfort.

But, about six or seven months afterwards, having suf-
fered from influenza, she again found her limbs fail her,
and I was called in a third time. After being mesmerised
five or six times she was able to walk as well as she did before
being taken ill, although her medical attendant had told her
that mesmerism would not benefit her, and that it would be a
very long time before she could possibly hope to be able to walk.
During the time that I attended her, I gave mesmerised
water, and (as has been the case with other patients) she
found that, though no visible change in the taste of the
water was perceptible immediately after my mesmerising it,
it would become quite flat and disagreeable to the palate in
about six hours afterwards.

I understand that no medicine was taken except some
homeopathic during the third time that I mesmerised her.
She is extremely sorry at not having been mesmerised earlier,
as she would have been saved a great deal of suffering. She
says that she is stronger and in better health than she had
been for years.

During the sittings this patient generally occupied herself
by reading either the newspaper or a book.

The lady does not wish her name to be mentioned ; but I
enclose a letter of verification from her.


Palsy of the Face.

A young female, of the name of Pippin, in the employ-
ment of Miss Sanders, of Alva House, Clifton Down, was
early in the month of July last seized with palsy of the left
portio dura nerve. Her mouth was considerably drawn to
the right side: she could only half shut her left eye: she


300 Clairvoyance.


could not frown with her left brow, nor blow out her right
cheek : her speech was very much affected : and she felt giddy
and ill.

In this state she was sent to a surgeon of considerable
practice and ability, who gave her some medicine and applied
a blister to the nape of her neck. I was also called in to
mesmerise her, and succeeded in sending her into the sleep
in about five or six minutes. I made passes over her left
cheek ; and upon waking she found a slight degree of im-
provement in her articulation. But, as the blister was to be
kept open for several days, it was deemed best to stop the
mesmerism and see whether the disease would give way under
the medicine and the blister only. I therefore did not see
her again for a week, but, at the end of that time, I called
and found her face and articulation just as bad as they were
at the time mesmerism was discontinued: not the least im-
provement had taken place.

I therefore recommenced mesmerising her, and, at the
end of about a month, during which time I mesmerised her
some ten or twelve times, her face became straight, the
other symptoms gave way, and she felt perfectly well again.
I did not often induce the sleep, but devoted my attention
to the face. After each sitting the paralyzed side would feel
warmer and slightly sore.


Clairvoyance.

The Rev. Mr. Boutflower called upon me one day for the
purpose of witnessing a few mesmeric experiments. i put
a boy into the mesmeric sleep and shewed the usual pheno-
mena of rigidity, catalepsy, attraction and repulsion, &c., both
in the sleeping and ordinary waking state. I then mesmer-
ised Mrs. Saunders, and, after many successful experiments in
phreno-mesmerism, Mr. Boutflower asked her to describe
to him the house in which he lived, many miles distant. We
were both perfect strangers to him and knew nothing what-
ever respecting the locality of his residence. She described
the house and grounds accurately, and said that no one was
in the house but the servants. Upon this Mr. Boutflower
said she must be wrong, for he had left parties in the house
who were not likely to have gone out at that particular time.
But she persisted that she was right, and said, “Oh! I see
a great dog at the door, like the one I used to see at Prior
Park in Bath” (an Alpine mastiff). Mr. Boutflower said
she must be wrong again, as neither he nor any person in
the house had a dog of any kind. After a few more ques-
tions I awoke her, and Mr. Boutflower returned home. In


Clairvoyance. 301


two or three days he again called, and stated that all Mrs.
Saunders had said was perfectly correct : that the parties in
the house had gone out at the time mentioned by her, and
a large dog, belonging to a person living some little distance
from him, had found its way to the door of his house and
was lying down upon the steps.

About a week afterwards, Mr. Boutflower witnessed at
my house a striking instance of the power of suggestion.
A young person had come to me suffering from intense head-
ache, caused in the following way. A gentleman in whose
house she lived was one day mesmerising her, and she was
just passing into the sleeping state, when a sudden ring at
the door-bell made her start up with a most violent head-ache,
and awoke her thoroughly. He was able neither to remove
the head-ache, nor to send her to sleep again, as he attempted,
in hopes of waking her up free from it. At last he sent her
tome. I spent nearly an hour in trying to induce sleep, but
without effect. I therefore told her to look steadily at me,
saying that her head-ache was going away gradually, and
that in a minute it would be gone. At the end of that time
she declared the pain had quite left her. She returned to
her home, and sent me word a week afterwards that there
had been no return of the pain.

8. D. Saunpers.


NOTE BY THE ZOIST.


We should be glad to learn how Alexis Didier was told
the information which he gave in the wonderful instances of
clairvoyance detailed by Mr. Townshend in No. XXXVI. :
or how his brother Adolphe was told the information which
he gave in the instances detailed by Mr. Townshend in No.
XLI.: how Mrs. Saunders was told the information which
she gave in the instances detailed in the present Number :
and how the writers in the Leader know “ Dr. Ashburner’s
known connexion with The Zoist,” which connexion is not
and never has been. Will Mr. G. H. L. or Mr. H. S. ex-
plain these knotty matters to our readers?


( 302 )


XI. A Report of the successful treatment by Mesmerism of
the following cases :—3 of After-pains: 2 of supposed
Cancer of the Womb : the confirmation of the permanent
cure of a most afflicted sufferer : 1 cure of irregularity of
the female system: 1 of severe Tooth-ache: 1 of intense
Head-ache : 2 of severe acute Rheumatism: 1 of threat-
ened Consumption: 1 of CEdema of the Lungs and general
(Edema: the extraction of one tooth with only partial
consciousness of pain. By Joun Barrisnitt Parker,
Surgeon, Exeter.


**In June, 1798, Dr. Jenner, being satisfied with the result of his experiments,
resolved to lay them before the public. And as he was a Fellow of the Royal
Society, and accustomed to divulge his observations in science through that
channel, he transmitted his manuscript to a correspondent who was in the confi-
dence of Sir Joseph Banks, the President ; and requested that it should be laid
before him, not doubting that it would soon be printed in the Philosophical
Transactions. Jenner had already contributed several articles to that celebrated
collection ; in one of these he had fully disclosed the natural history of the
cuckoo, which marked him out for a man of originality: and as none of his
former papers on subjects of mere philosophical curiosity had been rejected, he
naturally expected, that an essay promulgating a discovery of vast utility, would
be favourably received. But the perusal of his experiments produced no convic-
tion; and he received in reply a friendly admonition that, as he had gained some
reputation by his former papers to the Royal Society, it was advisable not to
present this, lest it should injure his established credit. This advice, though
given with the best design, was neglected with the happiest consequences ; for,
although disappointed in his favourite mode of ushering his discovery into the
world, he was confident that his work required no patronage ; and therefore, after
the addition of a few experiments made in this interval, he sent to the press his
Inquiry into the Causes and Effects of the Variole Vaccine, a disease discovered
in some of the western counties of England, particularly Gloucestershire, und
known by the name of the Cow Pox.” —The History and Practice of Vaccination.
By James Moore, Director of the National Vaccine Establishment, Surgeon of
the Second Regiment of Life Guards, and Member of the Royal College of
Surgeons in London. p. 19.


Aug. 13, 1853.
In furnishing the following report for the Editors of The
Zoist, I will endeavour to convince its readers of the import-
ance of mesmerism in relieving those cruel maladies which
render the female’s existence a burthen to herself and her
family. The active sympathies of the female system furnish
many troublesome cases to the medical practitioner: and
among them the neuralgic are the most difficult to treat, as
neuralgia of the womb may not be distinct, but accompanied
by congestion, hypertrophy being thereby produced, which
is often the forerunner of cancer. Mesmerism alone will
often be found sufficient to relieve it when distinct; and,
combined with the local application of leeches, has been
found by me of great service in relieving the latter, as well
as ovarian tumors. I have been led to this conclusion from


Cures of After-pains. 303


my own experience, and clairvoyant patients have prescribed
the local application of leeches for themselves with the most
unerring beneficial results. Anatomists must readily see
how some ovarian tumors may be relieved by the application
of leeches to the os uteri, as the ovaries receive their blood-
vessels from the uterine. Some author has lately announced
that hysteria is the result of moral depravity. If such were
really the case, we should find it prevail among the most
abandoned, instead of its being a cruel infliction on the
most virtuous. Antimesmerists have failed in finding a
remedy for hysteria, catalepsy, hysteric convulsions, puer-
peral convulsions and puerperal mania: and we feel a pride,
and no little pleasure, in having discovered a balm for some,
if not for all, such sufferings. Every experienced practi-
tioner must have perceived the strong affinity which the
above maladies bear to each other, and I trust the following
observations and cases will induce others to try mesmerism
for such otherwise intractable maladies.


After-pains.

1. Mrs. L. was confined with her tenth child, and every
thing had proceeded happily and regularly. I was about to
leave the room, when she exclaimed, “ what agony I am in!”
I returned to her bedside, and made a few passes. She ex-
pressed her astonishment at finding that the second pass had
stopped the pains, and, what may appear extraordinary to
those ignorant of the wonderful powers of mesmerism, it
prevented their return.


2. Mrs. P. was delivered of her fourth child, and all was
progressing naturally and most favourably, when suddenly
she complained of violent pain. A few passes were sufficient
to remove it, and to prevent its recurrence.


3. Mrs. C., whose cure of uterine disorder is published
in No. XXXVII. of The Zoist, was confined with her eighth
child. She was in a very delicate state from frequent child-
bearing, and was very apprehensive of a fatal result on this
occasion. Her delivery was quite natural, but she had a
keen recollection of her former sufferings, and, as soon as
she was delivered, 1 made some energetic passes over the
bowels. At my subsequent visit, she expressed how agree-
ably surprised she was to find that she had not suffered even
from one after-pain. ‘This I deem a very important addition


to our previous store of facts of the wondrous powers of
mesmerism.


VOL, XI. Z


a


304 Cures of Uterine Disorders.


I. Uterine disorder resembling Cancer, and pronounced to be
that frightful disease by several surgeons ; but effectually
relieved by Mesmerism and the local application of leeches.

Mrs. had had four children, and, since the birth of

the youngest, had suffered from such symptoms as to induce
several surgeons to pronounce her malady cancerous, when
it had baffled all the means they could devise. As she had
witnessed the soothing influence of mesmerism, she applied
to me. I found her suffering from congestion or hypertrophy
of the womb: and I advised the local application of leeches.
These were repeated several times. But the peculiar nervous
sufferings which attend most of those cases were only to be
relieved by mesmerism, and the combined treatment had the
most beneficial effect in restoring her to her usual active
habits. She was never afflicted with hysteria until frightful
sufferings had made great havoc in her previously good con-
stitution.


Il. Uterine disorder, which for five years had been pronounced
cancerous by four medical men, removed by the same means.

M had arrived at the critical period of life, and had
suffered from uterine disorder for several years. The symp-
toms are too well known to medical men, and are too fre-
quently unmitigated torture to the patient, as was the case
with this highly sensitive and intelligent woman. Before
she consulted me, she had been under the care of four me-
dical men, each of whom had pronounced her disease to be of
a cancerous nature, and incurable. Her sole object in apply-
ing to me was to have her cruel sufferings palliated by mes-
merism. On making the necessary examination, I found
she was suffering from hypertrophy or congestion of the
womb, of long duration: and the neuralgic sufferings were
the consequence of her mind being so constantly distressed
with the idea of having cancer of the womb. She consented
to have leeches applied locally. This was attended with the
most complete disgorgement of the congested womb, and
mesmerism was the happy handmaid in dispersing all the
excruciating nervous sufferings from which she suffered and
in restoring her to health.


Confirmation of the permanent cure of a most afflicted sufferer.

I am most happy to be enabled to record the permanence
of the mesmeric cure of one of the most afflicted sufferers
I have met with during the whole period of my professional
career—Miss , whose case has been only partially pub-
lished in the Thirteenth Number of The Zoist. She had to


Cure of Female Disorder and Tooth-ache. 305


contend with blindness of one eye from opacity of the
cornea, and the other was threatened with the same disease.
Her lungs were said to be ulcerated, with frequent he-
morrhage, and all the frightful symptoms of advanced con-
sumption. There was frequent pyrosis or water-brash, and
she vomited on several occasions from three to five pints
of watery fluid. An ovarian tumor existed, which had pro-
duced a permanent distortion of the spine, and from its
pressure on the bladder had prevented this organ being emp-
tied without the use of the catheter.

One eye is now very useful, having been cauterized by
me upwards of twenty times with lunar caustic during mes-
meric sleep without the least consciousness of pain. The
lungs are free from tubercles, and all the symptoms of
phthisis have disappeared. The ovarian tumor has been suc-
cessfully removed by the application of leeches to the os
uteri, as prescribed by her during mesmeric sleep. The
pyrosis was effectually relieved by her own clairvoyant pre-
scriptions. Her introvision was beautifully correct with re-
spect to her lungs, the ovarian tumor, and the state of her
eyes. Her prevision of the recurrence of the ovarian tumor
was most accurately verified, and so were her numerous pre-
visions of vomiting on many occasions from three to five
pints of water at atime. The lungs again became permeable
to the air, as could be verified by auscultation ; and she is
now enjoying better health than she had for many years
previous to her testing the curative powers of mesmerism.


Irregularity of the female system relieved by five mesmeric
sittings.

Miss had taken cold five months previously during
her periods. She suffered considerably for that time: and,
as she was not benefitted by the ordinary means recommended
for such cases, she applied tome. I gave her some medicine,
and advocated a trial of mesmerism. After five sittings she
became regular, and all uncomfortable symptoms disappeared.


Cure of severe Tooth-ache.

E had suffered for many days and nights from severe
tooth-ache : and, as the pain proceeded from several which
were much decayed, she knew not which to have extracted,
and she had not the courage to lose all. She had tried all
the ordinary remedies for tooth-ache without relief. There-
fore she consulted me about being mesmerised previously to
the extraction of the offending tooth or teeth. My mes-
meriser succeeded in producing sleep at the first sitting, but
z2


806 Cures of Head-ache and Rheumatism.


not sufficiently deep for the extraction of the teeth without
consciousness of pain. She left my house promising to
return the following day for that purpose: but, instead of
returning, she sent a message to say that her tooth-ache had
departed ; and, on enquiry, I found she had experienced no
return of the pain.


Severe Head-ache, not relieved by a blister and other ordinary
medical treatment, cured by Mesmerism, after a seton in
the neck had been recommended as the only remedial mea-
sure to be depended upon.

John Bowden, whose recovery through mesmerism from
chronic pneumonia, resembling phthisis, after every other
means had failed, will be recorded in the next number of
The Zoist, caught cold in the past winter; and, in addition
to other sufferings, had a most intense head-ache, for which
the surgeon of his sick-club had prescribed various remedies
for many weeks. A blister was included: but nothing re-
lieved him, and so this surgeon proposed a seton in the neck.
However, he thought he might as well have recourse to mes-
merism, in consequence of the benefit he had derived from
it on a former occasion: and he was fully rewarded in the
course of a few days by being entirely cured, and enabled
to resume his work.


Severe acute Rheumatism.

John Cockrell, gunner’s mate of H.M.S. Excellent, re-
turned from the Cape in the early part of this year, On his
arrival he made no change in his dress, and consequently
was seized with a severe attack of acute rheumatism. On
the 28th March I found him quite unable to move in his bed.
His mother was most anxious that he should be mesmerised,
as she had seen the benefit derived from it in a similar case.
He was accordingly mesmerised twice daily, and at the end
of ten days was quite free from rheumatism. He then told
me that he had suffered from tape-worm for thirteen years,
and I gave him some medicines. He voided upwards of a
dozen yards of tape-worm, and was soon quite convalescent
and able to return to the duties of his ship.


Acute Rheumatism, cured by five mesmerisations.

C. Emmett, aged 19 years, had an attack of acute rheu-
matism at the age of 13, which confined her to her bed for
a month. Two or three years ago another attack laid her up
for six weeks. On August 7th, 1853, she was obliged to
leave her place, and it took her nearly an hour to walk to her


Cures of severe Pulmonary Affections. 307


mother’s house, distant about the eighth of a mile; and it
was necessary to carry her up stairs. On the 8th her sister
came to ask me if mesmerism would be of service to her.
I called, and found her unable to move her hands or feet, all
of which were much swollen and excessively painful. The
poor girl was mesmerised once on the 8th, 9th, and 10th,
and on the 11th she was quite free from pain and able to take
a walk: she was mesmerised on the 12th and 13th, and was
then fit to return to service.


Threatening Consumption.

J. B. had been suffering from many of the symptoms of
phthisis for eighteen months: and, as he had lost three sis-
ters in that complaint, his mind was most gloomily directed
to a similar fate. He had much pain in his chest, with a
short and frequent cough, and expectoration at times streaked
with blood. Within the above time he had been under the
care of four medical men, all of whom had held out very little
prospect of his recovery. As a last resource, having received
little or no benefit from the various remedies prescribed for
him, cod-liver oil among the rest, he applied to me, thinking
that I should recommend mesmerism in addition to other
means. The happiest results followed. Mesmerism has re-
stored his usual strength, and brought about perfect freedom
from all the symptoms which had been to him a source of so
much anxiety.


(Edema of the Lungs with general Gidema.

J. B., an apprentice to a baker and confectioner, con-
sulted me on the 14th December, 1852. His countenance
was of a purple livid hue. The cheeks, abdomen, and lower
extremities were cedematous. There was considerable diffi-
culty of breathing that was much increased by exertion, a
very troublesome cough, and a frequent feeling of suffoca-
tion. He had been under the care of several medical men
before he applied to me, but had derived no relief from their
treatment. Almost in despair he sought the curative powers
of mesmerism, and by them, on the 19th February, he de-
clared himself quite cured of all his sufferings.


Extraction of an upper molar tooth with partial consciousness
of pain, on August 1st, 1853.

A very robust and intelligent young woman came to me
from a neighbouring town to have a tooth extracted during
mesmeric sleep: but, as she had never before been mesmer-
ised, I doubted whether this would be practicable, for she


308 Delirium Tremens.


had only a few hours to spare, and during them had to trans-
act some other business before returning home by the train.
However, I succeeded in producing mesmeric sleep in less
than ten minntes. I then applied the forceps, and endea-
voured to dislocate the tooth. She screamed violently, and
laid hold of my hands. I soon loosened them and extracted
the tooth. She was in the act of rinsing her mouth with
warm water when she awoke, and said she had felt a slight
pain, but had not the least recollection of having screamed
or grasped my hands.


XII. The great advantage of combining Mesmerism with ordi-
nary well-established medical measures illustrated in a
successful case of Delirium Tremens. By Dr. Ex.iorson.


‘* As a phrenologist, Dr. Moore has opposed Dr. Elliotson’s mesmeric doc-
trines, and glories in having been the prime mover in the onslaught upon mes-
merism in the Medical and Chirurgical Society as well as publicly in other places,
by which he exposed himself to the ire of that irritable individual. He feels the
more indignant from believing that, by the attempt to embody mesmerism with
phrenology, this latter study has been thrown back at least fifty years in public
estimation. However this may be, we are sure that Dr. Moore,” &c.—
Medical Circular, August 3, 1853. Memoir of Dr. Joseph Moore.


Every person has heard of the disease called delirium tre-
mens. Its name fully characterizes it. There is delirium
and general tremor. In an immense majority of cases it
occurs without inflammation or the necessity of employing
any of the remedies of inflammation: and is characterized
by intense excitability of the brain and spinal cord, and
more or less debility. The patient’s thoughts ramble inco-
herently ; he has delusions of various kinds, fancying that he
hears, sees, tastes, smells, and feels unreal things; fancying
past, present, and future occurrences, which have not taken
place, do not and will not take place ; and wishes to do im-
proper and absurd acts, being more or less violent, but easily
overcome. He ceases to sleep: or scarcely sleeps. There is
great sensitiveness of all kinds and irritability. There is a
general tremulousness and unsteadiness noticeable especially
on moving the tongue or any limb: and frequently there is
general muscular agitation. The pulse is quickened, and the
danger is, according to my own observations, almost always
proportionate to its rapidity. There was formerly great dif-
ference of opinion as to the proper treatment. Some always
depended upon bleeding, purging, mercurializing, and starv-
ing; others, always upon opium and good nourishment.


Opium the great medicine. 309


The former party must have been awfully destructive to
human life ; and, when their patients recovered, the credit must
in almost every instance have all belonged to nature, who
triumphed over both the disease and the doctor. The other
treatment, which I have all my life adopted, except when the
disease exhibited strength rather than debility, and then my
anti-inflammatory measures were mild, has been extremely
simple, though vigorous, and, I may add, most successful.
Though I see a great deal of this disease, I have not lost
six cases in my life, and each fatal case I condemned at my
first visit on account of the rapidity of the pulse. Some give
wine, malt and spirituous liquors, to support the strength,
from an idea that the patient being habituated to them re-
quires them. But I invariably stand out, and give none,
trusting entirely to the strongest beef tea* which can be
made, taken as abundantly as the patient can be prevailed
upon to swallow it—many pints aday. This is sufficient ; but
milk, eggs, and, if he can take it, niutton and other solid
animal food, may be useful. Tea and coffee as tending to
keep off sleep are improper. The only medicine I ever give
is opium. But it must be given in very large quantities.
Practitioners give it largely and freely ; for in ordinary doses
it is inoperative, so greatly is its influence withstood. I
begin with two grains every four hours. If it has no effect
soon, I give three grains every four hours: four grains every
four hours: five grains every four hours, every three hours,
every two hours. More than this I have never given: and
this quantity I have never known to be injurious. Indeed
I do not believe it an easy matter to do harm with opium
in this disease. Twice I have seen intense narcotic effects
from quantities that frightened me, given by gentlemen, one
in Berners Street, the other at Chelsea, but both patients
were all the better and recovered completely. I fancy that
opium is preferable to morphine from not losing its power so
quickly by repetition: and I fancy that solid opium is more
uniform than the liquid preparation. I have given five grains
every two hours, for three days and nights before the good
effects came: and then they came gently and terminated in
health. But the effects require careful and constant watch-
ing: a dose ought not to be repeated after sleep has begun


* The best mode of making beef tea is that taught us by Liebig. A pound
of lean beef, free of fat, should be well minced and put into a pint of cold water
and allowed to soak for four hours. The whole should then be placed upon the
fire, heated slowly, and after the water begins to boil briskly it should be allowed to
remain on the fire for two or three minutes only. The process is now completed,
and we have very strong beef tea. It may be strained through a cloth.


310 Case of Delirium Tremens.


to shew itself or the pupil of the eye has grown small. In
these circumstances we should desist for a time till we are
satisfied that these effects will not increase.

A young gentleman, thirty-five years of age, of very
fine person, sound constitution, and good strength, fell into
delirium tremens after being poorly with lumbago and feel-
ings of general illness for several days. On a Saturday he
became restless, excited, and a little strange, and at night
sleepless. He grew worse daily, and I was requested to see
him on the Wednesday morning. He had not slept at all
for several nights: his manner was very hurried: his hands
and tongue trembled: he was not incoherent or under any
delusion, but talked a great deal. His pulse, neither weak
nor strong, was a hundred, and his tongue foul: the skin
was not hot, but perspired copiously. I ordered him to eat
as much as he liked of meat and bread and to drink strong
beef tea as freely. He begged for stout and such things,
saying that he knew a patient who could not be made to sleep
by opium, but went to sleep after taking a pint of stout.
I assured him that such things were not requisite if opium
was properly prescribed and good food was taken freely, and
that I was satisfied that they retarded the cure ; and I reminded
him that up to and at the time of his attack he was taking
fermented drinks as abundantly as usual, so that the disease
was not produced by any want of his habitual stimulants.
He had for some time undergone great anxiety and much
bodily fatigue, and taken no food from morning till night.
I allowed him to eat whatever he chose: and, besides bread
and vegetables, he had mutton chops: he drank freely of
beef tea and cold water, for which the clammy state of his
mouth and throat made him long. I ordered three grains
of opium to be taken every four hours.—Evening. He was
talking a great deal, exceedingly restless, and had been a
great deal out of bed, even down in the drawing room. His
three grains were now to be taken every three hours.

Thursday. There had been no sleep; nothing but talk-
ing, delirium, restlessness. He had continued to take solid
food and beef tea. 1 ordered four grains of opium every
three hours and the same diet.— Evening. He had been very
violent, and gone down raving to the ground floor: but I
found him in bed, talking of robbers, serpents, streams of
water along the bed, under many delusions, agitated and
rather violent. His wife was lying by his side close to him
with her hand upon his forehead. On being asked why she
did this, she replied that she was trying to mesmerise him ;
and thought the attempt had rather quieted him. She asked


Decided effect of Mesmerism. 311


my opinion of the propriety of mesmerising him: and I said
that I should be delighted to have him mesmerised, but had
followed my rule of not mentioning mesmerism on any occa-
sion till it is mentioned to me, as the medical world and
so many of the general world are ignorantly and absurdly
prejudiced against it. I added that I would myself mesmerise
him late at night.—Hvening. Accordingly at 10 o’clock I
visited him again and mesmerised him for an hour with slow
passes before his face and gazing at him in silence, producing
instantly and all the time a state of quiet and drowsiness,
with momentary snatches of sleep. But no sooner was the
process over than his symptoms were as before. His pulse
had been 108 all day. I ordered the four grains of opium
to be given every two hours.

Friday. No sleep: no better: a keeper was engaged. I
prescribed five grains of opium to be taken every two hours.
—Evening. I mesmerised him for an hour before I went
home to dinner at seven o’clock: and again for an hour
before I went to bed. On each occasion he instantly became
quiet and very sleepy, with momentary snatches of sleep the
whole time: but, when the process was over, the symptoms,
as before, returned with their former intensity. He had been
very bad all the day: and his violence, restlessness, delirium,
and debility were extreme. He got down stairs, but fell
about. I prevailed upon him to go up again and into bed.
His countenance was pale, hollow, haggard. His condition
rather alarmed me. His pulse was 120 or 130 whenever he
was excited: but, during his moments of composure, it gra-
dually fell back to 108. He had taken many pints of the
strong beef tea, but had eaten nothing.

Saturday. No sleep: but perhaps his delirium and ex-
citement were a shade less intense, and his countenance
was improved. I discerned an improvement, although those
around him did not notice it. The effect of the mesmerism
had been so decided as to convince his friends as well as the
keeper, not one of whom had previously any belief in its
powers. They were all struck with it and declared them-
selves firm believers in its influence. They proved this by
taking every opportunity to make passes before his face. The
keeper, though a strong healthy man, and most sincere and
earnest, had less effect than the little, rather slight, but
active and most earnest wife.—Evening. He had taken im-
mense quantities of strong beef tea, and his five grains of
opium every two hours most regularly up to this time, except
the last dose: and, a piece of his last pill having been bitten
off and lost, I gave him two instead of one. He had not


312 Cure of the Case.


slept, except just at the moments when his wife made passes.
I had not had time to mesmerise him in the day: but now
set to work. ‘Though very talkative, and restless, even
turbulent, before I began, he became still and sleepy as soon
as I had made two passes; and during the hour that I mes-
merised him he had longer snatches of sleep, was very drowsy,
and at length really fell asleep, as did a friend, the keeper,
and another male attendant, who were in the room. After
mesmerising him an hour, I left him and the rest all asleep:
him mesmerised, and them exhausted and no longer disturbed
by him.

. Sunday. I found him perfectly well. The sleep in which
I had left him had lasted ¢welve hours, except that he occa-
sionally opened his eyes and took the strong beef tea. He
had taken no pills. His pulse was below a hundred.

From this time he took no opium : but, though his bowels
had acted daily during the administration of the opium, and
the liver had secreted healthily, they now became confined,
and at the end of a few days he took an aperient. Some
large and painful boils broke out upon him, such as those to
which thousands of both sexes, of all ages and in all conditions
of health, have for the last year or two been subject.

When I began the opium, he entreated me not to give
him any, as it always disagreed with his head. But it did
not cause the least inconvenience of any kind to him at the


time, nor has it been followed by any.
Sept. 1. He still remains well, eating excellently, and has
not tasted wine, malt or spirituous liquors.*


A fortnight after this gentleman had recovered, it struck
me, while calling upon him one day, that he very likely was
as susceptible as before. I made a few slow passes before his
face and then steadily pointed my fingers at his eyes. He
instantly shewed signs of being affected, and, by holding


* I never have mesmerised, and trust that I never shall mesmerise, profes-
sionally. But I myself worked at this case from my great respect for the patient,
who has been struggling in the medical profession, unaided, and by some un-
kindly treated, for several years, doing his duty kindly and devotedly, often
quite disinterestedly, and conducting himself in all respects in the most exem-
plary manner. He formed a favourable estimate of me before he began prac-
tice for himself, and, being neither worldly nor unprincipled, has always acted
towards me in accordance with that estimate, notwithstanding my professional
unpopularity through my advocacy of mesmerism, availing himself of my opi-
nion where a second opinion was desired, and not treating me as if I had lost
all my knowledge, skill, and integrity—thus acting so differently from a host of
my former professional friends both in town and country, whose absurd conduct
I deeply lament. I was therefore bound by gratitude to him as well as by
respect.


Facts in Susceptibility. 313


my fingers quietly, I sent him off. I awoke him readily by
transverse passes and blowing in his face.

Some persons imagine that after cure there is no longer
susceptibility. But I have recorded in The Zoist numerous
facts which shew this fancy to be erroneous.

Those who read the beautiful case of Master Salmon in
No. III., may remember that, after he had recovered, though
in his illness he was so susceptible, no effort of mine or of a
powerfully mesmerising friend, produced the least effect.
But he had taken a nervous dislike to mesmerism, and, for
no reason that he could give, had an absolute horror of it.
To this I ascribed his insusceptibility. Fourteen years have
now elapsed: and I have rarely seen him. But the other
night he happened to call upon me with his brother, whose
remarkable case is recorded in No. XXXIV., and who calls
occasionally to be sent off, as this always does him as much good
asacountry-walk. I found that the elder brother, being now
a hearty young man of seven and twenty, had no longer his
nervous dislike of mesmerism: and I begged to try him.
He instantly shewed susceptibility, and I soon sent him to
sleep. No attempt had been made for fourteen years to mes-
merise him.

I was lately consulted respecting a little child with partial
and general epilepsy, sometimes only one arm being convulsed
in the attack and there being no coma: and it was proved after
death to arise from scrofulous tubercles at the posterior part of
the brain. Her mother mesmerised her daily, and sometimes
a professional mesmeriser: and she always went into the
deep sleep in a few minutes. While she was asleep one day
after being mesmerised, a mesmeriser called and begged leave
to wake her (for what reason nobody knows), and said she
could soon be sent off again. She was readily awakened by
transverse passes; but not flurried in the least by being
awakened. She could not be sént to sleep again, and never
could be affected again: her susceptibility had vanished.
She died of the organic disease in her brain.


The readers of The Zoist were informed, in a note at
p. 140 to a motto extracted from the memoir of a little Wak-
leyan hero, named Clark, written most certainly by himself,
in a cheap little weak and weekly periodical called the
Medical Circular, that the absurdly glorifying memoirs of
the individuals of the whole swarm of medical men, as un-
known for the most part as the swarming individuals who


314 Dr. Joseph Moore’s whimsicality.


get their livings in all other ways throughout the land, are
each written in part by each distinguished individual himself:
aud that the editor is a medical practitioner resident in
Farringdon Street, who, employed by the proprietor, said to
be an aurist of Saville Row that keeps his name constantly
before the public by means of newspapers and in other
ways and like all no doubt that do this finds the plan
answer well, merely shapes the materials sent by each indi-
vidual, touches them up, and adds a remark here and there,
exactly as in the present motto the first sentence is evi-
dently by Dr. Joseph Moore, and the second may be partly
by the thankful editor.

Although Dr. Moore declares that he was the glorious
“prime mover of the onslaught upon mesmerism in the Me-
dical and Chirurgical Society,” I never knew any person
bestow this glory upon him, because the first person who rose
on that occasion, so memorable in the annals of English me-
dicine, was Mr. Coulson, who valiantly began the onslaught
by declaring, “that the paper ought never to have been read,
for the only point of interest was the non-expression of pain,
and that was a common thing, and he had no doubt the man
had been trained to it !”*


**Dr. Moore, a physician-accoucheur, living in Saville Row, im-
mediately followed, and made no objections, but protested, in a
loud voice and rapid manner, that really such a statement ought to
have been accompanied by affidavits, and asked if affidavits before
the Lord Mayor or some other magistrate had been made. Dr.
Moore has the distinction of being the first person who, in 2 scien-
tific society of gentlemen, required that the detail of philosophical
experiments should be supported by affidavit. He had, however,
gy | forgotten himself last summer at the Phrenological Associa-
tion, having been for some time in an incessant state of distressing
morbid antimesmeric irritation, ‘without knowing more of the subject
than its unpopu'ar name, and conducting himself precisely in the
way in which he complains, as a phrenologist, that the medical pro-
fession conduct themselves towards phrenology. When several gen-
tlemen had related most curious experiments in which, during the
mesmeric state, individual cerebral organs were at pleasure excited
or stupified mesmerically, he exclaimed that it was a ow | pretty
thing indeed for gentlemen to come down and tell us that they had
seen this and that. I replied that no experimenters could do more
at a public discussion, or in writing, than detail their facts faith-
fully, and put others in the way of repeating their experiments: and
he was at once put to silence for the night.

“Thus Dr. Moore made no objections, but called loudly for affi-


* See my Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations, &c.


Dr. Joseph Moore’s great whimsicality. 815


davits and then sat down again. No other notice was taken of this
speech than to laugh at it.”


At the following meeting, when the question of record-
ing the account of this most interesting and most important
case of absolutely painless amputation of a leg was debated,


“Dr. Moore protested that the authors had violated the laws of
the society ; and, at the same time that he was so indignant at its
publication having been taken out of the hands of the society, de-
clared, most consistently, that it was unworthy of a place in their
minutes. ‘ How would the character,’ he exclaimed, ‘ of that me-
dical society be affected, on whose records it should appear that it
had received and discussed a subject like mesmerism, when no proof
existed as to its truth?’ ”


This is all I know of Dr. Moore’s contributing to the
attempts to prevent mankind from possessing the blessings of
mesmerism in their diseases and agonizing surgical operations,
except his vain and silly chattering against it in private.*
If he has exposed himself to my ire, as he writes in his auto-
biography, he has evidently been blessed with a lucky escape,
for I have displayed none to him; have never written a
word about him except the simply historical passages of his
doings in the Medical and Chirurgical Society just quoted,
nor indeed spoken of him. I had nearly forgotten there was
such a person. For he has written nothing except a notice
that one of his patients had measles twice: he has done no-
thing for his profession: I never hear of him in practice or
meet with a patient who has consulted him. I was not sure
that he was still in practice.

The exquisite mesmeric phenomena of the excitement of
individual cerebral organs discovered by Gall, when no sug-
gestion or knowledge of what is attempting is possible on
the part of the sleep-waker and the operator exerts no will,
(see above, p. 258, &c.,) though foolishly despised by him,
have given a greater impulse to phrenology than this science
had received for twenty years, have attracted the attention
of thousands to it and converted sceptics without number.

Dr. Moore must be forgiven, for he knows not what he
says. To shew that I forgive him, and to prevent all appear-
ance of unkindness in continuing to neglect him and take no
notice of him, as well as to prevent posterity from knowing


* Within these few days a gentleman informed me that he was at a party
where Dr. Moore and Dr. Spurgin were eagerly ridiculing mesmerism, and that
Dr. Moore was not contented without adding that I knew mesmerism to be all
humbug though I advocated it. The gentleman took him to task as he deserved.


316 Dr. Joseph Moore’s Epitaph.


nothing of him and the deeds in which he glories, I will
write him an epitaph, which he may order to be chiselled
upon a marble tablet and placed in Westminster Abbey or
St. Paul’s, whichever he may prefer.


Memento MORI,
Hic JAcET


JOSEPHUS MNPOX.*


He is now no more :
But his fame will last for evermore.
Such was his admiration of swearing,
That he wished medical men,
Before publishing important scientific truths,
To swear to them
Before the Lord Mayor or some other magistrate.
When medical men communicated their experience,
He considered it “‘ a very pretty thing” in them
To declare what they had witnessed,

As if they spoke the truth and thus enabled
Others to verify their observations and experiments.
He considered the detail of a painless surgical operation
To be
A disgrace to a Medical Society,

And


The discussion of mesmerism
To be
Ruinous to its character.
He published no works: nor had he much practice.
et was he a glorious man.
Gloriosus erat :
For he boasted that he gloried in calling mesmerism imposture,
And its abettors impostors.
He wrote his own life in the Medical Circular,
But lost it by the excitement of his feelings against mesmerism
And
His self-glorification,
Which induced the disease called “‘ constitutional irritation.”
Notable things of him are recorded in the humble Medical Circular


And
In the far-famed Zoist.t


* Erasmus wrote a “ Mwplas Eyxémiov:’ and Holbein illustrated it co-
piously. It is elegantly bound in the College of Physicians: but as Dr. Moore
is unhappily not a Fellow of the College he cannot consult it.

+ We have it on his own authority, that he was ‘‘a man of agreeable man-
ners and considerable vivacity, good health, and bodily activity,” ‘‘ kindness
and courtesy :’’ that he was always well off, and having never felt the in-
citement of the ‘‘ res augusta domi,” never became so ‘‘ popularly known as
many others :’’ was unmarked ‘‘ by bustle and pretension,” (now he always ap-
peared a very bustling little gentleman:) was told by Abernethy that he was
** very much too clever for a doctor,” and ought to become a surgeon: and 80,
(choosing something midway,) that he felt ‘‘a bias for midwifery :” “ enjoyed the
confidence of a considerable number of general practitioners,” and received
many ‘* presents of plate and other valuable articles :’’ once had a legacy of


( 817 )


XIII. Cure of a case of excessive Flow of Saliva.
FRADELLE.


Sacred
TO THE MEMORY OF


JOHN BIRCH, Eszq,.,


Many years an eminent Surgeon of this Metropolis,
Who died on the 3rd of February, 1815, aged 69 years,
And whose earthly remains lie deposited under the Pulpit.


In his professional character as humane as he was skilful,
He permitted not the sight of daily wounds and sores,
Afflictions and wretchedness of every kind,

To blunt the edge of his natural feelings
For the sufferings of his fellow-creatures ;

But condemning a too hasty reliance on vaunted theories,
Sparing of the knife, abhorring unnecessary torture,

A foe to wanton, cruel, or dangerous experiment,
Averse from rash operations and the destruction of parts
Redeemable by patient and judicious care,

He earned for himself a high and distinguished reputation
On the solid and only secure basis of ENLIGHTENED EXPERIENCE,
Stimulated through life by a wise and Christian-like ambition
To cure, not maim—preserve, not destroy.


Mankind is indebted to him
For a more intimate acquaintance with the powers
Or Mepicat Evectricity,
By his own ingenious and improved application of which,
He performed many remarkable and almost unhoped-for cures.
But the practice of Cow Poxine,
Which first became general in his day,
Undaunted by the overwhelming influence of power and prejudice
And the voice of nations,

He uniformly and until death perseveringly opposed :
Conscientiously believing it to be a public infatuation
Fraught* with perils of the most mischievous consequences to mankind.
Man’s mere opinions must ever be liable to error,

But by the motives that sway his heart
Should he alone be judged.


To perpetuate the remembrance of qualities so excellent,
Penelope Birch,


£5 5s., twice of £50, twice of £500, and once of £5000: that he took his
degree at Glasgow ‘‘ with some little distinction :’’ and, before that time, ‘‘ was
bleeding and physicking all the old women and children of the district’ in the
capacity of apprentice to a ‘‘ parish doctor.”’

In this his autobiography he also informed his friends and the public in general
that he was to be found at No. 10, Saville Row.


I know nothing more calculated to lowe? the profession in the eyes of the
public than these autobiographies. These biographies prove themselves, by the
minute and private details and the glorifications, to be written by the worthies
themselves. But, besides the internal evidence, it is a notorious fact that the
editor applies to each person for his life, and does not apply in vain.

- very word used by Professor Wood in reference to mesmerism, p. 256.

t.


—Zois


Obstinate case of Salivation.


His affectionate and only surviving sister,
Hath raised this monument,
Not out of a worldly and vain-glorious
Pride of affinity,
But, in order to hand down an example worthy of imitation
To succeeding ages.*


Miss M. A., aged 30, had been under medical treatment
ever since 1840. In the first instance, for a pain and swel-
ling of the left knee, and pain of the left hip, and afterwards
for violent spasms in the stomach, head-ache, giddiness, fulness
of the head, aching of the left side, and other ailments of
the stomach and nervous system. Every night she had cough
and other chest symptoms. In 1846, she derived so much
benefit from taking, by medical direction, about once a week,
one pill containing calomel, that, hoping to do still better,
she inadvertently took one every day for several weeks, till
her mouth became frightfully sore and the sides of her
throat extremely swelled. Unconscious of the cause of the
mischief she had done, she swallowed the saliva, which was
daily increasing in quantity, instead of discharging it.

When the attention of the medical men was directed to
it, they could afford her but little relief. Change of air and
the shower-bath were of benefit, but the flow would return
at times with such violence that the saliva discharged in a
day would nearly fill a wash-hand basin. It continued during
sleep. One medical man succeeded in checking it for a short
time, but the respite was succeeded by fever, spasms, &c.,
which compelled her to keep her bed for weeks.

From first to last, six medical men in Ireland and five in
England were consulted, and she had been under the regular
care of several. They subjected her to “ dlisters, issues, oint-
ments, leeches, caustics, scarification of the gums, pills, draughts,
mixtures, and drops.” Sir Benjamin Brodie gave it as his
decided opinion that the discharge of saliva ought not to be
stopped, for fear of engendering some more serious disease.
Every cessation of the morbid flow was succeeded by one or
other of the complaints from which she had previously suf-


* Epitaph to be seen on a marble tablet in the church of St. Margaret
Pattens, Rood Lane, Fenchurch Street, upon a surgeon of St. Thomas’s Hos-
pital named Birch, who was as furious against cow pock as Dr. Moore is against
mesmerism., He wrote against it, had caricatures against it, lectured in the
Hospital against it, stormed fyom morning to night against it: and left
orders for an epitaph in the hope of damaging it after his death. But the cow
pock is adopted in all the quarters of the globe, the memory of its first promul-
gator is honoured by the whole human race, and the medical profession points to
his name as one of its chief glories, while poor Mr. Birch is gone,—one day
to be followed by poor Dr. Joseph Moore, who is destined to leave mesmerism
adopted by all mankind.—Zoist.


The salivation cured. 319


fered, and these in their turn yielded when the flow re-
appeared.

This state of alternation of complaints continued for six
years. The patient was constantly taking medicine, and her
constitution became considerably impaired.

She came up to London and consulted Dr. Elliotson. He
assured her that medicine would be useless; and advised
a trial of mesmerism. Mesmerism was resorted to. He
found one spot of a cartilage, near the breast-bone, very
tender, but could detect no tumor in the breast as had been
alleged.

I commenced mesmerising her, July, 1852, and, at the
end of twenty-five minutes, procured light and tranquil sleep,
which any noise would disturb. Beyond this degree the
sleep never went. It would continue for half an hour after
I left the house. I mesmerised her three quarters of an
hour daily, and directed my attention to, and made slow
passes over, the throat, or rather the seat of the salivary
glands, in order to reduce their action.

The discharge of saliva gradually subsided. The effects
of a cold or over-fatigue, would, at times, retard the im-
provement. It was not till mesmerism had been persevered
with for four months, that the discharge was effectually ar-
rested.

Two month’s further trial was made to establish the cure.
Mesmerised water was of benefit. It is now seven months
since mesmerism has been discontinued; yet none of the
complaints to which she had formerly been subject has re-
turned.

Acids are found to excite the glands, and are therefore
avoided. A cold does the same, but the effect soon goes off
spontaneously.


H. J. Frape..e.


5, Brecknock Crescent, Camden New Town,
August 19th, 1853.


VOL. Xf.


( 320 )


XIV. Can Professor Faraday never be wrong? or, is Table-
Turning all a delusion? By the Reverend Gerorce
SANDBY.

‘* Aliquando bonus dormitat.’’
Horace.
‘* There is a superstition in avoiding superstition.’’
Bacon.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Flixton, August 25th, 1853.

Sir,—It is, doubtless, a monstrous act of presumption to
call in question the infallibility of Professor Faraday. He is
an authority from whom no appeal is permitted. When our
Professor has once spoken, a cause is settled in public estima-
tion: Roma locuta est ; causa finita est ; and when in addition
to his decision, he appends certain fearful sentiments about
the “condition of the public mind,” and the “ deficiencies
of our system of education,” and his “startled” feelings at
the revelation of so much ignorant adherence to the “cause
of error,” that man is voluntarily exposing himself to ridicule
and censure, who does not at once bend in silent obedience
to the dicta. In spite, however, of the terrors of a Faradzan
anathema, I am rash enough to think that the question is
not yet closed, and that perhaps the great authority of Al-
bemarle Street may be wrong for once in his life.

Iam in some degree emboldened to utter this absurd
opinion, by a re-perusal of the opening paragraph in his
famous letter to The Times newspaper, dated June 28th.
“T have recently,” he says, “been engaged in the investiga-
tion of table-turning. I should be sorry that you should
suppose I thought this necessary on my own account, for my
conclusion respecting its nature was soon arrived at, and is
not changed.” <A man who is “sorry” that investigation on
his own account should be thought necessary, and whose
conclusion respecting the nature of an alleged fact is soon
arrived at, does not commence his experiments in a very
impartial state of mind. If the Professor had not adopted
a very different course in his grand inquiries on the subject
of electricity, he would not have attained the European
celebrity which so justly attaches to hismame. He would
not now have been regarded as the facile princeps of lecturers.
But, as Bacon says that there is a superstition in avoiding
superstition, so there may be an unscientific zeal in combat-
ting unscientific opponents ; and in his eagerness to demolish
people whom he may despise, a philosopher may sometimes
forget his philosophy, and inyent a machine which, while it


Mr. Faraday wrong. 321


admirably adapts itself to one class of facts, deals with but
half a question, though it professes to embrace the whole.
And this I believe to be the position of Professor Faraday
with his apparatus on this subject. The “expectant will”
has been as strongly developed in his case as in that of those
unfortunate table-turners for whose system of education he
entertains such scorn. He professes, indeed, “only to be
led by the facts and truth of nature,” and he “ expected”
that his instrument would soon settle the controversy: but
the “mental check,” of which he speaks, has prevented him
from going into every bearing of the question, for his instru-
ment has simply proved that which we all of us admitted
before his letter appeared.

I repeat it, that our best and most judicious experimenters
had previously admitted that muscular action and fatigue
with expectant attention did often produce the effects referred
to. We had given both caution and advice on the subject.
We had carefully distinguished between the different motive
powers. In my letter, which appeared in the last number of
The Zoist, I had myself especially drawn the attention of our
friends to this very point, and had expressed an opinion that
many of their alleged cases of success might possibly be the
results of muscular agency: nevertheless, I contended that
after a reasonable deduction of deceptive instances, there still
remained a collection of facts, which the “ muscular” hypo-
thesis did not touch. And Professor Faraday’s instrument
goes no farther: it is merely negative in its action : it narrows
the limit of our cases ; but it does no more. At the same
time, after the publication of the Professor’s letter, I was
not disposed to adhere pertinaciously to my own opinion, but
was anxious, as opportunity might offer, to test the question
over again. My own recent experiments, however, have al-
ways failed; and I appear to possess no power myself: how-
ever, I have lately been an eye-witness of a fact, in which
I perceive no opening for mistake.

I was in the company of several friends, when the con-
versation turned upon table-moving. Two or three sceptics
expressed their disbelief of some anecdotes which were
related : when a clergyman present, the Rev. , observed
that he had himself been as decided a sceptic as any one,
but that he had found that he possessed the power to a con-
siderable degree. It was agreed that he should be tested
under the surveillance of his sceptical neighbours. He took
a slim and very light hat (it is important to bear these points
in mind), and placing the fingers of his two hands perpen-
dicularly upon the flat and outer part of the brim, commenced


322 Tables moved by an insensible force.


the experiment. The hat moved distinctly and rapidly in
about a minute. This, of course, was at once attributed to
muscular power; with whatever good faith the party might
have acted, the cause was still the same. It was, therefore,
proposed by one of our sceptics that something heavy should
be placed inside the hat, something that might act with a
vis inertia, and offer resistance to the muscles. This was
agreed to ; and a piece of marble, weighing about two pounds,
was deposited inside: in less than a minute, however, the
hat moved most unequivocally. This fortunately was not
deemed sufficient : something still heavier was required. An
Indian pestle and mortar, with which the Hindoos pound
their rice, and weighing upwards of seven pounds (I have
had it weighed since), was selected by our sceptic and placed
inside the hat. We all considered that it was useless to make
an experiment under such circumstances; but again, and to
our surprise, in the course of a minute the hat walked off in
a marked manner. Unfortunately the experiments always
produce such distressing sensations upon my friend, the ope-
rator, that he was glad to withdraw his hands soon after the
hat was in movement; but still there was ample opportunity
afforded for distinctly watching the effect. The hat stood
upon a table more than a foot from the operator ; his fingers
were not laid horizontally upon the brim, or partly bent over
it so as to obtain a purchase; but he held them vertically
downwards, touching the hat slightly with the tips, it might
be almost said with the finger-nails. I stood next to him,
and can guarantee the accuracy of my description: seven or
eight other persons stood round the table watching the expe-
riments, and were satisfied of the fact. The hat was of such
slight fabric, and so flexible, that if any pressure had been
employed by the fingers consciously or unconsciously, it
could not have moved in consequence of the weight within,
but its sides would have yielded or crumpled into wrinkles ;
and yet the hat moved on uprightly and with as firm a shape
as usual. I lifted it up afterwards, and found the sides bend-
ing in from the great weight inside.

Now if Professor Faraday will condescend to take a light
hat, and place a heavy weight within it and try to move it in
the above manner by the mere tips of the fingers held per-
fectly straight, he will see the nature of the experiment. I
cannot expect that he will have any misgiving as to the con-
clusive character of his own test: but perhaps he may admit,
that those who believe in something besides muscular pressure,
are not quite the cretins, which he in his pontificial procla-
mation has described them all to be. And I further hope


Farther facts of this kind. 323


that any person, who finds that he possesses the power of
readily moving a hat, will try the above experiment, care-
fully observing the conditions, and report his results to the
ublic.

. I will mention, now, a few supplementary points.

The Rev. , who was a witness of the above experi-
ment, and who is as cool and clear-headed a man as any I
know, mentioned some striking facts, which had occurred
with his own children, who, like many other young persons,
seem to possess great power. They had formed a chain and
set a table in motion: having, as we may then call it, charged
the table, they broke the chain and the table stopped: in a
minute or two they re-formed the chain and held their hands
over the table, an inch or two apart, and in a short time the
table moved half a yard. This occurred in broad daylight,
and my friend, who was watching the proceedings very closely,
is confident that there was no contact with the table, either
from the hands or from any part of the body. I know no
one, upon whose evidence as that of a careful and philoso-
phic observer, I could more safely rely.

At another time, his children set easily into rapid motion
a table, which, from its size and weight, they could on other
occasions with difficulty move.

The same thing happened with a young friend of mine.
He easily, by himself, set into quick motion a large and
heavy round table, and there was this peculiarity in the ex-
periment ; the table was covered with a cloth which he never
creased or wrinkled by the contact. This was specially no-
ticed by all present, who none of them could afterwards set
the table in motion, on account of its size, without doubling
up the cloth into a crease. I consider this a good test against
the muscular-pressure hypothesis. Let any one try to push
a heavy table, and observe what happens to the cloth.

Your readers may remember the anecdote which I men-
tioned in my last letter, relating to M. Becquerel, the acade-
mician, and a young French girl. I observe a similar fact
mentioned in a letter which has been published on the sub-
ject.* “After the table has been rendered impressible, I
have placed my hands upon it, but it would not rotate. The
child has then placed her hands upon the outside of mine,
no part of her hands or of her person touching the table,
and in a short time it commenced its ordinary rotatory mo-
tion.” —p. 6.


* See Letters on Table-Moving, &c., by A. B. Bailliére, 219, Regent
Street.


324 Mr. Faraday rather amusing.


I submit the above statements, with great humility, to
those inquirers into physiology, who can patiently investi-
gate a perplexing question, and who, unlike certain philoso-
phers of whom we have heard, “do not soon arrive at con-
clusions respecting the nature” of a subject. -I do not say,
that a large proportion of table-moving cases may not be
cases of involuntary muscular action; but I submit that
there is still primd facie evidence remaining to shew that the
subject is not yet settled. Let us hope that our friends will
go on accumulating facts, patiently examining what they see,
and carefully recording those facts at the time. We must
not be frightened at the bad names that are given us, or at
the contempt in which we are held at the head-quarters of
science. For deplorable as doubtless has been our “system
of education,” and vitiated as our “mental condition” has
become, let us take to ourselves this comfort, that it might
have been worse. For, in addition to our other numerous
defects, we might have been wrapped up in a self-sufficient
satisfaction at our own superiority,—we might have been
scornful and uncharitable, intolerant of the facts and opinions
of others, and overweeningly contented with our own.

I am, Sir,
Yours, &c.,
Georce Sanpsy.


XV. Table-moving in distant lands.


‘* Nullum est jam dictum, quod non dictum sit prius.’’

Terentivs, ELunuchus, Prologus.
“ Whensoever a solid body, as wood, stone, metals, &c., is pressed, there is
an inward tumult in the parts thereof, seeking to deliver themselves from the
compression : and this is the cause of all violent motion, wherein it is strange in
the highest degree, that this motion hath never been observed, nor inquired : it
being of all motions the most common, and the chief root of all mechanical ope-
rations. This motion worketh in round at first by way of proof and search
which way to deliver itself: and then worketh in progress, where it findeth the

deliverance easiest.’’—Lorp Bacon, Natural History, cent. i., 9.


TO THE EDITORS OF THE ZOIST.


GenTLEMEN,—As a curious illustration of the odic force
alluded to in the introductory notice by Dr. Gregory in
Article 1 of the last number of The Zoist, as a transferable
influence capable of acting at a distance, I send you two ex-
tracts from works lately published, which you may consider
worth recording in the pages of your widely-circulated
journal. The Druses of Mount Lebanon, and the Lamas of


Table-turning in Siberia. 825


Siberia, in modern times seem to be acquainted with the
same secret powers of nature which were known to Moses
and the ancient magicians of Egypt.

Non-Wisr.
Edinburgh, August 15, 1853.


Extract from “ Table-turning and Table-talking.”


“It is quite evident that the mania (table-moving) has
also extended to Russia—to divide there the interest which is
felt on the Turkish question, for in a St. Petersburg peri-
odical, called the ‘ Bee of the North,’ a correspondent has
called attention to an analogous phenomenon which seems
to have been practised for many years past in the wilds of
Siberia. This account is sufficiently interesting to quote
verbatim :—‘ Immediately I read the account in your papers
of the “ moving tables,” it brought to my mind a circum-
stance which has a striking analogy to this newly discovered
phenomenon. Being an eye-witness to the fact, I consider
it my duty to communicate it to you. Like the high priests
of ancient Egypt, who practised a multitude of clever tricks
in order to maintain their influence over the superstitious,
the Siberian Lamas, priests of the religion of Budha, are in
possession of some of the more extraordinary secrets of na-
ture, which they never communicate to any one. These
secrets give them the reputation among their fellow-country-
men, of being inspired, and of acting under the influence of
divine revelation. Amongst the means employed by them,
there is one more curious than the others. A little moving
table is their magical wand, which serves them as an indi-
cator to discover stolen articles, when they are questioned
as to their place of concealment. This is how the enchant-
ment is brought about. When a person brings his complaint
before the Lama, and begs of him to discover the article
which has been stolen from him, it rarely happens that the
Lama consents immediately to grant his demand, but he puts
him off for several days under the pretence of preparing for his
act of divination. When day and hour indicated arrive, the
Lama seats himself on the ground before a little square table,
on which he places his hand, and then begins in a low voice
to read from a Thibetian work. Half an hour afterwards,
the priest rises, takes his hand from the table and raises his
arm, preserving at the same time, in regard to his body, the
position the arm occupied when placing it on the table, which
also rises and follows the direction of his hand. The Lama
then stands upright, raises his hand above his head, and the


326 Objects moved by insensible causes


table is brought on a level with his eyes. The enchanter now
makes a movement in advance, the table excutes the same
movement; he runs, the table goes before him with such ra-
pidity that the Lama can scarcely follow it. After having pur-
sued different directions, it oscillates in the air and then falls,
Of all the directions the table took, there is one more marked
than the others; it is on that side that the stolen articles are
to be sought for. If one lent an ear to the recitals of the
people of the country, they would be found at the exact place
where the little table fell. The day on which I witnessed
this experiment, after having travelled in the air over a space
of eighty feet, the table fell in a place where the stolen
articles were not discovered. I should own, however, with
all humility, that the same day a Russian peasant, living in
the direction pointed out, committed suicide. This suicide
raised suspicions; they repaired to his house, and there they
found all the stolen property. Three different times this ex-
periment took place in my presence, and the Lama declared
that the articles could not be found. But on the fourth
occasion I was witness to the fact I have just related. It
took place in the outskirts of the town Elane, in the province
of Zabackal. Not daring to trust blindly to my own eyes, I
explained this apparent phenomenon to myself as being some
trick employed by the impostor, the Lama. I accused him
of raising the table by means of an invisible thread before
the eyes of the spectators. But after a more minute exami-
nation, I found no trace whatever of fraud Besides, the
moving table was of pine, and weighed a pound and 2 half.
At the present day I am persuaded that this phenomenon was
produced on the same principle as that by which tables, hats,
keys, &c., are now moved.”


Extract from a work by Colonel Churchill, called ‘‘ Mount
Lebanon.” Saunders & Otley, Conduit Street. London.
1853.


“His son, Sheik Mechir, is one of the best informed of
the Druse Sheiks, and has acquired a store of history and
literature, which makes his conversation in every way superior.
He has, for some years, devoted his time, singular as it may
appear, to the cultivation of magic, and the stories he relates
of his interviews with immaterial beings are novel and start-
ling. At times he will place a jug between the hands of two
persons sitting opposite to each other, when after the recital
of certain passages taken indiscriminately from the Koran
and the Psalms of David, it will move spontaneously round,


among the Sheiks. 327


to the astonishment of the holders. A stick at his bidding,
will proceed unaided from one end of a room to the other.
A New Testament, suspended to a key by a piece of string,
will in the same way turn violently round of itself. On two
earthenware jars being placed in opposite corners of a room,
one being empty, the other filled with water, the empty jar
will, on the recital of certain passages, move across the room ;
the jar full of water will rise of itself on the approach of its
companion, and empty its contents into it, the latter re-
turning to its place in the same manner that it came. An
egg boiling in the saucepan will be seen to spring suddenly
out of the water, and be carried to a considerable distance.
A double-locked door will unlock itself. There cannot be a
doubt that an unseen influence of some kind is called into
operation, but of what nature those may conjecture who
liked to speculate upon such matters.

“ But it is in the more serious cases of disease or lunacy
that his supernaturally-derived powers are called into play.
Previous to undertaking a cure he shuts himself up in a
darkened room, and devotes his time to prayer and fasting.
Fifteen and sometimes thirty days are passed in this state of
abstinence and self-denial. At last one of the genii, de-
scribed by him to be much of the same appearance as human
beings, will suddenly appear before him and demand his
bidding. He then states his position, and requires assistance
in the case he is about to undertake. The genii replies at
once that his request is granted, and encourages him to
proceed.

“The wife of Sheik Achmel Talhuh had been for more
than two years afflicted with a swelling which had been long
mistaken for pregnancy. Sheik Mechie, after the usual pre-
paratory discipline, passed his hand over her person, and in
five minutes she arose perfectly cured.

“Sheik Yoosof Talhooh was brought before him, a con-
firmed lunatic ; in two days he returned to his home perfectly
restored to health and reason.

“That the Sheik stoutly maintains his intercourse with
spiritual agents to be real and effective, is unquestionable ;
and indeed the belief in magic, and in the interposition of
an order of unseen creatures in worldly affairs, at the bidding
of those who choose to devote themselves earnestly to such
intercourse, is universal throughout the entire population,
of every religion and sect. There are Christian priests who
affirm that the Psalms of David contain an extensive series
of necromantic passages, which, if thoroughly understood
and properly treated, would place the whole world of spirits
VOL. XI. BB


328 Books received, Notices to Correspondents, &c.


entirely at man’s disposal, and invest them, through their
medium, with miraculous powers.”


BOOKS RECEIVED.


The Reflection of Divine Truth. Nos. V.and VI. Robertson, Edinburgh.
The Christian Examiner and Bible Advocate. No, V1. Tweedie, Strand.
The Exposition of Life and Immortality. Nos. 1. and II. Ker, Edinburgh.
The British Journal of Homeopathy. No. XLV.

An Essay upon the Philosophy of Evidence, with a discussion concerning the
belief in Clairvoyance. By Watkin Williams, of the Inner Temple. Chapman,
Strand.

Hypnotic Therapeutics, illustrated by Cases. With an Appendix on Table-
moving and Spirit-rapping. By James Braid, M.R.C.S. Edin., M.U.S., &c., &c.
Reprinted from the Monthly Journal of Medical Science for July, 1853.


Christianity said by Bishop Butler to be a republication of the law of nature.
—A. B. is informed that when Dr. Elliotson made this remark, he evidently
referred to the moral precepts only of Christianity, though inadvertently he did
not so express himself. But in making this remark in all other parts of The
Zoist and in his Physiology, he has distinctly so expressed himself: and, in speak -
ing of a future state, has always placed the foundation of the belief of it on its
assertion by Christianity, of which it is an important doctrine.


LONDON MESMERIC INFIRMARY,
No. la, FITZROY SQUARE.


NEW DONORS.


hs a
Featherstonhaugh, J. D., ie o9 Aeasindl 5 5 0
Hebert, M., Paris.. sa. O0R UD Ahee we ceeds seat ae ele
Muskett, Mrs., Highgate. pvew de mendelecduepeesbedetintan. Sa §
Tanner, Mrs. .... +h benenewe beeeereseetsetingstvewss a2 oS


NEW SUBSCRIBERS,


Friend, a, per Mr. J. Ellick, 7, eneseted Villas, Maida Vale .... 1 1
Grattan, Colly, Esq. . ° sn. ie
Mitchell, Miss, 10, Abbey ‘Place, St. John’ . ; Wood... wwe; be


_
coco


Subscribers are earnestly requested to transmit their subscriptions to Mr.
Garpiner, the Secretary, No. 1a, Fitzroy Square. Many are one year, several
two years, and, some three years in arrear, notwithstanding applications have been
made to them. .

The public are earnestly requested to support this excellent Institution, which
would do far greater good with more funds, so great is the demand for mes-
merism among the poor.

We are surprised at not seeing the names of many noted mesmerists in the
list of donors or subscribers.

Patients who do not think it right to avail themselves of charity, but would
not find it convenient to pay a private mesmeriser, are mesmerised at the Insti-
tution for five shillings a week in rooms separate from those of the other patients.

Subscribers and visitors introduced by members of the Committee are allowed
‘to visit the Infirmary between 2 and 4 o’clock in the afternoon.

Fine Crystals may be purchased at the Institution for half a crown cach.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. XLIV.


JANUARY, 1854.


I. Popular Letters on the Odic Force, and on Magnetism.
By Baron Retcuensacu. Translated by William Gregory,
M.D., F.R.S.E., Professor of Chemistry in the University
of Edinburgh.


(Concluded from the last number.)


Letrer XII.
Transference and Conduction of Od.


You are now acquainted with the most important sources of
od, at least in so far as I have hitherto been enabled to
detect them. Crystals, sun and moon, magnets, animals
and human beings ; chemical action, including fermentation
and decay, sound, friction, and the flow of water, heat, elec-
tricity, and, finally, the whole material universe with some-
what inferior power, compared with the previously mentioned
sources of odic action, these all give out those sensible and
visible phenomena which we cannot refer to any of the known
imponderables, but offering certain points of view, from which
we perceive that they are all phenomena of the same kind,
and must- therefore be treated as forming an independent
branch of physical science. Let us now consider some of the
properties of the principle which must be supposed to be at
the root of these peculiar phenomena.

The first thing that we notice is, that this principle may
be transferred from one body to another ; therefore it is, like
heat and electricity, transferable. A body which is hot or
electrified causes another body placed in contact with it to
become hot or electrified. So is it with od. You have seen
that a glass of water, held at the poles of crystals or mag-
VOL. XI. ce


330 Od may be transferred.


nets, or connected with a glass rod which is subjected to
friction, or placed in the sunlight or moonlight, in the blue
or in the red colours of the spectrum, acquired odic properties.
But you may substitute any other body for the glass of water.
Take a piece of wood, a skein of yarn, your watch, a china
saucer, a small stone, a bit of sugar, or anything that comes
to hand ; first let it be felt and tested by the hand of a sensi-
tive, then bring it for a short time, for a few minutes, near
to a pole of some body which gives out od, and lastly return
it to the same sensitive hand. The sensitive will find it
altered, and will tell you that he feels it warmer or cooler.
And observe, that he will find it altered precisely in the sense
in which the odic pole to which it was exposed would itself
have acted on him, and not in the opposite sense, as happens
with respect to magnetism in the case of iron when exposed
to the pole of a magnet. Nothing else then happens but
this, that the odic pole brings an indifferent body placed near
it into the same odic state as that with which the pole is
overflowing. This is communication or transference, to be
well distinguished from induction. The former is an odic
action ; the latter a peculiar mode of action of magnetism
on other bodies. The glass of water and other bodies which
you have seen exposed to sources of od were therefore charged
with od, or odised ; and the change which took place in them
must be regarded as analogous to that which occurs in a glass
of water, for example, when it is heated or cooled. It is the
same water; nothing material or palpable has been added to
it; only a dynamical or imponderable change has been
effected ; but remarkably enough, a change which, notwith-
standing, acts on the sense of taste.

You may test this also with respect to the luminous phe-
nomena. Place one end of a copper wire in the dark chamber,
and the other end in the daylight, and now approach to the
latter, in succession, the pole of a powerful crystal, that of
a magnet, one of your hands; or rub it with a file, or place
it in a glass in which you gradually dissolve an effervescing
powder; or hold it over a charcoal fire, or place it within the
sphere of diffusion of the electric conductor: in all these
cases, the sensitive in the dark will see the wire become
luminous, and a small smoky flame mixed with sparks flow
from the end of the wire, as long as you continue any of
these operations on the other end. The od transferred to
the wire will render it more luminous than it naturally is,
and will flow out of its end in a form visible to the sensitive,
and be then dissipated in the air.

In like manner odic currents continually flow into the


Od constantly discharged from our surface and breath. 331


air from the points of your fingers or of your toes, indeed
from your whole person; and this escape of od is simply a
transference of it to the air, or a charging of the air with od.
One of the strongest of such charges is that produced by the
breath of all living animals. It is well known that an ener-
getic chemical action goes on in the lungs. Od is thus,
according to the laws of its production, set at liberty, and
transferred to the air of respiration, which is exhaled, strongly
charged with od.

Madame Cecilia Bauer, the wife of a hotel-keeper in
Vienna, who is very strong, thoroughly healthy,* and withal
highly sensitive, told me, with some alarm, that when she
woke on a dark night, and could see nothing else, she al-
ways saw her husband and child lying beside her, as if lumi-
nous, while at each respiration shining clouds of vapour rose
from the mouths of both. That was the breath charged with
od; and the breath is thus seen by almost all sensitives in
the dark, flowing out of their own mouths like tobacco
smoke.

Now turn to my first letter, and imagine yourself in a
crowded railway-carriage or omnibus, where a sensitive sits
enclosed between other persons, and this sensitive may be
one to whom the reaction of all like-named od is distressing.
But the air in a small closed space is very soon thoroughly
charged or even overcharged with od from the many limbs
and the breath of many lungs. The sensitive cannot now
draw a single breath without inhaling air already as strongly
charged as it is absolutely necessary for him that the air he
expires should be. And now put yourself in the place of the
tortured sensitive who is not permitted to open the carriage-
window. He sits on the rack, and no one admits his suf-
ferings. But henceforth you will grant him sympathy and
help. In the same way you will now understand why a
sensitive of the highest degree of sensitiveness cannot remain
in crowded societies, more especially where the ceiling is not
very high. The air soon becomes saturated with od; he be-
comes uneasy, hot, wretched; and if he cannot make his
escape, he becomes irritable, cross, and out of humour on


* Such a case, and they are the majority of the author’s cases,
at once disposes of the silly objection that the odic phenomena are
only observed by nervous patients. Even if it were so, it would not
signify, so long as they were accurately observed, and the statements
of the patients tested by comparison with those of other patients.
But they occur in persons whose health is and always has been
perfect in every respect.—W. G.

cc2


832 Od may be conducted through bodies.


the slightest occasion. The longer he is forced to remain,
the more intense become his discomfort and his bad humour.

So is it also with the sensitive in bed. They charge with
od, by their own emanations, their pillows, sheets, and couch.
This soon annoys and disturbs them. They turn and twist
about the whole night through, cast off the bedclothes, and
only obtain some respite when they have done this, and are
uncovered,

A person of this degree of sensitiveness is always a rest-
less being, literally a “‘ mauvais coucheur,” and must be so
from his very nature. He charges all his clothes with the
same od as that of the limbs they cover. Limbs and clothes,
charged with like-named od, act and react mutually on each
other, producing the unpleasant tepid sensation. When in
repose, therefore, the sensitive always suffers, and only ob-
tains some relief in motion, by transferring the od to the
air; he cannot of course bear much clothing, and what he
has always appears to be too much. He feels a continual
impulse to change his position and his occupation.

Od may not only be transferred to all bodies, but it may
also be conducted through them. We have seen a proof of
this when the sensitive held a rod in the sunshine. The od
of the sun’s light (which may be called Heliod) passed through
the rod into his hand. But now make a complex rod; add
to the wooden rod one of metal, and to that a wax candle,
and attach to the last a silk thread; give this fourfold rod by
the wooden end to the left hand of the sensitive, and when
he has became familiar with its effect, in about half a minute
take hold of the silk with your right hand. In a few seconds
you will hear that the wood begins to feel cool; but if you
exchange your right fingers for your left, it, the wood, will
become warm and unpleasant to him. Place the silk on the
pole of a crystal, on the spectrum, in the moonlight, in an
effervescing draught, or on sulphur; in all these cases the
effects corresponding to the various sources of od will be con-
ducted, through the different materials, silk, wax, metal, and
wood, to the sensitive hand. If you try rods of sulphur,
glass, resin, gutta percha, or any other idioelectric substance
(non-conductor of electricity), they will all conduct od just
as well as the metals. We have no isolator for this impon-
derable. Hence the difficulty of its investigation.

In all this, contact of the conductor with the source of
od is not necessary ; a near approach will suffice. Let the
sensitive take a glass rod in his hand, and approach the
points of your fingers to the other end of it without touching
it: you will immediately hear that you exert the same kind


Od has two poles. 333


of action on him as before, only weaker. Approach closely
to the end of the rod the pole of a crystal, the paw of a cat,
some bichromate of potash sealed up in a tube, or a bottle of
fermenting grape juice ; instantly the sensitive hand will feel
the corresponding effect. This agrees with the luminous
emanations from all these sources of od. Good conductors,
such as metals, glass, or silk, become luminous when strongly
charged, or when conducting a strong charge, and clothe
themselves along their whole length with a coating of lumin-
ous vapour, whether they be acted on by contact with, or by
mere approximation to, the source of od.


Letter XIII.
Dualism of Od.


To whatever department of nature we turn our attention,
we perceive dual or polar contrasts; and these are not want-
ing in the field which we are at present cultivating. You have
already had occasion to notice them in crystals, in magnets,
and in the two halves of the human frame or of brutes; in all
of which there are observed at one side reddish-yellow odic
light and an unpleasant tepid sensation, and at the other blue
light, united with a sense of grateful coolness. But the same
opposition occurs in innumerable cases of odic phenomena,
and constitutes a most essential characteristic of this impon-
derable.

Let us now take as a starting point, the chemical ele-
ments, or simple, that is, undecomposed bodies. Place in the
left hand of your sensitive subject, successively, a small phial
with potassium and another with sulphur; he will soon in-
form you that the former produces a tepid and disagreeable,
the latter a cool and pleasant sensation. Make the same trial
with sodium, gold, platinum, mercury, copper, on the one
hand, and with selenium, iodine, phosphorus, tellurium and
arsenic on the other, you will obtain from the first series
unpleasant warmth, from the second grateful coolness, more
or less powerfully marked in each individual substance. You
may even employ the difference in odic power as a principle
of arrangement of the elements, and place potassium as the
element which causes the most intense sensation of disagree-
able warmth, at one end of a scale, and oxygen as that which
produces the strongest effect of pleasant coolness, at the
opposite end. If now you examine the series thus arranged,
you will be astonished to find, that, with some trifling devia-
tions, it coincides with that which chemistry has derived from


334: Odo-chemical scale.


the relative affinities to oxygen, and which is named the electro-
chemical arrangement. By a different path we have arrived
at the same result, at an arrangement which may be called
the odo-chemical series or scale. Is it not in the highest
degree wonderful, that an ignorant uneducated girl, merely by
feeling them with her fingers, is able in half an hour to
arrange the elements in a series, the establishment of which
has cost more than half a century of infinite labour, and the
exertion of the utmost sagacity and acuteness on the part of
many men of the highest ability? The great Berzelius, the
originator of the electro-chemical system, felt this very
strongly, when, at Carlsbad in 1845, I laid before him the
evidence of this fact; but since his death, the chemists who
have survived him have not thought such a trifle worthy their
attention. Nay, a physiologist has even had the audacity to
accuse Berzelius, after his death, of senile dotage, because he
publicly and emphatically took under his protection these
results of my investigations.* To make up for the insuf-
ficiency of his own judgment, this writer only needed to
make the modest assertion that Berzelius had lost his mental
powers.

In this odic series the amorphous or uncrystallized bodies,
taken separately, exhibit, indeed, no dual opposition ; and we
must regard them individually as unipolar, much in the same
way as electricians regarded soap as unipolar. But if we
consider them altogether, and take the series as a collective
unity, this opposition is very decidedly manifested, so that at
the one end tepid, and at the other cool sensations are exvited
in the sensitive hand. Odic polarity, therefore, exists in the
material universe, viewed as a whole; and, as these sub-
stances which feel warm to the /eft sensitive hand are the
electro-positive bodies, and such as feel cool to the same hand
are electro-negative, I must, in the same sense, and in order
to be consistent, name the former odo-positive, the latter odo-
negative bodies.

Of compound bodies, I found the alkalies and alkaloids
and all similar bodies, odo-positive; the haloid salts, and
most of the metallic oxides, and the acids, odo-negative.
Organic substances, such as gum, starch, fat, oils, or paraf-
fine, stood between these.

In crystals I have observed that the end by which they
were attached was always warm to the touch and gave out
reddish yellow light, and the free end, on the contrary, was


* M. Emil du Bois Reymond, of Berlin, in Karsten’s Fortschritten
der Physik; year iii., p. 401.


Our left half is odo-positive ; our right odo-negative. 335


cool and gave out blue light. This rule may be followed out
even to fibrous crystallizations and to crystalline masses in
which the individual crystals can no longer be distinguished.
The base of the crystal is therefore odo-positive, the point
odo-negative.

Magnets, at the southward* pole, are, to the left hand of
the sensitive, warm, and give out reddish yellow light; they
are here consequently odo-positive. At the northward pole
they are cool to the left hand, and the light is blue, they are
here therefore, odo-negative. (Some philosophers, not all,t
regard the northward pole of the magnetic needle as magneto-
positive, but without giving any distinct reasons for so doing.
The odic phenomena lead me to doubt the correctness of this
view. Odo-positive and electro-positive bodies, as we have
seen, agree; and magneto-positive bodies must coincide with
them. Consequently the northward pole of the needle, with
its blue light, can only be magneto-negative). Heat, chemi-
cal action, and sound, have hitherto yielded only odo-negative
effects; and friction only odo-positive ones. This part of the
subject requires further investigation. Polarized sunlight is
odo-positive in its transmitted, odo-negative in its reflected
portion. In the spectrum, the red, fire-yellow, and yellow
rays, and those beyond the red, are odo-positive; the blue,
the violet, and the chemical rays are odo-negative. The same
is true of the spectrum of moonlight, as well as of the feeble
spectrum from an Argand lamp.

The animal, especially the human, body, is odo-positive on
the entire left side from head to foot, and negative on the
right side. This is most strongly apparent in the points of
the fingers and toes, and here again chiefly at the root of the
nails, the seat of the most active organic changes in the whole
hand. Man is therefore polarized across the breadth of his
frame; but there are also other less marked polarities, or
odie axes, one along the length, another along the thickness
from back to front, the details of which my space does not
permit me to give.

To fix this in your mind, make a few easy experiments.
Place before a sensitive a sheet of medium blue paper, and
let him look at it alternately with either eye, keeping the
other closed. He will find the effect on the left eye agree-


* The pole which points to the south is properly the north pole,
but to avoid confusion I call it the southward pole. It is well known
that the sonth pole of one magnet repels the same pole of others,
and attracts their north poles.

+ Handwirterbuch der Chemie von Liebig, Sc. §c., vol. v., p. 34.


336 Man and woman are in polar contrast.


able, on the right disagreeable. The left eye is odo-positive,
and the blue colour is, as you know, odo-negative. Here
then, unlike named odic influences meet,- and the result is
pleasing. In the other case, with the right eye, like named
odic agencies meet, and the effect is unpleasant. Control
this experiment by another, with a sheet of orange-yellow
paper; similar results, but this time reversed, will be obtained
invariably. By this delicate experiment you observe that the
unpleasant effect of yellow and the agreeable effect of blue
on the sensitive, depends on their action on the /eft eye, and
that this action is felt, in the internal sense, to prevail over
that on the right eye.

If you look into the right eye of a sensitive, at a short
distance, with your left eye, he will make no objection; of
course the other eye of both must be covered. If you now
look with your left eye into his left eye, he will instantly feel
uneasy, and not be able to hold out for half a minute; if you
try to force him to continue, he will turn away. If he be
very highly sensitive, a very short trial of this kind will affect
him so powerfully, that for some time he will be unable to
see with the eye exposed to the action of yours. Nay, if he
be forced to submit to the experiment for a somewhat longer
time, it will often happen that vomiting is brought on. This
is the result of the meeting of like-named odic influences, and
this the highly sensitive cannot endure.

Does odic dualism exist in the contrast of the sexes? For
an answer to this question I appealed to nature by the following
simple experiment. I placed opposite to a sensitive young
lady a man and a woman, each of whom had a glass of water
in the right hand. After six minutes, when the water had
become negatively odized, I caused the sensitive to taste in
succession, the water of both glasses. She found both cool
and grateful, but that from the hand of the man far cooler
and more grateful than the other. I now repeated the same
trial with a sensitive man. But he found the water from the
hand of the woman to be the cooler and more pleasant of the
two. You see, then, plainly, that man and woman are in
polar contrast to each other.

You have no doubt observed, that in all my experiments
I have always used the left hand of the sensitive, not the
right. The reason of this must now be obvious to you: odic
warmth and coolness are not absolute effects of external
stimuli, but only relative, and the same effect refers only to
one half of the sensitive frame. On the opposite side the
effect is reversed. In order, therefore, to avoid confusion in
my statements, I referred all trials to one side, and selected


Odie rainbow in the darkness of night. 337


the left, because the effects on that side are usually stronger
and more marked, and are thus better observed. Had I taken


the right side or hand, I should have obtained the same
results, but reversed.


Letrer XIV.
The Odic coloured Spectrum. The Polar-lights of the Earth.


The splendour of the rainbow by day has often delighted
you; but I shall now introduce you to a rainbow, seen in the
darkness of night.

A subject of low sensitiveness perceives at the two poles of
crystals only a greyish undefined vapour, a dull gleam of light
amid the general darkness. One of middling sensitiveness
distinguishes, that the light at one pole is bluish-grey or blue,
at the other yellow or reddish-yellow, exactly like the lights
from his right and left hands. Finally, one who is very
highly sensitive perceives that this blue and this yellow are
not homogeneous, but that within each, all other colours,
green, red, orange, violet, play and as it were leap in all
directions, and that each polar flame, strictly speaking, has a
variegated aspect. This, however, is to be so understood, that
the colours last named appear only as secondary colours, as
partial specks of colour, in the general blue of the one and
the general red of the other pole.

It was a sensitive invalided sailor, Frederick Werdlick,
who first pointed out to me, that these colours are not always
in restless motion through one another, but that they quietly
arrange and stratify themselves, if not disturbed and mixed
by the currents of air caused by my movements or by respira-
tion. And when I asked him about the order of arrangement,
I learned that red invariably lay lowest, that is nearest to the
pole, and was troubled by much smoke; that above this lay
fire-yellow, then bright yellow, then pale yellow, canary
yellow and green; that the green passed into blue, first pale,
then deep, and that above all was violet-red, which passed
into smoky vapour; the whole being mixed with many small
and bright sparks or stars. What this man first told me, was
afterwards confirmed by numerous other sensitives in thousands
of nocturnal experiments. Now what is this arrangement
of colours, but that of the prismatic spectrum or rainbow?
The appearance of a brilliant rainbow in absolute darkness—


338 The tints of this rainbow separable.


what a strange spectacle! All the highly sensitive described
it as the most splendid object they had ever seen.*

I placed a powerful bar magnet in the vertical position,
its southward pole uppermost ; a reddish tint prevailed in all
the colours which arranged themselves over this pole. I then
turned it, so that the northward pole was uppermost; and
the spectrum now became tinged with a bluish colour all
over its component tints, which were duller than before. The
section of the bar at the poles was a square inch. To diminish
this surface, I placed on the pole a pointed iron cap; the
light became longer, narrower, and brighter, but the rainbow
tints remained. I now used a cap with two upright points ;
one of them showed a light entirely blue, the other a light
entirely red. Lastly, I employed a cap with four upright
points; each point had now a different coloured light. The
first had a small blue flame; the second a yellow; the third
a red; the fourth a greyish-white, and all four flames rose
vertically, close beside each other, from the four points of the
bar. I had therefore succeeded in separating some of the
tints of this enigmatical rainbow, and in obtaining each, as it
were independently.

When I turned the bar slowly round its vertical axis, the
coloured flames did not move with it, but retained their posi-
tion, and when the point on which the yellow flame first
appeared had come to the place of that on which the blue had


been, it had no longer a yellow, but a blue flame, while the
blue had passed into grey, the grey into red, the red into
yellow. The colours did not therefore depend on the magnet
alone, but on some external circumstance also. The meaning
of this soon appeared; it was the quarters of the heavens
which exerted an influence on the colours of the flames. The
blue light always stood on the point which was to the north ;


* Here, once more, is an experiment, and the same remark
applies to those which follow, made with many subjects, all of whom
agree in the details, save only as to degree of brightness. Is this
conceivable, when no one of them knew what the others had seen or
said, except on the supposition that the light is a true external phe-
nomenon! Could the descriptions of imaginary lights agree in this
manner? Let the reader try the experiment, taking care, as the
Author always did, not to suggest anything whatever, but to let the
subjects tell their own story, and let him observe what sort of agree-
ment will be found in the statements of only two persons who see
nothing real, but fancy, or pretended that they see light. Let him
test their statements as the author did, and he will soon be convinced
that real phenomena alone can explain the Author’s results.—W. G.


Appearances from upright points, a circular disk, &c. 839


the yellow on that on the west side, the red at the south, the
grey at the east. I might turn the bar how I pleased, the
coloured flames did not move, but retained their respective
positions in reference to the quarters of the heavens.

Instead of four upright points, I now fixed on the mag-
net a horizontal four-sided iron plate, a square foot in surface,
with its corners north, south, east, and west. This was hardly
done, before horizontal lights flowed from all the corners, as
vertical ones had done from the four vertical points or spires.
When I turned the plate 45°, mixed colours appeared at its
corners, green at north-west, orange at south-west, greyish
red at south-east, and violet at north-east.

I now placed on the bar a circular iron disc; when the
beautiful sight of a circular iris or rainbow appeared in the
dark to the sensitive. Light flowed out from the whole cir-
cumference. From the north, where it was blue, it passed
through all shades of blue into all those of green ; at north-
west, and thence to west, into those of greenish yellow, yellow,
orange-red ; and towards the south full red, then greyish red ;
and towards east it passed into grey. But in the north-east
there appeared a tolerably sharp and defined stripe of red,
from which point as the light approached the north, the blue
tints again appeared, and at last passed into pure blue at
north.

I next had a hollow iron globe made, so large that I
could not clasp it with both arms, and hung it in the dark
room by a silken cord. I fixed in its axis an iron bar, round
which were six strata of coils of copper wire, and arranged
so as to be able to connect the ends of the wire with a voltaic
battery on Smee and Young’s plan. At first nothing was
visible ; but as soon as I made the connexion, and converted
the bar into an electro-magnet, the sensitives saw the sus-
pended globe, luminous in all the colours of the iris, start
out of the darkness into view. The whole surface of it shone
with rainbow tints. Dividing the globe ideally into stripes,
like the parts of an orange, that towards north was blue from
pole to pole, that on the north-west green, on the west yellow,
on the south-west fire-yellow, on the south red, on the south-
east greyish red, on the east grey, on the north-east appeared
the stripe of red and the returning blue. The colours formed,
visibly, fine lines, like meridian lines, separated by dark
ones. The whole globe was clothed in a delicate luminous
hollow sphere of vapours. The upper or odo-negative half
had decidedly a bluish tinge over all its colours, the lower
or odo-positive had a reddish general tinge. In the north
part, where the northward pole of the electro-magnet was,


340 Remarkable stripe of pure red,


rose a column of light with a tinge of blue, to the height of
a hand above the globe, then beat downwards, like an um-
brella, on all sides, and flowed downwards towards the equa-
tor of the ball, at a distance of two or three inches from the
surface. From the opposite pole below rose a similar column
of reddish light, which bent over and flowed upwards to-
wards the equator. Both of these were dissipated in fine
lines or fibres of light, before reaching the equator.

It is evident that I wished to form a terrelle or miniature
earth, in the sense of Barlow’s; a floating model of our
globe with a north and south pole and the appropriate mag-
netic forces, and to test this in reference to odic light. And
we see, in fact, that the results resemble in a surprising
degree the phenomena of the aurorz borealis and australis
of our planet. A closer comparison than it is possible here
to enter on reveals so perfect an analogy, that it becomes in
the highest degree probable that the aurora borealis is posi-
tive, the aurora australis negative, odic light (of sufficient
intensity to become visible to the ordinary human eye,
W. G.).

We see, then, that the odic luminous emanations are
not monochromatic, but, when closely examined, appear to
constitute a regular iris or rainbow.

(I must here direct the attention of the reader to the
singular statements of the sensitives, that towards the violet
- end of the odic spectrum or rainbow, in all its forms, and of
course far removed from the red end, they saw invariably a
narrow, well-defined stripe of pure red. Without entering
into the question of how the odic light comes to be separated
into its compotent parts, as sunlight is by the prism or by
drops of rain, no such cause, so far as we know, applying
to the odic light, I may observe, that the Author was quite
taken by surprise with this fact of the narrow stripe of red at
the opposite end of the spectrum to the red ray, having never
heard of such a thing. How much less could his subjects
have known of it! But it so happens that Sir D. Brewster,
in his analysis of solar light, published many years ago,
shewed that light consisted of only three colours, red, yellow,
and blue, the mixture of which produces the green, orange,
indigo, and violet of the spectrum. He further shewed that
each of the three primary colours existed at every part of the
spectrum, but that each predominated at one special part ;
the red towards the red end, the yellow in the middle, the
blue towards the violet'end. And he first discovered, by his
methods of analysis by absorption, that the red alone had
two maxima, the chief one at the red end, the other near


agreeing with Sir D. Brewster’s observations. 841


the violet end, beyond the blue maximum ; and he actually
obtained a stripe of pure red*near the blue end. It is the
existence of this second smaller maximum of red which, by
mixing with the blue, produces the indigo and the violet
beyond the blue. All this was unknown to the Author, till,
on reading his great work, I told him of it; yet he had come
to the same conclusion from the coincident statements of all
the highly sensitive. Is it possible to imagine a more striking
proof of the accuracy of his method than this perfect agree-
ment, in so singular and unexpected a fact, with so exact
an observer as Sir D. Brewster? And ought not this one
fact to have aroused the attention of all who are occupied
with the study of optics and the subject of light? just as the
luminous moving coil of light round the galvanic wire, which
embodies and renders visible Ampére’s hypothesis of an
exterior current moving in that way, ought to have arrested
the attention of all electricians. But this unjustifiable neg-
lect of such beautiful and striking phenomena will have no
effect ultimately. “ Magna est veritas et prevalibit”’ Such
observations as those of the Author must sooner or later
take their due place among the very highest results of expe-
rimental science.—W., G.)


Letter XV.
Terrestrial Magnetism and Terrestrial Od.


Since the colours of the odic spectrum, as you may
understand by the preceding letter, arrange themselves with
reference to the cardinal points, north, south, east and west,
these last must possess in themselves something which has an
intimate relation to odic phenomena. If even a small pocket
magnetic needle or magnet, in virtue of its odic power, in-
fluences these phenomena, it is obvious that the magnetism
of a magnet so stupendous as is our earthly sphere, that is,
terrestrial magnetism, must exert the most marked action
on all odic phenomena whatever, taking place on its surface.
This influence is {nothing else than that of the od which
everywhere accompanies magnetism, and which consequently
is attached to the terrestrial (magnetic) poles, and from thence
acts over the whole globe. It may be called terrestrial od.

You have seen that the magnetic pole, which gives odic
coolness to the sensitive left hand, as do likewise the electro-
negative bodies, is that which points to the north when the
magnet is freely suspended, as in the compass needle. We


342 Our body odo-negative and odo-positive.


must therefore consider it as a negative pole, and its asso-
ciated od as negative od. Andsince the terrestrial (magnetic)
pole, which by its attraction causes it to take this direction,
must be of unlike character (in electricity, magnetism, &c.,
unlike poles attract, like poles repel each other), it follows,
that the north (magnetic) pole of the earth must be odo-
positive, and the south pole odo-negative.

Of this unavoidable inference we shall now make a very
natural and easy application to the affairs of daily life. I
have already noticed, in my first letter, that all sensitives
are unable to sleep save when lying on the right side; they
feel distressed and restless when on the left. Now I feel
entitled to assert, with perfect confidence, that in New
Holland, Chili, or Buenos Ayres, that is, in the southern
hemisphere, this will not be the case; but that, on the con-
trary, sensitives will there find it impossible to sleep except
lying on the left side. Near the equator it will be to them
indifferent on which side they lie. This must be so. The
north (magnetic) pole is odo-positive. If a sensitive turn
tqwards it his left or positive side, this gives a combination
of like poles, which he cannot endure, for it acts disagree-
ably on him, rendering him uneasy and banishing sleep.
But if you place your sensitive friend with his right or odo-
negative side nearest the earth, the annoyance is removed ;
the negative side and the positive terrestrial pole are turned
towards each other, and comfort and tranquillity are at once
established, so that he falls asleep without delay. Of course
all this is reversed in the southern hemisphere. Here, then,
is the explanation of what seems a very superficial matter,
but which is really founded on a deeply-seated principle in
our system ; and pathology will do well to take note of the
fact.

I shall now mention, in passing, a similar but still more
important fact. I have said nothing, from want of space, of
the odic character of the longitudinal axis of the human frame.
I shall therefore briefly state, omitting, for the present, the
evidence, that I have found the human body above, towards
the brain, odo-negative, and below, towards the abdomen,
odo-positive. This being premised, I beg you to place four
chairs in the middle of a room; one of them with its back
towards the (magnetic) north, one towards the west, one
towards the south, and the fourth towards the east. And
now ask a good sensitive whether it be indifferent to him on
which of these chairs he sits for some time? When he has
tried them all, he will be sure to tell you, that he feels most
comfortable on that on which his back is towards the north


Sensitives easily to be found. 343


and his face towards the south, and most uncomfortable, by
far, on that where his back is towards the west and his face
towards the east. I shall pass over the characters of the
two remaining chairs, and instead beg you to extend the
trial to the bed of your sensitive. Place him on it, and turn
it, successively, towards the four quarters. You will soon
learn that he only feels comfortable when his head is to the
north and his feet to the south. The explanation is obvious.
The upper half of the body in reference to the longitudinal axis
is odo-negative, while the north terrestrial pole is odo-positive.
When turned towards each other, unlike poles are paired,
and this is agreeable. The lower half is odo-positive, and
gives an agreeable combination with the odo-negative southern
pole. All other positions are less pleasing, and more or less
tepid, causing uneasiness or even nausea. Some of my
sensitives have always carried a compass since they learned
from me the cause of the unpleasant sensations they had long
experienced, and, when travelling, always place their bed by
the needle. Highly sensitive subjects are quite unable to
obtain rest in any position but that of head to north and feet
to south. But even in those who are only of middling sensi-
tiveness, as for example, M. Delhez, teacher of French in
Vienna, the position of the bed has so powerful an influence,
that it not only decides in regard to the nightly rest, but
also in regard to the general health. A healthy sensitive
must therefore observe the rule of lying always with his head
to the (magnetic) north ; and a sensitive afflicted with illness
must absolutely and above all things be placed in this posi-
tion, or all other efforts to effect a cure, and all drugs, will
be found nearly ineffectual.

(Here is a most important fact, which any one can verify
without a dark chamber or any instrument but a pocket
compass. He will soon find a sensitive, if he only look for
one. Of all who have declaimed and written against the
Author’s views, or of all who have contemptuously disre-
garded them, let me ask how many have tried this simple
experiment, which demands, no doubt, a little trouble and a
little patience, not however the hundredth part of what they
daily expend on matters of far inferior interest? I answer
with confidence, not one; for I have never yet obtained an
affirmative answer to the question, “‘ Have you tried the effect
of position on sensitives, healthy or diseased?” from those
who at once rejected the Author’s conclusions. I have tried
it, and found his statements literally true. Nay, the com-
plaint we hear every day from those who leave home that
they cannot sleep in a strange bed, must, I have no doubt,


Ob Our Churches are placed improperly.


frequently depend, in sensitive persons, on the fact that the
strange bed stands in a different position from their own.
But further, I have been made acquainted with several cases
in which, long before the Author’s first work appeared, the
effects of position were recognized by the subjects and their
friends, who had, in every case, come to the north and south
line as the only tolerable one. These persons, on reading
my translation of the Author, wrote to me to thank me for
the explanation of what had so long puzzled them. I have
seen several of them, and had the details viva voce. In all
these cases it was impossible that the idea could have been
suggested by a work which was not in existence till long after
the fact had been noticed and had become known to the
subjects and their families. How long will men of standing
in science go on imitating the detractors of Galileo, Columbus,
Harvey, or Jenner, and reject new facts, without examina-
tion? The reader will, I am sure, agree with me, that the
rejection of such facts by the highest authority, unless accom-
panied by a careful investigation, is unworthy of attention,
and must ultimately recoil on its authors.—W. G.)

I may now take you back to the church, where, in my
first letter, I left you with the sensitive who had fainted. In
our Christian temples we have adopted the rule, which has
come to us from heathen nations, of placing the altar to the
east, so that the nave extends from it westward. The con-
gregation thus sit with their faces to the east and their backs
to the west. But this is exactly, of all positions, the most
intolerable to the sensitive. His odo-positive left is turned
to the odo-positive north terrestrial pole, his odo-negative
right to the odo-negative south pole; he sits therefore under
the double influence of like poles, which he is unable to
support. If this continue long, as through the hours of a
long service, he is affected by one discomfort after another ;
he becomes hot, and nervous; is affected by migraine and
probably nausea, by pain of stomach or even vomiting, and
if he do not retire, at last falls down fainting. We see this
daily in large churches, and it is due entirely to the improper
position of the building.

This influence also affects our daily life. No chair, sofa, or
seat should be placed with its back to the west, if a sensitive
is to use it. M. Philippi, Major of Engincers, a middling
sensitive and an experienced sailor, requires, on board ship,
no compass to enable him to point out the quarters of the
heavens, in cloudy or foggy weather, where neither sun nor
stars are visible. He has only to turn himself, standing,
slowly round, and instantly feels where west and north are.


Instances of sensitiveness to polar positions. 345


Every sensitive seaman will soon learn this, and find the
cardinal points by the same law by which the sensitive spring-
finder discovers running water underground.

These things penetrate in all directions into our domestic
habits, and affect the position of a piece of furniture, of a
machine of any kind, or of a piano-forte. A sensitive lady
was often in the habit of playing on the last-named instru-
ment at my house. But she always felt uncomfortable, and
could not tell why she always felt indisposed when at my
piano-forte, which was a good instrument. On reflection, I
remarked that the instrument lay in the meridian, and that
the performer sat with her back to the south. She sat there-
fore before the odo-positive poles of a number of long mag-
nets, namely, the steel wires. This she could not endure,
and after a certain time would have fallen fainting from her
seat. I turned the piano round, so that she sat to the north
of it, and before so many northward poles; instantly all was
put right, and thenceforward she played with comfort and
with delight. A grand piano must therefore never be placed,
so that the performer sits to the south or west of it; for no
sensitive will have any comfort in that position.

I knew a man, an excellent domestic character and an
industrious weaver, who was rather sensitive: he changed
his dwelling, and from that hour he had no longer any com-
fort at his loom. He began to desert his seat, to frequent
the wine and beer shop, neglected his work, and was brought
toruin. Now in his old house, the loom stood so that he
sat with his back to the north; but in the new, his back was
to the west. This was to him intolerable, and his sufferings,
the cause of which he did not know, but which forced him
away from the place of torture, caused the ruin of the unfor-
tunate man. Thousands, engaged in sedentary occupations,
mechanics, sempstresses, writers, clerks, artists, especially
painters, who have the light from the north, and must sit
with their back to the west, and are thus deprived of all
enjoyment in their professional labours, have become the
innocent victims of the ignorance which has hitherto pre-
vailed in regard to these recondite physical phenomena.


Letrer XVI.


Velocity of Transmission. Radiation. Distances at which the
influence of Od is exerted. Odic Atmosphere. Odoscope.
Etymology of the word “ Od.” Conclusion.


You know that od is transmitted or conducted through
VOL. XI. DD


346 Velocity of odic transmission.


bodies, but you do not know the velocity with which this
takes place. That of electricity is well known to be prodi-
giously great, while that of heat is singularly small. Od is,
in a manner, intermediate between these. I extended an
iron wire of 100 feet in length, and placed at one end vari-
ous sources of od, such as the hand, crystals, magnets, &c.,
successively. A highly-sensitive person perceived the arrival
of the corresponding effect at the other end of the wire,
held in his hand, generally after the lapse of about half a
minute. This shews that the od passed slowly enough along
the wire, to allow us to follow it in its course.

We have seen that the transmission of, and charging of
bodies with, od, took place without actual contact with the
odic source, by merely approaching the latter to the body to
be charged. We do not yet know whether this took place
by absorption of the luminous odic emanations, or by radia-
tion. That od is capable of transmission by radiation would
appear from this, that it comes to us with the solar rays, and
can be transmitted with them through glass prisms, there
refracted, and polarized by glass plates. But this evidence
is not quite conclusive ; for the od appearing in these circum-
stances may be produced by the impinging of the rays of light
on the solid recipients.* But if you stand opposite to a
sensitive, and make passes downwards with both hands at the
distance of half an arm’s length, he will feel very distinctly
a cool aura passing down his frame. Now take a step back-
ward, and repeat the passes; he will feel the same sensation,
but less strongly ; and if you retire two, three, four, or more
paces, he will still feel the passes, with gradually diminish-
ing intensity. When you have reached the end of the room,
he will still perceive the effect ; and if you continue to retire
through an adjoining room, the action will become very


* If we reflect on the differences above mentioned in the velo-
city of transmission of electricity, heat, and od, to which may be
added light, it is hardly possible to conceive, according to the old
doctrine, that the solar rays consist of material particles, moving in
right lines. For all the component parts of these rays, including
the invisible chemical rays, must be, in this respect, of the same
nature, and as they all reach us together, must be radiated with
equal velocity. But as they are all conducted with very different
velocities, it is not probable that, if material, the velocity of their
radiation is equal, and we are hence led to infer that they are all, as
light is now admitted to be, forms of motion or undulation in the
atoms of an ether or subtle universal fluid, pervading all space.—
W. G.


Odic radiation. 347


feeble, but still perceptible. With a person of middling
sensitiveness, you must be at the distance of from forty to
sixty feet before the effect of the passes becomes uncertain
and finally imperceptible. Upward passes are (disagreeably)
perceived at a somewhat greater distance than downward
ones. I have had highly sensitive subjects whom the effect
of passes made by me was perceived to the distance of 150
feet, beyond which I had no means, within doors, of trying
the experiment; and the action was not then exhausted.
They also felt the action of the poles of crystals and of pow-
erful magnets quite as far, and that instantaneously, as soon
as I pointed these at the subjects. You perceive, then, that
od is endowed with a very wide sphere of radiation, extending
perhaps, like that of light, to infinity. As a result of this,
we carry about with us, proceeding from our fingers, toes,
and limbs, immeasurably extended prolongations of rays in-
visible to us, and are besides, as material, living beings, sur-
rounded by a luminous atmosphere, which accompanies our
motions. I have often been told, in the dark chamber, that
my head was surrounded by a crown of rays, that I was
clothed with the “ glory” of a saint. And it is far from un-
likely, that the legendary tales and traditional belief of the
luminous crown or glory round the heads of saints, is directly
derived from this phenomenon, which was seen shining,
thousands of years ago, in the East, as it is now seen among
us, that is, by the sensitive.*

This odic atmosphere, which surrounds every human
being, and emanates from all living creatures, is not always
exactly alike, just as tastes and smells differ, as light has
different tints, and sound different notes in the scale. That
of a woman differs from that of a man ; that of the young man


* It is quite conceivable that while, on the one hand, the in-
tensely excited and active state of the nervous system in persons
devoted to religious meditations and leading an ascetic life, may have
greatly intensified the odic emanations, especially from the brain,
so, on the other, the effect of enthusiasm in the followers and ad-
mirers of such holy men may have been to exalt their natural sensi-
tiveness, and that both causes combined may have led to this result,
that the disciples saw the luminous crown round their master’s
head, either in daylight, or in twilight and ordinary darkness. That
such luminous emanations do become visible in daylight is known ;
for Sir Henry Marsh has described various cases in which luminous
rays were seen round the heads of dying persons. Indeed, it would
appear that they are not at all rare on the approach of death, and
the frequent lucidity of the dying is probably connected with the
same cause.—W. G.

pbv2


348 Distance of odic influence.


is different from that of the old; that of the sanguine differs
from that of the choleric; that of the diseased from that of
the healthy ; nay, among diseased persons, it is different in
catarrh and in scarlatina, in typhus and in calor mordax, &c.,
&c.: and all these differences are distinctly perceived by the
highly sensitive and frequently even by those of only middling
sensitiveness. Here then you see the first hint of the possi-
bility, that the patient, in a state of extreme sensitiveness,
may feel the approach of the physician before the healthy
have any sense of it: or of the explanation of the fact that
sensitives often experience, for certain persons, at the first
meeting, a repugnance as invincible, as the preference or
attraction they feel for others is apparently unfounded ; or
that animals of prey and dogs recognize the trace of their
prey on a leaf on which the flying creature has set its foot ;
and many other apparently wonderful things, which, however,
only seem wonderful as long as we are ignorant of the mate-
rial links by which they are enchained, simply and according
to physical laws, in the natural world. But I should exceed
my space, were I here to enter on these high and recondite
relations of od. I therefore here take my leave.*

You have now a general notion of that which I have
called od, in its outlines. It is a dynamide or imponderable
force, analogous, and closely related, to those already known
to science. It embraces a peculiar group of imponderable
natural phenomena, which are, however, perceptible by the
senses; but for which we have no other measure, and no
other test, than the human nerve, and this only under the
peculiar circumstances which give origin to the irritability we
have named sensitiveness. The reason why it has hitherto
entirely escaped scientific investigation, nay, has been directly
and obstinately repulsed by the science of the day, is founded
on this very want of a general odoscope and odometer acces-
sible to all, by means of which its existence might be demon-
strated easily and so as to convince all the world. And the


* The existence of the odic atmosphere, above noticed, also
tends to explain and render conceivable the power undoubtedly pos-
sessed by many persons in the mesmeric state, of perceiving the
state of health of those with whom they are placed en rapport. 1
have frequently pointed out, that those who can be mesmerised are
usually sensitive, and that at all events, when they are mesmerised,
they become highly sensitive, to odic impressions. This explanation
may enable many, who find a difficulty in admitting unexplainable
facts, to see the possibility of a large class of mesmeric phenomena.—
W.G


Etymology of the word Od. 349


cause of our failure, hitherto, in discovering an odoscope, lies
in the very nature of od itself, that is, in its power of passing
through all bodies and all space, and the consequent impos-
sibility of accumulating it, or condensing and concentrating
it so as to be generally or universally perceptible. For heat,
light, and electricity, we have up to a certain point, isolators,
but I have not yet been able to discover one for od.* And I
have thought it right to employ this property of unconfina-
bility, (to coin a word,) in order to form a name for the new
force, admitting of all the necessary inflections and combina-
tions required for scientific purposes. “ Vd,” in Sanscrit,
signifies, to blow (as the wind). In Latin, “vado,” and in
the ancient Norse, “ vada,” means, “I go, I go fast, I hasten
on, I flew on.” Hence, in the old German dialect, “ wodan”
signifies the idea of the all-penetrating, which in various old
idioms, passes into “ wuodan, odan, odin,’ meaning, the all-
pervading power, which was ultimately personified in a Ger-
manic Deity. “Op” is therefore the sound appropriate to a
dynamide or imponderable force, which rapidly penetrates
and constantly flows through all objects in collective nature,
with irresistible and unrestrainable power.

Had nature endowed us with a sense for od, as plain and
distinct as those we possess for light and sound, we had then
stood on a far higher level as to knowledge; we should in
that case have been able to distinguish truth from error by
virtue of this all-pervading influence, incomparably more
easily, rapidly, and certainly, than we now can; we should
have seen, as we say, into each other's breasts; Talleyrand
could not have any longer abused speech to conceal his
thoughts; and we should, as an inevitable consequence, have
become beings of a higher and nobler nature. It is easy to
show, that man, with such a sense for od, must have been a
kind of angel; and that the possession of such a power would
at once, without increasing our intellectual powers, elevate us
to a far higher point in the moral scale than that on which
we now stand. But Infinite Wisdom, which willed only the
existence of imperfect and erring men, has therefore denied
to us that, which would have made us equal to demigods.+


* It is possible, or even probable that the magnetoscope of Mr.
Rutter, modified by Dr. Leger, is really nothing but an odoscope,
fitted, however, only for demonstrating the existence of a force or
current, and for estimating, comparatively, its force in different
bodies. This subject is of the highest interest.—W. G.

t May I be permitted, without levity or profanity, to suggest,
that it is conceivable that man, as first created, may have possessed


( 350 )


Il. Further testimony to the peculiar appearances of Mesmerised
Water. By the Rev. Jerrery Exins. Communicated
by Dr. Elliotson.


* * . * * +
* - * * * ~
* * * + * *


.... “* In 1853—a fortnight ago—the Archbishop of Dublin (Dr. Whately),
long the patron of homoeopathy and other systems of delusion and quackery,
accepted the office of President of Dr. Elliotson’s Mesmeric Infirmary, vacant
by the death of the Earl (of) Ducie.

‘** Thus are the wild speculations of charlatanic mysticism blasphemously pro-
claimed to be equal with revealed religion, as necessary instruments for the
temporal and eternal well-being of man. Thus is religion dishonoured through
her own minister’s teaching profane and old wives’ fables, and forming in their
own persons a loathsome alliance between Christian truth and the unbridled
excess of credulity.”—Association Medical Journal, July 1, 1853; p. 575.
Editorial article. Editor, Joun Ross Cormack, M.D., general practitioner
at Putney, Surrey, holding his appointment by the authority of the great asso-
ciation of medical practitioners throughout England and Wales.*


At the subsequent Annual General Meeting of the Association, August 12th,
Dr. Conolly praised Dr. Cormack’s “learning, talents, and zeal in conducting
their Journal.”’—-Association Medical Journal, Aug. 19, 1853.


Sampford, Braintree, Nov. 4, 1853.

My dear Sir,—As the enclosed statement made by two
ladies of my acquaintance corroborates facts already recorded
in The Zoist respecting the effects produced on water by
mesmerising, you may wish perhaps to forward it for the
next number of that interesting and popular work. I myself
have seen similar effects, as I stated in The Zoist (No. XLI.,
p- 85), and I have since noticed that mesmerised water has
a brighter and more transparent appearance than water
which has not been submitted to the influence. Both the
ladies I allude to are extremely susceptible of the action of
crystals and other substances. I saw one of them strangely
acted upon by a piece of white sugar placed in her right
hand. She was sitting with her left hand towards the north ;
and, on the sugar being placed in the right hand, she was


the odic sense, (now only known as exceptional or at least somewhat
rare sensitiveness, and very low in degree,) in full force and perfec-
tion; and that the loss of this gift would form an intelligible, or at
least conceivable, explanation of the change produced by the Fall ?
Man, as he is, is a grievously imperfect being; but, independent of
the statements of scripture, all nations have held the tradition of a
more perfect state or golden age. May not the study of this inter-
esting subject throw light on many obscure questions ‘—W. G.

* What we have omitted is a quotation from a speech made in 1850 at Rio


Janeiro by the President of the Homeeopathic School, and one from a sermon
delivered by the rector of Whickwar in 1851.—Zois?.


Appearances of Mesmerised Water. 351


gradually drawn up from the sofa; and, when on her feet,
was turned round till her right arm was fixed rigidly pointing
to the north. She appeared to be entirely under the control
of this agency, and would have fallen down if she had not
been caught by persons near her, who afterwards demes-
merised her. She was also strongly affected in the right
arm, which was near me when I was mesmerising the water,
and I was obliged to make transverse passes and blow upon
her hand in order to restore the use of her arm.

If these facts are of any service, I am ready to give my
name in support of them. The ladies wish af present to be
anonymous,

Iam, my dear Sir,
Your most sincerely,
JEFFERY EKINs.


First Lady’s statement.

“In the water mesmerised by Mr. Stride, I first ob-
served a few small air bubbles ascend to the surface; then a
waving undulating motion, which appeared to be caused by
a small thread, like a stream of light, which issued from the
end of each finger and interpenetrated the water, imparting
to it a clear and sparkling appearance.

“In the water mesmerised by the Rev. Jeffery Ekins,
I first perceived the undulating motion and the same kind
of light emitted from the fingers; but in his case the rays
were united, forming a compact column of light, which
passed down the centre of the water, but imparted its radi-
ance to the whole.”


Second Lady’s statement.

“In the water mesmerised by Mr. Stride, I perceived an
undulating motion on the surface, and smail particles rising
from the bottom of the glass. After a few minutes the
water became perfectly still, and looked particularly bright
and sparkling.

“In that mesmerised by the Rev. J. Ekins, I perceived
the undulating motion, but not to so great an extent as in
the former.

“In both cases the tumbler of water was placed on a
table, and great care taken not to touch it lest some motion
might be given to the water.

“ Braintree, Aug. 18.”


( 352 )


LIl. Cure of a case of Intense Coma; great benefit of Mes-
merism in a severe Injury of the Hand: and an instance
of Cross-mesmerism. By Joun BartisHitt Parker,
Surgeon, Exeter.


‘It is scarcely necessary to say that the honour conferred upon Sir John
Forbes by the Queen will be considered as a compliment to the whole profession.”’
** He conducted the British and Foreign Medical Review for twelve years with an
ability, honesty, and independence for which it would be difficult or impossible ‘o
Jind a parallel.” ‘*The clear exposure of the impostures of the mesmerists
and of the absurd follies of the homoeopathists, &c.; he has long since earned
his laurels.’’—Editorial article, Mepicau Times, Aug. 3, 1853. Editor, Mr.
Spencer WELLs, house-surgeon to the late Earl of Ducie.


Intense Coma.
On the morning of the 6th October, 1853, Mrs. T: re-
quested me to go and see her daughter, aged 13, who had
appeared in perfect health the previous evening, but had
eaten a curious mixture, some of the items being fish, apples,
nuts, pears, blackberries. They had found her insensible,
and unable to speak. When I arrived, the girl’s cheeks
were flushed, her respiration hurried, her pulse quick, the
whole chest in a state of commotion, the eyes half open, but
not seeing the point of a finger which almost touched the
cornea. In the first place, I endeavoured to give her a tea-
spoonful of water, which she swallowed with difficulty. I
then dissolved five grains of tartar emetic in two ounces of
water, and a teaspoonful was given every ten minutes, but
no vomiting was produced. She then took a teaspoonful of
castor oil every ten minutes, and an ounce was given in three
doses. All this she vomited. As there had been no evacua-
tion from the bowels for several days, an injection was given
which emptied the lower intestines. The unconsciousness
and inability to speak continued in spite of mustard freely
applied to the legs. I then took twelve ounces of blood from
her; but this operation was performed without the least con-
sciousness of pain. After this, I told her parents that I
thought nothing but mesmerism would save their child’s life.
They shewed a truly parental feeling on the subject, and I
am sorry to say I do not always find this to be the case. On
the arrival of my mesmeriser, he commenced making very
slow long passes, and breathing over the chest and stomach,
when I perceived the girl’s eyelids began to droop. At this
moment the Roman Catholic priest was announced ; I imme-
diately told him what we were doing, and asked if he had any
objection to mesmerism. He replied he could have none, as
he had no faith in it. My mesmeriser persevered for three
parts of an hour, and then left the child for the night. At


Great benefit of Mesmerism in an Injury of the Hand. 353


nine the next morning I found she had been more quiet
during the night, and had vomited some greenish fluid, but
there had been no evacuation from the bowels. She was still
unconscious, and lying on her back, with her head almost
under the pillow. I placed my left hand on her forehead,
with the fingers of my right pressing over the ends of the
ribs,—I breathed energetically for nearly five minutes over
the heart, lungs, and the pit of the stomach,—I then gazed
steadily at her eyes, which were immovable and half open,
and in less than ten minutes my little patient closed her
eyes, and turned on her left side,—I next made some long
and slow passes from the head to the feet, the whole of my
operations occupying fifteen minutes. The girl slept quietly
for three-quarters of an hour, and then awoke perfectly con-
scious, complaining of head-ache and sickness, and totally
unconscious of all that had been done for her. During the
day she took several doses of castor oil without any other
effect than vomiting. Some other aperients were given at
short intervals up to a late hour in the evening of the 9th,
before any effect was produced on the bowels. In the course
of the night of the 10th and 11th they were freely moved,
and only a slight fever from the reaction was left. From the
above account it will be seen that the relief was not derived
from the emetic, castor oil, injection, sinapisms, bleeding, or
various aperients, as the former had been tried without effect,
and consciousness by means of mesmerism was restored before
the operation of the medicine.


Advantages of Mesmerism in a very severe Injury of the Hand.

My son, aged 13 years, was, on September 13th, 1853,
with the usual recklessness of the genus boy, pouring some
gunpowder from a small copper flask on some lighted paper,
which ignited the powder in the flask, and caused it to burst
in his hand, thereby dividing the whole of the muscles in the
ball of the thumb, from the base, through the palm, to the
back of the hand. That the whole hand received a fearfully
severe blow may be imagined from the wound taking six
weeks to heal, and from the backs of the fingers having a
greenish tinge at the end of five. As the accident happened
while I was making my morning round to my patients, a me-
dical friend, living near by, was called in as soon as possible,
who most kindly and properly adjusted the edges of the lace-
rated wound, confined them by sticking-plaster, as there had
been considerable hemorrhage, and then applied a cold lotion.
When I returned, I found him in great agony. I imme-
diately breathed over the hand with all my energy, and, by


354 Ill effects of Cross-mesmerism.


dint of perseverance, he soon experienced its soothing effects,
and at the end of two hours suffered only comparatively
slight pain. Miss Coker, one of my kind mesmerisers, whose
greatest delight is in doing good, mesmerised him several
times daily with the most satisfactory results, and the boy
felt soothed more by her influence than by mine, or by that
of Mr. Squires, another of my mesmerisers, who was also
most anxious to be of use. Everything proceeded most satis-
factorily until the fifth day, when some of the alarming symp-
toms which precede lock-jaw came on, attributable, I believe,
to the effects of cross-mesmerism. Miss Coker having, in
my absence, been induced to mesmerise another patient, a
young lady, im his room, whither she had gone to see him.
Thoughtlessly the passes were carried from this lady towards
the boy, and he felt a peculiar pain in his arm and hand from
the time the second one was made. He mentioned this in a
few minutes, and the mesmerization in his room was in-
stantly discontinued; yet it took several hours to disperse
the uncomfortable feelings which had been produced. I
mention this fact in order to shew what unceasing care is
requisite in the proper application of mesmerism, humbug
though it be. Thanks to its repeated application and soothing
effect, my son was spared the awful affliction of lock-jaw;
which alas! is the too frequent result of such an injury.
Still he has now only a limited use of his fingers and thumb,
though I doubt not all will be right in the course of time.
Years, however, may elapse before he may recover the full
use and strength of his hand.


Slight Epileptic Fits resulting from Cross-mesmerism,* with the
details of their cure.

An itinerant lecturer on mesmerism having given a lecture
at a country town, and mesmerised a susceptible subject,
desired of the audience to inform him if any among them
would submit to a similar experiment. But only a few were
willing; and a medical student, above six feet high, and
apparently very robust, mounted the platform to prove the
humbug of mesmerism. The lecturer found in a few minutes
that the student was very susceptible, and exhibited many
phreno-mesmeric phenomena on him, when the lecturer
awakened him; after having cautioned him against allowing
himself to be mesmerised by any inexperienced person.
Months passed away, when this young man, being at a


* See this subject fully treated and illustrated with numerous striking ex-
amples in No. XXVII., pp. 224—251.—Zois?.


Local excitement of Cerebral Organs. 355


small party at a watering-place in the south of Devon, where
mesmerism became the topic of conversation, regardless of
the advice of the lecturer, permitted a gentleman to attempt
to mesmerise him. The trial was commenced, and in a few
minutes mesmeric sleep was produced; and from the phe-
nomena which he exhibited whilst under my influence, I can
easily imagine that an inexperienced mesmeriser would feel
much alarm and allow the imprudent intervention of friends,
which, of course, could only aggravate the evil. The medical
student became violently delirious; the mesmeriser lost all
control over him; his friends became more frightened, and
patted the patient on the head, and thus increased the de-
lirium. A medical man was called in, and, on being informed
of the circumstances, he immediately replied that he knew
nothing of mesmerism, and had no faith in it for good or for
evil, but that, in order to subdue the delirium, the young
man must have a blister applied to the nape of the neck, and
take some aperient medicine. The latter part of this advice
was followed, but not the former. After some time the
young man was demesmerised, but found himself the owner
of a severe head-ache which he had not before, and he had
also slight attacks of unconsciousness, of an epileptic cha-
racter, preceded and followed by head-ache, three and some-
times five times a day, after this severe attack. As these
symptoms continued for three weeks, the patient became
extremely melancholy and very nervous about himself. At
this time a friend advised him to apply to me; and on his
first introduction he was so nervous and restless that he could
not remain in the room whilst the friend who accompanied
him put me in possession of the above facts. On Friday,
August 5th, 1853, I put this young gentleman into mesmeric
sleep in less than five minutes, and very soon he exhibited
the following phenomena spontaneously, viz.: great attach-
ment to me, (which, had the same phenomena been exhibited
by a female, impure opponents would have attributed to
sexual depravity,) and intense jealousy at my holding any
conversation with his friends, so that he even threatened to
tear everything to pieces. I soon perceived that the organs
of destructiveness were pressed on by a contrivance forming
part of a surgical chair, which has been constructed under
my directions, and which, having a padded vice to hold the
head, dispenses with all assistance for any operation on the
eyes, ears, or mouth. When this pressure was removed, his
destructive propensities were instantly calmed, and he be-
came as amiable and tractable as possible. Having kept him
asleep for more than half an hour, I awoke him, and he re-


356 Dr. Forbes’s honour and prophecy.


turned to his lodgings at the sea side. On the following
Monday he paid me a second visit. He had experienced no
attack of unconsciousness since his first mesmerisation by me.
This second time I put him to sleep in less than three minutes,
and avoided producing any phreno-mesmeric phenomena.
On the 12th he paid me a third visit, when I found he had
suffered one slight attack, the result of some family quarrel.
I put him to sleep in two minutes, and very soon he said he
felt so happy and comfortable that he did not wish to be
awoke. After some time he was restored to consciousness,
and then told me that he felt the horrid nervousness had left
him, and that he was more than delighted at being thus re-
stored to his usual good.spirits and happy temper for the
first time since he had been so imprudently mesmerised by
a friend at an evening party.


Note by The Zoist on the motto of this article.


Of Dr. Forbes and his “honour,” we can only say as merrily
as Horace did,—


se libenter


Linquimus, insani ridentes preemia Scribe.’’


A full view of his able, honest, independent, and unparalleled
course against mesmerism, now crowned with knighthood by the
interest of his patron, Sir James Clark, and of the cudgeilings
like his fellow-knight, Sir Hudibras, he has received at our

ands,


“


who stoutly on his quarters laid,
And on his servants, who came in t’ his aid,’’


will be found in Nos. VI., pp. 274-8 (his unfulfilled prophecy in
1839 is here given); VII., pp. 393—409; IX., pp. 116—118;
X., pp. 241—256; XL. pp. 537—543; XIII, pp. 58, 59; XVI.
pp- 588—596 ; XXV., pp. 3, 6, and passim.

Sic itur ad astra. We shall see him at evening parties with a
star upon his left breast, as soon as mesmerism lies “ trampled”
under his feet, in fulfilment of his prophecy delivered in 1839, for
the fulfilment of which he has worked so hard. ‘“ Nevertheless,”
said the prophet, “there is comfort. The world is round, saith the
proverb, and all things come to an end. Pass a few short months
and the delusion stands exposed: the actors are declared to be de-
ceivers or deceived : the facts so lately boasted of are trampled upon
with contempt, and the doctrines built upon them are laughed to
scorn.” —British and Foreign Medical Review, April, 1839.

While we think of the far-seeing and high-minded editors, Mr.


Mr. Southam’s sagacity. 357


Wakley, Dr. Rose Cormack, Sir John Forbes, Dr. Bushnan, and Mr.
Spencer Wells, we think also of a speech made at the annual dinner
of the medical officers of the Army and Navy, on May 24th, by
Dr. Semple, who most respectably conducted the Medical Times
for many months between the dignified editorships of Dr. Bushnan
and Mr. Spencer Wells. ‘‘ He was only an in¢erim editor—had no
wish to be anything else, for he thought there were other professional
occupations less responsible and MORE RESPECTABLE.” — Association
Medical Journal, Jan. 3, 1853.*


IV. Remarkable Cure, in Norfolk, by a Lady, of all but
total Blindness of one eye and of inveterate Asthma, in
Marianne Howse, the wife of a shepherd. Communi-
cated by Mr. Barth.


“If one unacquainted with the laws which regulated the human frame in
health and disease, watched the progress of the mesmerist, he might readily be
converted to mesmeric doctrines. But, as studies were pursued, it would be
found that, while some of the mesmeric phenomena were clearly owing to decep-
tion, others strongly resembled certain morbid states of the system. Thus
without any previous mesmeric influence, cases would be met with of temporary
paralysis or inaction of one particular part or organ, with catalepsy and cata-
leptic epilepsy, and even with the higher ecstatic conditions (so marvellous to
the non-professional observer) in persons of hysterical and highly irritable nerv-
ous systems. What inference was to be drawn from these facts? That to pro-
duce these effects artificially, or at the will of the mesmeriser, the system must
be brought into a condition analogous to that which gave rise to those diseases.
Hence it might be reasonably inferred that the true mesmeric phenomena were
only so many proofs of the susceptibility of the individual to those affections.
Tn other words, mesmerism instead of being a curative agent was more likely to
be a cause of disease. And the phenomena of electro-biology, which was ano-
ther name for mesmerism, invented probably because the other had lost its attrac-
tions, were clearly but exaggerations of those laws of suggestion which frequently
produced a predisposition to prevailing diseases.’-—Mr. G. Sournam’s Intro-
ductory Address at the Chatham Street School of Medicine, Manchester, Oct. 3,
1853. Lancet, Oct. 15, 1853; p. 369.


TO THE EDITORS OF THE ZOIST.


4, Mornington Crescent, Nov. 18, 1853.
GenTLEMEN,—I have received the following account of a
cure of blindness, accompanied by severe pain and extreme


* An old woman, who had come from Chichester to London to see all our
wonders, was walking along Old Burlington Street to the Burlington Arcade,
and, never having seen a title on a door in Chichester, she stared at beholding a
conspicuous brass-plate with the words Sir Cuaries Apis at No. 13. Going
onwards she saw another conspicuous brass-plate at the next door, No. 12, with
the words Sin Joun Forses: and now exclaimed, in the hearing of the printer’s
warehouseman who was carrying a load of Zoists, “ O gemini!” As the old lady
sie from a learned cathedral town, she no doubt knew that gemini is the Latin
or twins.


358 Blindness and agony.


sensibility of the eye, and confirmed asthma, with mesmerism,
from the benevolent operator, a lady in Norfolk. Iam at
liberty to mention the lady’s name privately, and refer to
her if it should be required. But she would rather not
publish her name. She belongs to one of the best families
in Norfolk.

I enquired for the early history of the case, and am in-
formed that the patient, when a child, was under a doctor
for a year, for a speck on the left eye. He used to blow
something into it through a quill. About twelve years ago
she was under a medical gentleman at Swaffham. He died
suddenly, and she has had no medical attendance since, ex-
cepting occasional remedies obtained from the druggist ; and
this can hardly be considered medical treament. Previously
to being mesmerised she had for a long time been afflicted
with a suffocating and distressing asthma, great pain in the
left side of the chest, a grinding pain in her back, and severe
pain in the head.

These sufferings, and nearly total blindness of one eye,
have been rapidly cured by the application of mesmerism.

The patient’s name is Marianne Howse: her age is 46,
and she is the wife of a shepherd. The lady, who so kindly
and judiciously treated the case, became acquainted with the
sufferer while paying a visit of mercy to the poor of the
locality.*

I subjoin the lady’s own statement, and am,

Your obedient servant,
Grorce Barra.


“ For about a year and a half, up to February 22nd, 1852,
when I began the mesmeric treatment of this case, a white
flake had been gathering over the iris and pupil of her left
eye, and the cornea presented a glazed appearance. The
sight was becoming more and more obscured ; so that, when
I placed my open hand before her, she could not say what
it was, but described it as a shade, not being able to discern
anything at all at a little distance. She suffered incessantly
in that eye from a hot, forcing pain, which any attempt to
use the eye rendered almost insupportable: the great sensi-
bility to light obliging her to wear constantly both a shade
and bonnet. In the left side of her head, also, was seated
an intense throbbing pain, which appeared connected with


* We ourselves know the lady well; and she has already contributed to our
pages. —Zoist.


Immediate Mesmeric relief. 359


her blindness, as it came at the same time and only grew
worse.

“The following details of the immediate relief obtained,
and the rapid restoration of sight, together with the cure of
her, as was supposed, confirmed asthma, will be found, it is
hoped, more satisfactory and interesting in the form of
extracts from my journal noted down during each sitting.

“Feb. 22nd, Sunday. I commenced by making contact
passes on the seat of pain in the head to increase the heat.
I placed my left hand on the right, and in four minutes she
said, ‘ That is all gone; this side of my head feels quite new
to what it has done for this twelvemonth and more.’ Think-
ing only of relieving the constant pain, I made very gentle
contact passes over the forehead and eye, not touching the
latter because of its exquisite tenderness: the throbbing
lessened, and in eight minutes she exclaimed, ‘I can see my
hat hanging there :’ (it was on the beam across the middle of
the room, while she was seated at the fire-side:) ‘I can see
the face of the clock, but I cannot discern the hands, I
can bear the light better.’ While seeing these, the other
eye was covered. I now examined and could hardly believe
the fact, that the white film was fast removing. Clasping my
wrist with the left hand as she ‘ wished for it hotter,’ I con-
tinued from the eyebrow to the cheek-bone for one minute.
‘I can see both hands now,’ she exclaimed ; and, as a proof,
said, ‘It wants five minutes to four,’ which was exact. She
saw the looking-glass on the opposite wall, but as yet nothing
reflected from it. I began at two minutes to four. My left
hand was on my right, greatly increasing the heat: my
fingers were passing on the eye, neither of which measures
she has before been able to bear.

“The clock strikes, and she is now entirely free from pain :
and, looking again at the glass, sees and describes the reflec-
tion of things. Contact as before; and, testing the improve-
ments every now and then, I found each time that without
pain she saw further and more distinctly. Contact passes
had now been made in all twenty-two minutes, and the
white coating, with the exception of one little speck, is gone,
and the whole eye is clearer. She passed by the window and
looked out upon the setting sun shining on the partly melted
snow : in surprise, I asked if that caused no pain? ‘No,’
she said, ‘that does not hurt me at all; I never gave ita
thought even: I can see now as well with one eye as with the
other” And with inward thankfulness I left her in the en-
joyment of sight restored and in perfect ease, after nineteen
months of acute suffering.


360 Speck removed : pain also.


24th, Tuesday. No return of pain in the head. The
eye was quite comfortable until the cruel trial of reading by
candle-light that same evening. Excessive pain struck both
eyes—even the right, most strange to say—and has lasted
till to-day, when a few passes have sufficed to obtaining
entire relief. But this does not lessen my self-reproach for
sanctioning such an imprudent step. Feeling that, for the
first employment of the newly-restored precious gift, nothing
was so fitting as reading the Bible to her old blind husband,
I proposed it, and most blameably.

“A pain had fixed itself in the centre of her forehead,
extending to the chin, the teeth and gums being benumbed
and sore: I drew it all out. Her son looked at the eye and
saw the remaining white speck. In the brightness of the
sun and snow, looking causes pain. I made double contact
passes over the eye. In nine minutes the white speck was
divided into three parts (her son observed this): in four mi-
nutes more the smallest dot only was visible. Standing
with my knees crossed, still keeping both feet on the ground,
I find greatly increases the heat experienced by my patient.
On my uncrossing my knees, to hear if she would remark a
change, she instantly said, ‘That’s another hand—it is not
so warm.’ I resumed first position: ‘Ah! that’s nice: it is
the same as half boiling water drawn down with a flannel
from the top of my head to the chin.’ I was making passes
from the eyebrow to the check-bone. I refrained from test-
ing improvements.

“25th, Ash Wednesday. No ache at all since yesterday :
dazzling light gave no pain.

“The patient’s little grand-daughter being here, and
having an inflammatory eruption on her left eye that she has
suffered with for two months, I mesmerised her. After half
an hour’s contact passes, one eye looked as bright, clean,
and healthy as the other.

“No sitting. When the eye is well I will try to cure the
asthma. The green shade is left off!

“st March. Has caught a thorough cold. I drew out
all pains and aches, leaving her warm and comfortable. I
gave five minutes’ mesmerising to the eye, which has had
neither pain in it nor been tender to the touch since Tuesday.
Could not say what o’clock it was. Her severe cold, I sup-
pose, affects the eye.

“2nd, Tuesday. Contact generally, but not on the eye;
nevertheless it looks clearer.

“3rd, Wednesday. Tells me, ‘It is best in the morning ;
and when I get up in bed I can sce out of my window right


The usual medical game. 361


upon the open creek ; when the other eye is covered up.’
Sees better. She feels a band of boiling water rush round
her head at each pass. The glazed look is not gone, though
the eye is clearer. After ten minutes was surprised to ob-
serve three distinct hazy transparencies. I could not compre-
hend it. It seems that what produces the glazy effect is now
breaking up, being the thinnest possible veil under the flakes
which the first sitting all but removed. Pointed for ten
minutes: this gave it strength.

“Sth, Friday. A bad cold. The sun shines brightly.
The veil is drawing away in a circle from the iris, which with
the pupil is quite clear. Naturally more sensitive to light.

“6th, Saturday. No pain at all. In the course of twenty
passes she saw and described minute details of two small
pictures at four and eight yards distance.

“7th, Sunday. Stood by the door, the bright sun shin-
ing in, without even contraction of the eyelid. Told the
exact time by the clock six yards off.

“10th, Wednesday. Dreadful cough. She saw a doctor,
who says that she is a confirmed asthmatic, but her lungs
are not diseased: thinks this is ot a case o. cataract, but
that she must have received an injury. This she denies. He
looked puzzled. I wish he had seen it before I began to
mesmerise her; for now no indication of the former state of
the eye remains, but a partial haziness only. He listened to
the story of her previous fast-approaching blindness,—of her
inability two weeks before to see objects even near her except
as shades,—of the acute and constant pain which she endured
on any attempt to exercise it, rendering her suffering almost
insupportable. She now declared herself free from all pain
and able to see around her and into the far distance clearly.
But, as was to be expected, he heard incredulously ; for, like
a true member of the faculty, he scoffs at the means employed,
denies its curative powers, and, not ranking me with dupes and
impostors, kindly finds me a place among the imaginative !
However, as my patient observed energetically when he left the
house, ‘He may say what he likes, but I know myself well
enough, that before you came I could not hardly see, and my
eye was always agony to me, and now I can look out far yonder,
a-standing in the sun, and never feel ache nor pain.’

“llth, Friday. Uninterrupted twenty minutes’ passes
enabled her to spell and read ‘catalogue,’ in printed letters,
not a third of an inch high, at a foot distant, without pain.

“12th, Saturday. No return of dragging, soreness, or
knife-driving pains in breathing. Longer sitting. I refrain

VOL, XI. EE


862 Different effect of the two hands.


from making further trials of vision. Her sight is clear, and
but strength is required. Besides a cure is assuredly hin-
dered by testing the advance at each step. Would that
eagerness for positive proofs had not blinded me to this.
The heat flows down from her head to the extremities, ‘ gulp.
ing down like boiling water out of a bottle. It feels quite
new, like a new eye to me.’ She came from the shed, ex.
claiming joyfully, ‘I can see right up to the wind border:
I’ve never seen so far as that before (the sun shone full upon
her). I can see plainly as anything can be: it has not given
me a thought of pain.’ Left her so happy.

“15th, Monday. Mesmerised with my knees crossed : it
adds to the power, and rests me too. Glow increased in-
stantly. ‘The heat gushes down to my toes and fingers, and
seems to flow between the flesh and the skin.’ Double con-
tact. Removed the right from the back of left hand: heat
the same. Replaced the left by the right hand: she shrank
back saying it was ice. Her own hands now suddenly became
benumbed. ‘It’s like a fire on the top of my head, and as
if flames went down my back and round me, to my toes and
down my arms.’ She compares her present power of vision
with that of the Sunday I began. ‘ When I could only see
your hand as a shade, the loss of my sight used to make me
very low.’

“16th, Tuesday. Reports ‘as new and comfortable as
when you left.’ The flames ceased to dart down her in an
hour and a quarter after the sitting. The same sensations
are produced sooner each time. In twenty minutes the only
part not benumbed was her head and throat. She describes
the heat as ‘ gulping down ;’ then numbness seizes her hands,
and from the back of her head creeps down the spine. It
comes like a piece of sliding ice; numbness follows close,
and then great heat; flames rushing down the while. Could
not stir till feeling was restored by sharp passes. ‘ My eye
feels quite beautiful—better than ever in its life: you will
make this the better of the two.’

“17th, Wednesday. This time the numbness spread up-
wards as well, passing all down within and afterwards over
the head. ‘My hair feels standing on end—as one piece.’
I tried everywhere if she had feeling. She said, ‘I should
not know I was sitting, or that you were touching me: I
have no feeling inside ; for I should not know I was coughing
except that it catches in my throat,’ Fast circles on the
spine and breathing there, drawing all the numbness out of
her extremities like pins and needles, released her. The /eft


Directions of a Clairvoyant. 363


eye now feels the better: it has ceased to water of a morning.
The other has begun and feels weak : five minutes contact
has brightened and strengthened it.

“18th, Thursday. Why did the feeling of ice, sliding
from the top of her head down her back, instantly follow on
the cessation of the flames, which lasted an hour after I left ;
her hair seeming to stand on end, and remaining so cold till
this morning? Both eyes well. ‘I did not know I had an
eye, it felt so comfortable, bless God; and before I used to
have aches and pains.’ ‘I stood and could see those trees
and stacks at two hundred yards distance.’ While making
passes over the eye, sharp pains and cramps seized her unac-
countably: I removed them instantly.

“21st, Sunday. I have hitherto only mesmerised locally.
I am ignorant of the cause of these pains and icy sensations,
unless it be that the nervous system is overcharged, the odic
fluid not having exhausted or equalized itself in sleep. Does
the total bodily insensibility produced shew that all but the
brain is sleeping? Will try distant passes. Does not feel
sleepy, but they cause such a weight in her head that she is
obliged to take both hands to move it. Double contact on
eye induces the same succession of effects, fiery heat, rushing
cold, followed by numbness. ‘I can’t tell you how my eye
feels: I thought before it could not be better; but now they
are a new set complete.’

“22nd, Monday. Rather alarmed by sudden sharp pains
that struck her while relieving the asthma. She looked wild
with their severity. Speedily removed them. But what is
their cause ?

“24th, Wednesday. A clairvoyant shews me that it is
the head that is overcharged, having been long mesmerised
without my drawing off the fluid. The following are her
directions :—‘ Pour nicely a pint of mesmerised water upon
the head, and make contact passes, rapid and light ones,
from the throat down the shoulders and arms to the fingers’
ends for ten minutes: not to touch the head, but put the
fingers’ ends on the skin behind the ears and carry them
down. Repeat this daily between the hours of eleven and
twelve. Prepare the water by either breathing or passes :
breathing better for this case. Make long contact passes
from the throat to the toes, ending all gently down.’

“In subsequent sittings discontinued the eye treatment
and followed the above directions ; but omitted to pour the
water over the head, being fearful of a return of tic doulou-
reux, from which she has once suffered tortures, and that for
seventeen weeks. During the making of the passes from the

EE2


364 First perfect sleep for seventeen years.


ears for the fifth time, the heat did not draw from the top of
the head down the arms, and the icy chills, cramps, and pains
have ceased to appear. Notwithstanding the omission of
bathing the head, the dreaded tic seized her, but the ten
minutes of contact from the ears to the fingers lightened and
freed the head from pain, and then three minutes sufficed to
give perfect ease to the face. Severe cold caused a return: I
dismissed it again. Permanently contact passes generally
applied are making her strong and freeing her of all pain,
asthmatic and otherwise.

“4th April, Sunday. So well in every respect since.
Non-contact passes for ten minutes on the 1st produced drow-
siness. To-day slept nearly an hour, awaking with a start
on the change of long passes on the chest to circles. ‘I feel
new altogether since 1 have been asleep.’ Her eye looks
and is charmingly.

“5th, Monday. After I left sleep was irresistible, and in
three quarters of an hour she woke fresh and bright. Last
night, for the first time in seventeen years since a bad illness,
she slept till morning undisturbed by frightful dreams, which
had caused a dread of sleep and a terror of the dark, and
for the last year she had been obliged to burn a light. Ano-
ther symptom has not once recurred since the beginning of
mesmeric treatment—that of falling into a kind of stupor,
no matter how much occupied she might be at the time. She
is just in from a walk of some miles, not having rested on the
way. She quite laughed, feels so strong and well, with not
a pain about her.

“Short sittings at intervals. I do not let her see what
I do during the distant passes. She would not understand
it, and would attribute all to magic. ‘ While I sit with my
eyes closed,’ she says, ‘it feels as if any one seemed to be
giving me strength: a something beautiful and warm spreads
over me, leaving strength as it goes down.’ She calls these
‘her beautiful sleeps.’

“18th, Sunday. Wondering if she would be susceptible
to the action of hair in producing sleep, I, instead of non-
contact passes, placed a small lock of my own within her
folded hands, not telling her what I had done, and, purposely
withdrawing my thoughts from her, remained passive, await-
ing the result. But a few minutes, and her head drooped,
and she passed an hour in tranquil sleep. I asked her what
she had felt? ‘A-few minutes after I was seated I felt
sleepy, as if I wanted to doze: the warmth gathered first ;
it seemed to glow in my chest: it spread round me and down
my body, the same as if I took water near boiling and


Blindness and Asthma both cured. 865


whipped it into it, and then laid it on. I dozed off soon,
was asleep all the time, but not in a sound sleep. I did not
feel you touch me: I am now new as you may say.’

“19th, Monday. Quite well: slept by my hair from
half-past eleven to twenty minutes to one o’clock, when a
sudden intrusion roused her. To double the power I had
placed another piece of hair on the top of the spine, and
now made for some minutes passes on the eye. I had not
ventured to do so since the 21st of March, fearing again
to overcharge the head. Now even cold struck her waist
and numbness her hands: but breathing dissipated these.
‘Though so brisk and well before, I feel better from head to
foot.’ She looks years younger.

“20th, Tuesday. My last visit; for I leave the neigh-
bourhood to-morrow. I found her writing a letter to her
son in India: the third side of it was nearly finished, and
not a thought of pain had this produced ; while, before it was
cured, besides its own constant suffering, any attempt to
exercise the eyes caused instant and lasting agony. She
looked around on all within and without, seeing with perfect
clearness. Bidding her sit daily at the same hour in the
same position as usual, to think of me and pray for sleep,
which would be granted her, I took my leave.

“Some time after, a letter expressive of deep gratitude
informed me that daily she had placed herself and thought
exactly as I had been there, and then sleep had come,
‘Quite bravely and bonnily ’ she is ‘ without a pain,’

“Who would now look into those clear eyes and say that
blindness had once been there? or that, in the active and
cheerful woman, they saw the once bowed-down, wheezing,
and confirmed asthmatic?

“ September, 1853,”


Note by The Zoist on the motto.


The acute observer and profound phi‘osopher, Mr. George
Southam, not being “‘ unacquainted with the laws which regulate the
human frame in health and disease,” will doubtless see at once that
some of the facts of this splendid cure are “‘ clearly owing to decep-
tion, and others strongly resemble certain morbid states of the
system; that ‘‘mesmeriem, instead of being a curative agent,
was more likely to be a cause of disease ;” and that the cure was
effected by ‘‘electro-biology, which is another name for mesmerism,
invented probably because the other had lost its attractions.”

The public here see how the rising generation of the medical
profession are instructed in medical science and the means of reliev~


366 Fearful effects of Spirit-rappings in America.


ing their fellow-creatures, and what descriptions of men are autho-
rized by the colleges and halls to instruct, and to give certificates to,
the innocent young men, who believe all that falls from their teachers


and presume that their seniors must be competent to teach them all
the truths of the profession.


V. Raving Madness, excited by spiritual table-turning fancies,
and cured with Mesmerism. By Mr. Henry Joseru
Frape.ie, of Camden New Town.


“ EFFECTS OF ‘SPIRIT-RAPPING’ IN AMERICA.


‘The following are extracts from the American papers :—

““*The wife of Michael Catt, of Decker Township, Indiana, was shot on
Monday last by her daughter-in-law, who was much excited on supernatural
objects at the time.’

***Mr. Orville Hatch, of Franklin, Connecticut, has become insane, having
devoted considerable attention to the subject of spiritual rappings. Mr. Hetch
is a farmer, and has been instrumental in introducing —_ important improve-
ments in agriculture.’

= + Be. Barber, a deacon in one of the churches (Congregational) i in Warwick,
has become insane, in consequence of surrendering himself to the *‘ spiritual-
rapping’’ delusion. His wife and other members of the family are in a similar
state.’


‘«* Mr. B. Peabody hung himself in a barn in Grafton, Lovain county, on
Friday last. He was an amiable, intelligent, and respected young man, and be-
came so absorbed in rappings as to unbalance his mind. His case is but one of
a long list of insane, made so by modern rappings and spiritualism.’

‘**The annual report of the Ohio Lunatic Asylum discloses the fact, that
there are no fewer than 26 persons (13 men and 13 women) who have found their
way there by means of the spiritual rappings.’

*** Samuel Dole, of Warlington county, Ohio, was made insane by the spirit-
rappings, and became possessed with the idea that he must offer, like Abraham,
a sacrifice to the Supreme. He accordingly proceeded to cut off one of his own
feet, which he succeeded in doing in a very scientific manner, and with heroic
determination. His family, fearing that some other of his limbs might be de-
manded in a like cause, had him conveyed to the lunatic asylum.’

“** A young woman was removed to the asylum at Utica this week, having
become insane in consequence of witnessing some “ spiritual’’
Massachussets. She is now wild with madness.’

*** Mr. Christopher Snevely, a very worthy and industrious citizen of Harris-
burg, Pennsylvania, has become insane in consequence of attending to “ spiritual
manifestations,” and has been conveyed to the Pennsylvania Lunatic Asylum,
and is now a raving maniac.’

*«* Ebenezer Pope, of Milton, hung himself on the 14th instant; cause,
‘* spiritual rappings.’’ He was one of the select men, and leaves a family to
mourn over his terrible delusion.’

“«* We regret to announce that a lady of Northampton, Massachussets,
lady too of great beauty, loveliness, and intelligence, the mother of six children,
has become raving mad through the influence of “‘ spiritual manifestations.’’ She
was conveyed to the Battleborough Insane Hospital, on Wednesday, in such a
state of excitement that it took two attendants to hold her. These instances are
multiplying with fearful rapidity in every quarter of the country. Some of the


most sane, too, out of the madhouse, talk like madmen.’ ’’—Daily News, Oct. 28,
1853.


experiments in


Spiritual Table-moving excitement.


Account by the Master.


Sir,—The following case will, I hope, convince the most
sceptical readers of The Zoist of the extraordinary, I may
almost say, of the miraculous powers of mesmerism in re-
storing the raving maniac to health. As I do not practise
mesmerism from pecuniary motives, I trust your readers will
believe me when I state that the sole object I have in insert-
ing this letter is the benefit of the public at large.

On the 15th ult. I invited a male friend to dine with me
at my cottage in —————._ After dinner I proposed that we
should try the table-moving experiment. Accordingly my
friend and self and two female servants sat round a heavy
mahogany loo table, with our hands placed as usual in those
experiments. In about fifteen minutes my friend’s right arm
commenced shaking most violently, and almost immediately
afterwards my servant Mary’s arm commenced a similar
movement. This continued for full five minutes, when all
of a sudden both arms stopped and the table began to move,
the movement increasing until we were compelled to run to
keep up with it. We tried many other curious experiments,
the particulars of which it will be quite unnecessary to relate,
such as table tipping, glass moving, &c. I may however as
well mention, that invariably before each experiment suc-
ceeded, the right arm of my friend and the left arm of my
servant would shake in the most violent manner.

On the following day, Sunday, Mary (the subject of this
letter) left ——————- for my town residence in

(As this is a most curious case, I trust you will
excuse me for entering into particulars in order to shew its
progress until it arrived to a state of perfect madness. Should
a similar case therefore occur in the families of any of your
readers, they will know at once the remedy without having
recourse to the lunatic asylum, strait jackets, &c.) On
Monday morning when I arrived in town I asked Mary
how her arm felt. To my surprise she replied that she was
a Medium for spiritual communications; that if she wanted
to know anything, she had only to ask the spirits, and if the
reply was in the affirmative, the arm would shake as it did in
the country ; but if the reply was in the negative, it would
remain still: also that she could obtain replies to her ques-
tions by the table-tippings, in performing which she required
no one to assist her. (Twelve months ago Mrs. Haydon, the
American Medium, was at my house, ever since which time
Mary has had a great desire to become a Medium.)

On Tuesday morning she informed me that she had now


368 A maid becomes a Medium


become a writing Medium, and what I saw and read con-
vinced me that there was something very extraordinary about
it. I will just state that I saw her hand frequently guided
to the inkstand when she required more ink in her pen, al-
though I purposely made her turn her head in such a position
that she could not possibly see where I placed the inkstand,
and that her hand would then be guided back to the paper
on which she was writing, and dot an i or cross a ¢, her head
being placed so that she could not see the paper. Your
readers may think what they please of this, but I solemnly
assure you they are facts.

On Wednesday she informed me that she felt confident
the spirit of my mother was exerting a strange influence on
her, and that she had no doubt she could be mesmerised by
her. Willing to see what the effect would be, I asked her if
she felt at all timid. On her replying in the negative, I
requested her to sit in an easy position. She now said, “ If
the spirits can mesmerise me, shake my arm.” In an in-
stant, not only both arms began to shake most violently, but
her head, legs, and her whole body. The appearance was so
ludicrous that I could not help laughing aloud ; but noticing
that the motions continued to increase, I desired her to stop:
she however said she could not, and that she had no com-
mand whatever over herself. I will confess that I now felt
alarmed, and tried every means I could think of to keep her
still, but all my exertions were useless: she appeared to have
the strength of a giant. She then said in a very loud voice,
“ Spirits, restore me to myself.” In an instant all was still.

You will probably say that a great deal of the above looks
like imposition on Mary’s part. I admit it does, but what
follows will prove to you that such was not the case.

On my arrival at my town-house on Thursday morning
I asked her sister (who sleeps with her) how Mary was? She
replied, “ There is something very strange about Mary, for
she has been talking as if with spirits from the time she went
to bed, eleven o’clock until four o’clock this morning. She
is now at her work, and all seems well again.” On my seeing
Mary, she began to cry and said, “ Don’t be alarmed, Sir,
at what I am about to communicate to you. I have been
talking to your mother all night, and although I now re-
member very little of what was communicated to me, still
she promised that when you arrived, she would be near me
to communicate everything to you through my organs of
speech.” I smiled and told her that in addition to her being
a writing, tipping, and shaking Medium, it would appear
she had now Gece also a speaking Medium. She then


raving mad. 369


began talking to me and addressed me as, ‘‘ My dear son,”
telling me she had left this world thirty years since, that she
had always kept a watchful eye over me, that she was my
guardian spirit, and that although she could not communicate
freely to me through Mary as yet, she should be enabled to
do so in a few days, by which time I was to have in readi-
ness a quantity of paper to write down everything she should
communicate to me, which would be of the greatest import-
ance to me and the whole world. Much more she stated
which it is quite unnecessary to relate. As several patients
were now waiting for me, I left Mary to proceed with her
work.

She was perfectly calm the remainder of the day, and no
one would have thought there had been anything the matter
with her, for she laughed and chatted with her fellow-servants
just as usual. Thinking it possible, however, that there
might be a relapse, I left word with my man, that if Mary
was at all worse during the night he had better send for a
medical man. On my arrival on Friday morning the servants
were all in confusion; Mary had been raving all night, a
medical man had been sent for, medicine administered, and
a blister applied to the neck, but all to no purpose, for she
continued to get worse and worse. I stated to her medical
attendant that I did not wish to take the case out of his
hands, and I therefore trusted he would pay every attention
to her. He described it as a case of mere nervous irritability,
and gave his opinion that it would quickly pass. He now
administered a grain of morphine, which had the desired
effect for a short time; but on awaking she was decidedly
worse than ever.

Friday night. No sleep, talking to herself, asking ques-
tions, and herself replying to them, as if two persons were
in conversation.

Saturday. Considerably worse; refused to take anything
but water, which she described as “ concentrated electricity.”
Her medical attendant was now afraid it was a hopeless case,
and recommended an immediate removal to a lunatic asylum.
I told him we would wait until Monday. In the evening I
left town for —————,, and gave strict orders that if she be-
came worse a messenger should be sent for me. On Sunday,
at three o’clock p.m., a messenger arrived, who informed me
that Mary’s medical attendant wished me to start for London
immediately, that medicine was no longer of any service,
and that Mary was now a raving maniac.

I started on the instant, and on my arrival at my town-
house my ears soon informed me that what the medical


870 Her spirit was God.


attendant had stated was perfectly correct—Mary was indeed
a raving maniac. The idea which now possessed her was
that the Almighty was speaking through her. She would
not allow any one to enter her room, nor to approach within
several yards of her, none of us being pure enough to come
near her. Six persons were standing on the landing whilst
she was preaching to them, and in such language as I never
before heard her utter; for, although a maniac, she looked
and spoke as some superior being. Her attitude as she stood
at her door in her night-clothes with her uplifted hand, and
uttering the words, “ Woe, woe be unto you, vile sinners,
repent, the day of judgment draweth nigh, prepare to meet
your God,” was majestic in the extreme: I never saw any
thing on our stage at all equal to it. I was now informed
that she had been standing at her door and speaking in a
similar manner for more than twelve hours, during the whole
of which time she never ceased speaking in the most vehe-
ment manner for one moment. I said, “ Mary, I wish to
shake hands with you.” Her reply was, “ When Mary
receives permission to shake hands with you, she will do so;
but at present she must not be interrupted : she has important
communications to make to all sinners, therefore listen.” I
remained a listener for full half an hour, endeavouring all
the time to mesmerise her by staring at her. She now ap-
proached me and said, “ Mary is now permitted to shake
hands with you.” The moment she did so, I clasped her
round the waist, and, with the assistance of my man, we
forcibly put her into bed. She still continued raving, and,
seeing no probability of her ceasing, I summoned all my
energies to mesmerise her. I placed my left hand on her
forehead and grasped her left hand with my right hand, and,
looking her full in the eye, I completely subdued her in less
than twenty minutes, at which time, although her lips con-
tinued to move, her voice had ceased. In about ten minutes
more her lips ceased to move and her eyes closed. I remained
in town that night, thinking it probable that mesmerism
would be again required; but it was unnecessary, as not a
sound escaped her lips the whole of the night.

On Monday morning about seven o’clock, she again com-
menced preaching, but nothing near so vehemently as on the
previous day. I humoured her in every way I could think of,
and agreed that everything she said was right. I believe this
to be the most judicious course to pursue in such cases, for
experience will soon convince any one, that, the more the
maniac is irritated, the worse he will get. At ten o’clock she
became decidedly worse; her voice became as loud as on the


She does all by spirits. 871


previous day; on hearing which, I went to her room with the
full intention of mesmerising her. I discovered that one
of the servants had been contradicting her, and hence the
reason of her getting worse. I should have mesmerised her
the first thing on Monday morning, but, hearing her talk so
calmly and uttering language really sublime, I was unwilling
to stop her.

I had just commenced mesmerising her when Mr. Fradelle
the mesmerist, of No. 5, Brecknock Crescent, Camden New
Town, called on me. I related to him the particulars of the
case; and, having stated to him that mesmerising invariably
produced a very weakening effect on me, he kindly offered to
attend on Mary gratuitously. With some difficulty and a
great deal of coaxing, I prevailed on Mary to allow him to see
her. At this time she was talking very loud indeed, loud
enough to be heard all over the house, although she was in
one of the attics. Mr. Fradelle now commenced mesmerising
her, and in justice to him I must say, that a more powerful
and scientific mesmeriser I never met with. Patience and
perseverance appear to be two of his virtues, for he ceased not
to mermerise her for full four hours. In ten minutes after
he commenced, her voice ceased ; but as on the previous day,
her lips continued to move for sometime afterwards.

As the patient was now left entirely in Mr. Fradelle’s
hands, and as he has promised me to append notes to this
letter, I beg to refer my readers to them; they will there see
that in seven days after the mesmeric treatment was com-
menced, Mary, the raving maniac, was restored to a reasonable
being. One morning before he arrived, Mary was in a very
desponding state, fearing she should never get well. I sug-
gested to Mr. F. the propriety of exciting the organ of “ Hope.”
He coincided with me, and after ten minutes manipulation of
that organ, the change in her feelings and countenance was
of the most extraordinary kind; she was now confident she
should quickly get well, was a silly girl for doubting it, &c.

On her recovery she informed me in reply to questions I
put to her, that she had a sensation in her inside as if a red-
hot ball was there, and from which the sound in reply to her
questions seemed to proceed; that is, whilst she fancied that
her body was possessed by a spirit. If this voice desired her
to communicate anything to me, and she refused to do so, the
voice would invariably say to her, “If you do not tell him
what I desire you, you shall suffer for it ;” and she declared
to me, that as sure as she neglected communicating to me
anything she was desired to communicate, so sure was she to
be tormented in the most painful manner; the red-hot ball


872 Decided effect by Mr. Fradelle.


appeariag to fly to all parts of her body. I am happy to say
that this affliction has made a complete change in her disposi-
tion; she is now very religious, thinks nothing of dress, or of
the gaieties of the world; has an idea that she has not done
enough for her parents, and is now resolved to do all in her
power to assist them.

Sincerely hoping that all who may have relatives or
friends afflicted in a similar manner, will immediately send
for a good mesmeriser,

I have the honour to remain, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,


Nov. 24th, 1853.


Account by Mr. Fradelle.


Her age was twenty-nine years. She had the fixed idea
that when the spirit of another which she believed possessed
her, left her, “ Mary’s body would be dead.” Morphine had
failed after the first dose to procure the patient the least
sleep; a large blister applied at the back or nape of the neck
had but aggravated her sufferings. Hunger and thirst had
fled. Ordinary functions were suspended. She was fast
losing flesh. There was foetor of the breath. The medical
man, at the last interview with her master, stated she was
beyond the power of opiates; that no alternative was left but
to send her to a lunatic asylum. The medical treatment was,
accordingly, from this time discontinued.

On my being introduced to the patient, she at once wel-
comed me and declared that I was appointed to perform a
miracle in her favour; that I should have to attend on her
that day and the two following days; that she should know
then what directions to give me; that not a word should be
spoken during the time of her being mesmerised, not wishing
me however to begin till we had heard what she had to say
about this world and the next. She could not bear the least
interruption, or suggestion to discontinue. We were threat-
ened that we should, on the following day, have to listen to
her for twelve hours or more, which would be for our good
and that of the whole world. Our patience was, however, not
put to the test. Having in about an hour ascertained the
condition of mind she was in, I quietly requested her to sit
up in bed and be silent—took her hands in mine and gazed
intently at her eyes. Her figure soon appeared to me en-
veloped in a silvery mist. I then directed her to her pillow


The usual medical game.


and made slow passes for a few minutes; her eyes then firmly
closed, her jaws separated as far asunder as possible and
remained fixed. The spasmodic action was arrested by plac-
ing my hands on her; she was then at rest, if one might
judge by the serenity of her countenance and the repose of
her limbs. A few words which I was saying in reply to her
master disturbed her; the rapid motion of one of her fingers
expressed it to me; she afterwards told me so. Though she
was in a mesmeric state, her senses were painfully acute, and
she appeared to be perfectly aware of what was for her good.
She could hear all those about her. I requested her to talk
but little during my absence, and left her in the mesmeric
state.

25th. Continued in the same state all night and till, on
my arrival, I released her eyelids. She then asked me for a
glass of water ; this I gave her, and she drank it off at once
and asked for more. She then directed me to place my hand
on her forehead and eyes. I had been so occupied an hour
and a half, the patient now and then gently muttering “all is
well,” when her master mentioned to me that the medical
man, professing to be well disposed to mesmerism, wished to
witness the proceeding—to remain but a few minutes. The
medical man remarked how much calmer she had become.
At my request he felt her pulse, he said it was at 70. She
soon after became excited at some remark which he made,
and then went on talking without cessation: all she said
bearing the stamp of insanity. Half an hour passed thus,
and still the medical man did not request her to be silent.
The excitement was increasing—the pulse was at an 100!
Fearing all my efforts would be unavailing if she were per-
mitted to run on thus, I mentioned my fears and withdrew
my hand from her forehead, my hand becoming heated and
uncomfortable. After having taken a few minutes’ rest, pre-
viously to the medical man’s retiring, I proceeded as on the
previous day, by taking her hands in mine. Soon after I had
commenced he laid his hand upon her wrist; she thrust it
unceremoniously aside. I then failed in closing her eyes,
though I tried my utmost. I attribute this to the above
untoward circumstance.* I succeeded however in relieving
her from the excitement. Slow passes with the palms of my
hands, while I confidently exerted the will to withdraw it,
from whatever cause, I found the most effectual.


* This was the last visit he paid professionally : his attendance not being any
longer required. When he heard of the cure of the case, he said, ‘‘ They must not


take all the credit of it to themselves.’’ As if the failure of his treatment had
contributed to it!


374 Great effects of Mesmerism.


26th. Had but little sleep the previous night. Halluci-
nation less marked. Manner more composed. Quite so
under and after mesmerism. The change for the better was
observed by all who attended her. She assured me she should
not require my attendance on the next and following days,
but wished me to come after that, and added I should know
then how to proceed.

27th. I called to ascertain how she was and found her
decidedly better and more rational. I did not mesmerise her,
but watched the turn the complaint was taking.

28th. Did not produce sleep. Proceeded as before.

29th. Mesmerised her twice. For half an hour in the
evening, by slow passes from the forehead over the top of the
head, continuing them down the back ; she experienced great
relief from them.

30th. She had slept the whole of the night comfortably.
It was ordinary sleep: the first she had had since she became
ill. A long visit from a friend of her’s prevented my mes-
merising her.

83lst. Had not slept as on the preceding night. Was
dressed on my arrival and taking exercise in the room.
Mesmerised as before. She was so feeble that her knees
almost gave way under her; but at the end of the sitting she
stepped much more firmly.

Nov. lst. Repeated the above. She was much better in
every respect. The recollection of what she had said in her
delirium was fast passing away. Her mind, though weakened
and somewhat depressed, was in its right frame.

2nd. Omitted mesmerism.

3rd. Mesmerised her for the last time. She had com-
pletely regained her self-possession. She had wished for
some time to pay her father and mother a visit, in Yorkshire,
and thought thé present a good opportunity to go. Every
trace of insanity had disappeared. She prepared this day for
the journey, and left for Bradford the following morning.

She has since sent two letters to her sisters, written in a
style which clearly proves that her reasoning faculties are
quite restored; and she regards the affair as a piece of folly
and indeed wretchedness.

H. J. FRapeE.we.
5, Brecknock Crescent, Camden
New Town, Nov. 23rd, 1853.


P.S. Although it will be noticed above that the medical
man called more than once, still no medicine whatever was
taken by the patient from the moment I first attended her.


The same kind of Insanity without external cause. 375


NOTE BY THE ZOIST.


The preceding was an instance of insanity produced by an
external mental cause in a poor, ignorant, and healthy person,
not more ignorant, however, than thousands of others in
higher positions, aye, and in very much higher positions. We
will quote another of exactly the same character, but pro-
duced by constitutional disposition to mystical insanity,
without any external exciting cause.

In Mr. James Smith’s Lights and Shades of Artist Life
and Character, just published, is an account of the poet painter
Blake, from which we extract the following passages :—


“It is pleasant to look in upon him at his humble lodgings in
Poland Street, and to watch him sketching designs, engraving plates,
writing songs and setting them to music, while the ‘dark-eyed Kate’
of his verse cheers him with hopeful and encouraging words. But the
poet painter has visions ; spiritual intelligences hover about him, and
voices from the men of old renown are perpetually ringing in his
ears. The productions of his pen and graver reflect the mysticism
and enthusiastic fancies of his own mind, and inasmuch as they are
unintelligible to the multitude, they meet with but little sale, and
the poor artist daily becomes poorer. He buries himself in humbler
lodgings, works with redoubled energy, penetrates yet deeper into
that spiritual world with which he has already held communion, and
comes at length to believe in the reality of the visions which his vivid
imagination conjures up. To a medion from the spirit of his
favourite brother Robert, he asserted he was indebted for the know-
ledge of an original and novel method of engraving upon copper,
which he ever afterwards employed with great success, and cherished
as a valuable secret. Homer and Virgil, Dante and Milton, visit
him in these visions; and the delicate creatures of Faerie-land are
not excluded from his ken. ‘I was walking alone in my garden,’
he once remarked, to a lady, ‘and there was a great stillness among
the branches and flowers, and more than common sweetness in the
air. I heard a low and pleasant sound, and knew not whence it
came. At last I saw a broad leaf of a flower move, and underneath
I saw a procession of creatures of the size and colour of grasshoppers,
bearing a body laid out on a roseleaf, which they buried with songs
and then disappeared. It was a fairy funeral!’ And in the reality
of this product of a graceful but distempered fancy he stedfastly
believed. So potent was his imagination, that visitors to his studio
would often find the poverty-stricken artist gazing into space with a
look of rapt enthusiasm, and transfering to his canvas the lineaments
of some hero or monarch—then standing, as he believed, imme-
diately before him; and the portraits painted in these moods, it is
but just to add, are full of character and sentiment. There is some-
thing inexpressibly touching in the fact of the noblest of all his
productions, the Inventions for the Book of Job, having been
conceived, drawn, and engraved in a small room, which served him


376 Insanity cured.


for kitchen, bedchamber, and study, where he had no other com-
panion but his faithful Katharine, and no larger income than 17s. or
18s. per week.”


VI. Mesmeric Cures in Dublin:—of Palsy and Insanity:
Sprained Ankle: Inflamed Breast : Deafness of two years’
standing: Neuralgic Hysteria of nine months’ standing,
with Clairvoyance: of Rheumatism of twenty-five years’
standing: and of Elephantiasis of the legs. By Captain
Fatconer MI gs.


** Advertising quacks, herbalists, MesMERISERS, homeeopaths, electro-botanic
physicians, et id genus omne, flourish as the result of ignorance on the one hand,
and the imperfection of our medical laws on the other. The remedy is a Regis-
tration Bill.”—Mr. Wax.ey, Lancet, Sept. 24th, 1853.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Merton, Cullenswood, Dublin, Nov. 22nd, 1853.

My dear Sir,—Enclosed I beg to send you a few good
cases to further establish the curative powers of mesmerism.
If you think them worthy of a place in The Zoist, you are at
full liberty to do what you please with them. I have selected
them out of many others which I could send you: but as I con-
sider “enough is as good as a feast,” I only send you a few.


But let all the praise be given to Him without whom nothing
is strong, nothing holy, and without whose aid all our labour
is in vain.


I am, dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
Fatconer Mites.


P.S. As many object to mesmerism on the grounds that
its curative powers are not lasting, I have particularly sent
you No. 1, 6, and 7, to shew that they are.


I. Partial Paralysis and Insanity cured in four sittings.

James Doyle, aged 45, a poor man, had four years pre-
viously been severely injured by a fall from a house in
Stephen’s Green, after his recovery from which, his left side
remained considerably paralyzed and he was subject to fre-
quent attacks of insanity. The week previous to his coming
to me, he attempted to murder his children. His Grace the
Archbishop of Dublin, knowing the man and feeling an
interest in his case, asked me if I thought I could do anything
for him. I replied that I would try; and consequently His
Grace sent him to me. I found his left side quite cold and


Cure of Sprain, Inflamed Breast, and Deafness. 377


apparently dead, he had not been able to work since the
accident. I mesmerised him for fifteen minutes; at the end
of which he felt his side getting warm. After being three
times mesmerised, in all fifty-five minutes, he was perfectly
cured, and able to return to his work. Twelve months have
now elapsed since he was cured, and he has had no return of
the insanity or paralysis. The Archbishop considers it a
most perfect cure. No sleep was induced in this case.*


II. Sprained Foot cured in one sitting.

His Grace the Archbishop of Dublin having sprained his
foot, I happened to be at the palace the following day,
when His Grace came into the room limping and leaning on
a stick. He was unable to put on his shoe from the pain.
He asked me could I do anything for him. He sat down on
the sofa, and, after my mesmerising the foot twenty minutes, he
declared the pain was quite gone; he got up, put on his shoe
and walked away without the further aid of his stick, and felt
no inconvenience from the accident after.t


III. Inflamed Breast during confinement.

My wife, has after every confinement invariably suffered
dreadfully from sore breast, which always was obliged to be
lanced. In January last, after her confinement, as usual
every symptom of sore breast set in—great inflammation with
tenseness and very great pain. Her medical attendant told
her she should cease nursing: and nothing he found would
prevent the disease taking the usual course. I therefore
determined to try mesmerism. I consequently mesmerised
the breast twenty minutes, when the inflammation appeared
quite drawn out, as well as all pain; I then applied strongly
mesmerised oil for two or three nights, this removed all
tenseness, and she has never had the slightest return of it
since, and has continued nursing up to the present time.


IV. Deafness of two years’ standing, cured in four sittings.
_ A poor girl, in service as a nurse, came to me a short
time since, and said she was getting so deaf that her mistress


_ * This magnificent cure will alone compensate the Archbishop for the low,
ignorant, and unfeeling tirade of the editor of the Association Journal, Dr.
Cormack, against him,—‘“‘ the patron of delusion and quackery, the blasphemous
proclaimer of charlatanic mysticism and wild speculation, destroying religion by
old wives’ fables, and forming a loathsome alliance between Christian truth and
the unbridled excess of credulity.” (See above, p. 350.)

t How many persons cured by mesmerism are too deficient in moral courage,
how many too deficient in conscientiousness and religious feeling, to allow their
cures to be known with their names !—Zoist.

VOL. XI. FF


878 Cure of Neuralgia and of Rheumatism.


could not keep her longer, and she wished to know whether
I could cure her. She also complained of great pain in her
side. She said she had been deaf for two years. I tested
her hearing; she could not hear my watch quite close to her
head. I mesmerised her for twenty minutes by pointing into
the ears and breathing into them through flannel, and fiuish-
ing with long passes. After the first sitting she felt much
better and all pain in her side ceased. After four sittings
she could hear perfectly well when I spoke to her in a low
voice across the room. I tested her in the presence of several
persons. She is now quite cured.*


V. Remarkable case of prevision in a cure of Neuralgia.


Cory OF A LETTER RECEIVED FROM Mrs. Fry.


“ My daughter having suffered from the severest form of
neuralgia, and deriving no benefit from the most eminent
advice that could be procured for her in Dublin, I was recom-
mended to place her under the care of Mr. Miles. Under his
mesmeric treatment she improved so rapidly that her health
was almost entirely restored, when, unfortunately, by the
accidental breaking down of a car at night, she was obliged
to walk about three miles exposed to the night air. A relapse
of the most serious symptoms of her malady occurred. While
in the mesmeric sleep, on three occasions, a singular instance
of clairvoyance took place. She predicted future and severe
paroxysms of her malady. And these actually occurred on the
very day and hour she had specified. On being taken out of
the sleep she was perfectly unconscious of her predictions;
and they of course were carefully concealed from her know-
ledge. On each oceasion Mr. Miles’s skilful treatment and
very kind attention brought her perfectly through these very
severe and painful attacks.

* (Signed) Ismania Fry, Cullenswood.t
“Oct. 18th, 1853.” t


VI. Cure of Rheumatism of twenty-five years’ standing.
Cory or A LETTER FROM Mas. Waters, or SANDFORD.


“‘T think it but justice to Mr. Miles to bear testimony to


* I have had several other very good cases of deafness quite cured.

+ This was a most remarkable case. She had been nearly nine months on her
couch when I first saw her, and never free from pain. In three days she was out
in the streets walking. On the day she predicted her future paroxysms I had a
medical man and a clergyman present to witness them.

t This might have been an instance of previsional clairvoyance, or of the
effect of an imagination.—See Dr. Elliotson’s remarks in No. XL., p. 357, &c.—
Zoist.


Cure of enlarged legs. 879


the curative power of mesmerism which I have experienced
myself. I was suffering from severe rheumatism for twenty-
five years, so much so that I was frequently unable to leave
my bed for days; I was quite lame, and, from the violence of
the pains, bony lumps formed on my wrists and the back
sinews of my legs. I tried every remedy I could hear of
without the least relief. I was advised to try mesmerism ;
but I had such a prejudice against it, that for a long time I
refused. At last I was prevailed on to try it when suffering
dreadfully with rheumatism in my head; Mr. Miles having
mesmerised me, I found to my great surprise that I was quite
free from pain. I was then regularly mesmerised for six
weeks and have never had a return of pain since, and the
bony lumps have also quite disappeared. Before I tried mes-
merism I could not walk without the greatest pain; I thank
God I can now walk four or five miles without any incon-
venience. What makes my case more remarkable, is, that I
am 63 years of age and have continued quite well more than a
year and a half.


“ (Signed) Frances Waters.*
“Sandford, Nov., 1853.”


VII. Cure of enlarged legs.
Copy of a statement made by Elizabeth Connel of Parsons-


town, in the presence of Mr., Mrs., and Miss Grey of
Kingstown.


Elizabeth Connel of Parsonstown, states, that she was
under treatment seven months in Long Lane Hospital and
four in Sir Patrick Dunn’s Hospital, for what had been called
elephantiasis, without receiving the slightest benefit, but was
much worse. It was proposed to amputate one of her limbs.
She then went to Mr. Miles on the recommendation of the
Rev. Mr. Causland. She was then treated mesmerically and
was operated upon five times, and she at once got relief. She
then went down to the country and has returned this day
perfectly well to thank Mr. Miles. Eleven months having
elapsed since he saw her; she is now going out to Australia.

Elizabeth Connel, + her mark.
Signed in the presence of Mary Grey, J. Grey,
Sept. 19th, 1853.


* Mrs. Waters is the widow of a medical man, and has four sons, medical
men, who can testify to her cure.


( 380 )


VII. A cure of Insanity, with a desire for self-destruction ;
attended with a remarkable incident in relation to the
watchful eye of a lady, a clairvoyant interested in the cure
of the patient. In two letters; one from the patient to
Mr. Gardiner, and one from Mr. Gardiner to Dr.
Elliotson.


** When from the lips of truth, one mighty breath
Shall, like a whirlwind, scatter in its breeze
The whole dark pile of human mockeries,—
Then, shall the reign of mind commence on earth,
And starting forth as from a second birth,
Man, in the sunshine of the world’s new spring,
Shall walk transparent, like some holy thing.”


Mr. ——, residing at , whose moral worth is unques-
tionable and who may be called a fair specimen of an honest
English tradesman, has furnished me with the following letter
for the readers of The Zoist.

“ My dear friend.—For such I must be allowed to call
you, from the marked kindness and unwearied attention I
received from you during the time I was under your care for
the cure of one of the most distressing afflictions that can
happen to man.

The following history of my case may not be uninterest-
ing, and may perhaps assist others to avoid the shoal on which
I foundered. I was at the age of nineteen, and almost I may
say, from the force of circumstances, placed in a business on
my own account; a trade of which as to the working part, I
was quite ignorant. Thus, without practical experience and
against many difficulties, I pressed on to make if possible
ends meet. But the fear of not succeeding, the hurry of
business, the desire to please my customers, the hasty manner
I ate my meals, and the short time allowed for rest, so
operated upon my mind that in twelve months my friends
deemed it necessary to hold a consultation as to my health,
and it was decided that I should go into the country for a
change.

After a short time, however, I rallied and returned home:
but still felt considerable anxiety about my business; for I
was daily losing money. Three years thus rolled on, when
I suffered an attack of typhus fever. The medical man was
called in (a regular bleeder) to see me: when he decided that
I must lose blood. He made the attempt to bleed me, but
did not succeed, and I fainted. I thought it very odd to
bleed a man already half-dead ; but, after four months, I was
again restored. What this medical man did to me I know
not, but my teeth began gradually to fall out one by one.


Inutility of established measures. 381


After a period of several years, I suffered another attack
of intermittent fever. So the medical man said; but it sub-
sequently proved to be small pox in a very favourable form.
Still I did not feel the powers I needed for active life after
this attack. I abstained from meat, I washed, I bathed, 1
walked ; studied with care What and How to Eat and Drink ;
and I may add, that for seventeen years I had been an
abstainer from all intoxicating drinks, but I could not find
health. I then consulted Dr. C., under whose kind treat-
ment I remained twelve months and was somewhat relieved.
I left him for another Dr. C., and Ais medicine I drank by
the quart. It seemed to relieve me when taking it: but,
when I discontinued the hot and exciting stuff, I was worse
than ever.

I then tried emetics, vapour baths, hot bricks to my feet,
and various other applications: but to no good purpose. I
did not find relief: the oppression on my brain, the enemy,
still hovered over me. 1 had heard of Mr. Gardiner and
MESMERISM! My wife and friends said NONSENSE, STUFF.
But somehow I had confidence in the man, and I rriep it:
and you Sir can better describe my state than I can. For,
if I were not insane, I was within a hair’s breadth of insanity !
I shall now, Sir, leave all the rest to you, and if I can do you
any good, or if you can refer any one to me, I will try to
convince him of the uses of mesmerism, and will then tell him
what you did for me, and how you watched my case early
and late with an eager eye to my safety and the cure of my
wrong.

I am, dear Sir,
Your obliged and sincere friend,


To Dr. Elliotson.

Sir,—I feel in reference to the above letter that our ene-
mies must admit that my poor patient must have suffered
seriously from some hidden cause, which time and the ordi-
nary medical treatment had not reached.

And if persons, who doubt the powers of mesmerism as
the great curative agent in such a case, had seen him when I
placed him in my old mesmerising chair, heard him tell his
tale of woe, and seen the great big tears running down his
cheeks, I feel they would have said, “A man crying: there
surely must be something wrong.” He told me of his suffer-
ings; he said that he was tired of life, and that but for the
merciful interposition of Providence he must have done the
fatal deed, for he had thought of it many times. I looked


382 Sudden intermission of the disease.


him full in the face; I sympathized with him. I told him that
he could be cured: and that mesmerism was in my judgment
the only power that would touch his case. He looked at me
with great doubt and said, “ Sir, can you cure me?” I replied
firmly, I believe your organization is good, and if you will be
obedient to my wishes, I believe that I can cure you. I fre-
quently suffered for my confidence as to the certainty of cure,
or, in other words, for the way in which I expressed myself as
to the cure: for many persons suppose that, when they are to
be mesmerised, some wonderful phenomena must necessarily
follow and that they must be cured at once. Persons should
remember that mesmerism for the most part is the last re-
source, and that in some cases time is absolutely necessary to
effect a cure. Nevertheless wonders are performed as to the
rapidity of cure. However, let all young mesmerisers be
careful how they answer such patients as the above ; for this
man a hundred times said to me after mesmerising him, “ Is
that all you can do, Sir?” “I thought you were going to
cure me you said,” &c., &c. I invariably replied what more
can I do? I have told you that I could cure you and you
will find me to my word.

When I found my patient able to answer the question: I
asked him what he would have done if in answer to his ques-
tion, I had said that I could do no more for him. He replied,
“ Nothing could have saved me from self-destruction, for on
your word I relied, and on that hope I cast anchor.”

I commenced mesmerising him in the good old way sug-
gested by you, Sir, to calm and quiet nervous and melancholy
persons, viz.: by very slow passes over the forehead down-
ward, looking firmly into the very soul of the patient. And,
as he suffered daily great irritation in the epigastrum, with
palpitation of the heart, I breathed considerably and mes-
merised powerfully over this region of the stomach. The di-
gestive powers also were very weak indeed.

At the end of three weeks one of those crises arrived
with which all mesmerists are familiar; and which was ex-
emplified on a fine morning last spring by my patient calling
at my house and ringing my gate bell as early as six o’clock,
rousing me out of sleep to tell me that the preceding day he
had informed his friends that he was cured and that I was the
man destined by Providence to meet his case, and that he had
not enjoyed such a state of mind for seventeen years, wishing
to know if such happiness would last.

I cheerfully replied that he would not possibly get well
quite so soon; but that I was quite sure the good work was
progressing as fast as I could expect. At the end of the


Remarkable Clairveyance. 383


fourth week, however, he appeared to himself to be worse
than ever, and said te me that he should now discontinue
mesmerism. When I instantly replied, “No, you will not, I
am sure.” But he urged that his wife was nearly worn out,
his business was going to ruin, he was tired of life, and that
he could no longer afford to pay me for what appeared to him
to be uncertain. He was indeed all despair. Well, I said
again in reply, “ If you cannot afford to pay me, I can afford
you acure: and, if you cannot afford to pay me for a cure,
I will pay you to be cured! But as to giving you up, J will
not.”

This boldness inspired courage, my kindness to him gave
confidence, and I was allowed to work on and on again for
another fortnight, when a second crisis arrived; and so on,
alternating in this way for three months, sometimes he was
comparatively quite well for a day, then two or three days,
and then again apparently as bad as ever.

At this particular juncture a circumstance occurred in
reference to the clairvoyant who had prescribed mesmerism
for his cure that is worthy of notice. In one of his worst
moments, Sir, the fatal knife had been selected with a view
to put an end to his sufferings, and, at the moment he was
premeditating and arranging for the almost sad event, the
clairvoyant was staying at the house of a friend two miles
distant and she saw the whole affair, being then in a mes-
meric state. When, to the surprise of the person who was
then consulting her on another subject, she said very peremp-
torily, “I must go directly to Mr. Gardiner’s house and send
him to Mr. , if I cannot influence him (the poor man) to
go to Mr. Gardiner.” She at once started, in company with
her friend to watch her: for she walked with her eyes closed
through the streets from near Euston Square to my house in
Camden Town. When she arrived she told her mission to
my wife, and said that she had been informed by a good spirit
of the circumstance. (See Psalm xxxiv., verse 7.)

But at the same time the patient had arrived and was
being mesmerised. I was, however, called out of the room
and was then informed for what purpose at that time of the
evening the clairvoyant had called. She said, “ Never mind !
It is all right!) You may wake me now.” And those only
who saw her on waking, or, who are familiar with such events,
could imagine the alarm she suffered on finding herself at my
house, instead of that of her friend, where she had been sent,
as it is called, into the mesmeric sleep.

I now returned to my poor patient and charged upon him
the fact. He admitted to me, that at the very moment the


384 Cure of the Insanity.
clairvoyant had seen him, he had entered his parlour with
& full determination to do the fatal deed. But all at once,
something seemed to whisper, “ No, don’t do so; go to Mr.
Gardiner’s house and he will mesmerise you,” and, as his
words were, “ Here I am Sir, and you have mesmerised me.”
I must confess that I felt within me, that things did not look
well for mesmerism: “This is not,” I thought, “the first
attempt, it may not be the last, I will go at once to the great
mesmeriser I said, with my patient, for, in the event of
anything serious occuring he would be in possession of all
particulars.”

I accordingly called on you, Sir, with my patient, and I
need not state that you kindly received us. I told you my
difficulties, you heard from the lips of the patient his cure,
and I looked for a prescription to help me. For it should be
added that my patient was at the time suffering from very
torpid bowels, and ill-coloured irregular and offensive secre-
tions. But I must confess that your eye saw through the
matter, and you said, Sir, (if you remember) “O, no! no
prescription! go on with mesmerism, and give mesmerised
water to drink ; persevere and you will cure him.” I carried
out your wishes to the letter. I cured my patient, and he
lives to tell of the powers of mesmerism: and he works for
the cause with gratitude and zeal, and his business is now
conducted with assiduity and care, and he is now in better
health than he has been for seventeen years.

Tuomas GARDINER.
Mesmeric Infirmary, Nov. 24th, 1853.*


VIII. Cure of severe Inflammation and Ulceration of the Eye,
after endless previous attacks. By Mr. J. I. Pree.
Communicated by Mr. Gardiner, resident Secretary to
the Mesmeric Infirmary.


“ To the Editor of the Huddersfield and Holmfirth Examiner.


. +++ “I shall continue to pray that my conscience may never permit me to
traffic and gamble with the elements of mortality as homeeopaths do, for the sake
of a transitory repute; that its scruples may never be sacrificed at the shrine of
quackery; and that I may remain steadfast in this my determination to shun
homeeopaths, hydropaths, mesmerists, and the like, as I would a pestilence, or
the touch of pitch. Each system has, in its turn, holden sway as a delusion, a


* In conjunction with this case, read Mr. Wm. Snewing’s account of his own
cure in Nos. XIX., XX.—Zoist.


English doctors and Lewchewans. 385


mockery, and a golden man-trap. All personalities I shall treat with contempt ;
for so long as I have truth on my side I have nothing to fear.

“I am, Sir, yours, &c.,
“ Huddersfield, Nov. 17, 1853.’’ *“* WiiitaM Scort, M.D.


“ To the Editor of the Medical Times.

‘* Sir,—The following paper has been drawn up from information furnished
by Dr. Bettleheim, who has laboured as a missionary among the Lewchewans
for seven years, encountering much opposition and misrepresentation, yet steadily
persevering in the work he has undertaken, &c.


“FPF, J. Farre.
“7, Montague Street, Russell Square.”’


**On one occasion,’’ (says Dr. Bettleheim,) “I represented to the Regent
the importance of permitting, and even ordering, the people to wear shoes and
stockings, as a means of averting many diseases: and, at the same time trans-
mitted fifty dollars, to be distributed to the Mandarins among the poor for the
purchase of these articles. The following answer was returned by the Regent :—

“* This no doubt proceeds from a kind and compassionate heart, and cannot
but elicit our utmost gratitude: but, since of old, we follow the medical system
of China, buy there our medicines, and are not wanting in effecting cures, there
is NO NEED OF ADOPTING A NEW MEDICAL METHOD, OR ASKING FOR MEDICINES.
In addition, our country lies south-east (of China) : we have gentle breezes and
warm weather. There is NOT ONE IN TEN WHO WOULD PUT ON STOCKINGS.
WHAT THE POOR WANT HAS ALREADY, BEFORE THIS, BEEN SUPPLIED.
Pray excuse, and do not carry the poor on your heart. I send a Tafu, who will
restore you the fifty dollars. Wishing you happiness, &c.’”"—Medical Times,
Aug. 6, 1853.*


51, High Street, Hampstead.
To Mr. Gardiner.

My dear Sir,—I have great pleasure in complying with
your invitation to write a statement of my case for the pages
of The Zoist. Indeed, I had determined so to do before I
received your letter, for I consider it to be but little short of
a religious duty for any one who has received any benefit
from mesmerism to hold up to the world the wonder-working
power of this “ divine science.” I do not speak too strongly
when I call it a “divine science.” Is it not divine in its uni-
versality, in that it can heal all diseases which can be healed ?
and has not the gift been presented to every son and daughter
of Adam who is of sound body and mind? No wonder that
such legacy to mankind (lost for ages) should, on its re-
appearance, stir up the powers of darkness to persuade men
that it is all a fallacy, a delusion, and an imposture. I care
not whether the opposition comes from divines or from mem-
bers of the medical profession, but would unhesitatingly
assert that, as, when one says it is of a satanic agency, he


* The heathen and barbarian Lewchewans are better bred while declining
European medicine than the Christian and civilized British doctors while reject-
ing our offer of mesmerism.—Zoist.


386 Inutility of established means.


neither understands the nature nor the quality of his reli-
gion, so I would also declare the other to be false to the true
principles of his profession; and both are abettors of that
spirit of evil which drives truth from the world and retards
the happiness and improvement of our race. But let wise
men judge “just judgment.” I present my own experience
of mesmerism for their consideration, and they shall find
“nothing extenuated, nor aught set down in malice.”

In introducing my case to the notice of the public, let me
premise that by profession I am an artist, and for many years
resided in America. The disease of which I have been cured
is ulcerated, weak and inflamed eyes. The first indication of
a failure in my eyes happened about four years since, at the
close of a day’s work before the easel. There was a feeling
of excessive weakness and an appearance of slight inflamma-
tion. On the following day, a small ulcer was visible on the
cornea of the right eye. I sent for a physician, who pre-
scribed a purgative dose; and afterwards (according to or-
thodox practice) gave the ulcer a touch with nitrate of silver.
The ulcer disappeared in two or three days: but the eyes
remained so weak that I could not resume my profession.
In addition to the general weakness, the lids were hot and
dry, and the balls of the eyes seemed to grate as they moved
in the sockets. Candlelight was intolerable to me, and read-
ing or painting was out of the question.

My doctor prescribed a variety of eyewashes, but all
were of no effect; and, yielding to the persuasions of my
friends that I had overtaxed my eyes in professional labour,
I started off for a jaunt of three or four weeks on the
Catshill mountains. This did me a little good, and I was
enabled to resume the pencil (though often interrupted), but
could not read a paragraph without causing additional inflam-
mation.

This condition of my eyes lasted for about a year and a
half, and then I was advised a voyage to England. I came,
but experienced no particular benefit: in fact, I had more
frequent attacks of inflammation than in America, occasioned
doubtlessly by the humidity of the climate.

About a year since, from a severe cold, the inflammation
in the left eye became so severe that in three days a very
large ulcer was formed. I tried the usual remedies by re-
ducing the system. But the inflammation increased, and
the ulcer grew larger. Becoming very much alarmed, I made
inquiries for the best oculist in London, and was directed to
This geutleman pronounced the eye to be in
danger; and asserted that, upless vigorous measures were


Patient driven to despair. 387


adopted, the result would be the loss of the eye. A cupper
must be immediately had, and fourteen ounces of blood taken
from the temple: this done, successive doses of mercury
were to be taken at intervals during the three following days,
with black draughts, &. The system under such decisive
treatment became sufficiently reduced: so much so that, at
the end of the fourth day, I was but the shadow of my former
self. It is remarkable that, the day following the bleeding,
the inflammation was not at all reduced, and it was only
after the mercury was administered the ulcer was stopped in
its growth. A day or two after this, however, the inflamma-
tion abated a little; and my physician thought he might,
after having knocked me down with bleeding and mercury as
low as he could, set me up again with quinine tonics. But,
unhappily, this brought on an increase of the inflammation
again, and I was to be put down with more mercury and
more bleeding. This having been accomplished, and very
low diet observed for several days, tonics were again resorted
to with more caution and with rather better success. But,
alas! notwithstanding the inflammation had sensibly dimin-
ished, the ulcer was frightfully apparent: there was a large
white spot upon the eye, and both eyes were so excessively
weak that I could not do more than glance at any object
without causing strong inflammation. Thus the eyes re-
mained for weeks. Sometimes in spite of every precaution
to the contrary, I would take a little cold, when the inflam-
mation would again appear, creating, as on three occasions,
new ulcers; two of them appearing at one time on the other
eye. On these occasions I rarely troubled my physician ;
but, making use of the clue that had been put into my hand,
I reduced the system again by more purgatives. My doctor,
however, hearing this, advised me not to do so in future, but
to force up the system*as much as possible. Accordingly,
steel pills, quinine, cod liver oil, wine, ale, and soups, were
used daily. This puffed me out by degrees, and gave me a
sort of grotesque imitation of being in health. The appear-
ance was but deceitful, for I was in reality extremely weak,
and could not by every precaution keep free from colds.
Thus five months passed away ; and, in addition to my eyes
being no better, the ague paid me nightly visits, and would
not leave me in spite of the strongest remonstrances that ten
grains of quinine a-day could make to the contrary.

Reduced almost to despair, I came to the desperate con-
clusion of taking farewell of that time-honoured, venerable
practice, “which all England and the world worshippeth.”
Mesmerism presented itself! Quackery most surely, thought


388 Improvement on the first day.


I; but then, what would have been the regular practice itself
without the labours of quacks? Answer that, ye venerable,
spectacled gentlemen of the “true British breed.”

At this juncture, accident, or rather providence, directed
me to Mr. Gardiner. He had, at the time, a young lady
clairvoyant residing with him; and, having known in New
York a wonderful cure performed upon a friend of mine by
one of this faculty, I determined to trust to her prescription.
After a careful examination, she informed me that, although
my eyes were the great cause of trouble to me, that was
only the effect of a much worse state of things throughout
my system generally; but principally in my head. With
respect to my eyes, it proceeded from inflammation of the
lining membrane of the brain; and this had extended itself
over the whole body. Mesmerism was prescribed over the
back of the head, and from the centre of the forehead down
over the temples. This Mr. Gardiner commenced doing at
once, every day for nearly an hour at atime. No mesmeric
phenomena were the result at any time; but the effect was
almost magical. From the very first day I began to improve,
and kept steadily doing so until the disease was entirely re-
moved. In the same degree that the inflammation disap-
peared and the ulcer healed, in the same degree did my
general health also improve; and this, without the aid of
stimulants and tonics; for the clairvoyant condemned the
whole of them, permitting only water to be used while there
was any inflammation in the system.

As a confirmation of the truth of clairvoyance, I would
here mention, that, although a perfect stranger to her, she
stated precisely the same as the two distinguished oculists I
had consulted: all agreed that the difficulty was in the
system, and not a mere local disease in the eyes. The supe-
riority of the clairvoyant was preémhinent in this, that she
pointed out the parts where the disease lay, and prescribed
the only true remedy: while the great gentlemen whom I
had previously consulted continuously confined themselves
within general statements ; and, instead of working a cure,
merely played off a variety of nostrums upon me, to the great
injury of my constitution.

Mr. Gardiner mesmerised me every day for a month ; at
the end of which period the improvement was so great that
I waited upon him but every other day.

I now began to feel the power of mesmerism, the opera-
tion being frequently painful. A very powerful pressure
down the back of my head followed the passes, until it
seemed at times as if my neck would burst. I would then


Cure completed. 389


request Mr. G. to remove it by mesmerising from that point
down the back.

The third month I was mesmerised but twice a week; at
the end of which all disease was removed. Since then I
have been mesmerised occasionally, but merely to add to my
strength.

As an unequivocal proof of the virtue in mesmerism, I
would state a most wonderful cure performed by it.

About a month since I accidentally struck my eye, which
became inflamed to such an extent that in twenty-four hours
there was an ulcer formed as large as a pin’s head. It was
worse indeed than I had ever had it before in so short a
time; and I drearily looked forward to spending a long time
in a darkened room. I requested my wife to commence
mesmerising the eye at once; this was repeated seven times
during the day, the passes being continued about fifteen mi-
nutes at a time. The second day the improvement was so
great that less mesmerism was required, and I could bear the
light. By the fifth, day, my eye was well again, and I was
able to resume my profession. Here was ocular demonstra-
tion, which could be tested by a fifteen minutes’ experiment ;
for, immediately after every operation, the inflammation was
considerably diminished. No medicine whatever was taken
during the time, and I did not vary my diet in any respect.

Methinks I hear some one saying that the eye got well
of itself. But, my dear Sir, I have had inflammation and
ulcers at six different times of my life, and on two occasions
nearly lost my sight by waiting so long to see if they would
not get well of themselves. They never recovered on any

‘previous occasion without the assistance of purgatives and
bleeding.

T have had so much proof of the power of mesmerism that
there is hardly a disease that I would not trust to it asa
curative agent. My own family have frequently given me
occasion to practise it, for I can mesmerise with considerable
effect myself. Rheumatism, head-ache, nervousness, debility,
are sometimes charmed away by a few passes. If the chil-
dren are restless and cannot sleep on going to bed, I mes-
merise them, and they sleep in a few minutes. If my wife is
tired and unable to take a walk with me, I mesmerise her,
and she is at once invigorated. In short, Sir, I would that
all the world knew as much of mesmerism and could practise
it with as much effect as, even your humble servant,

And obliged friend,
J. I. PEELE.


( 390 )


1X. Stray Notes upon the article on Electro-Biology, Mes.
merism, &c., in the Quarterly Review. By Anr-
GLoRIoso.


‘* Partout, les empoisonneurs du genre humain sont chéris, honorés, récom-
pensés ; leurs attentats sont protégés, leur lecons et leur instructions sont chére-
ment payées; l’autorite supréme, complice de leurs iniquités, force les peuples &
recevoir de leurs mains la coupe de l’imposture, et punit tous ceux qui refusent
d’y boire. Partout les medecins qui possedent le contrepoison de lerreur, sont
découragés, proscrits ou forcés de se taire.”—Essai sur les Prejugés, ou de Vin.
Sluence des opinions sur le bonheur des hommes. Par M.D. M. 1770.


‘* Occidit miseros crambe repetita magistros.”’
Juvenal, vii. 154.


** Tt is some Carpenter.”
First Part of Henry VI, act v., sc. 3.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Nov. 25, 1853.

S1r,—It is a satisfaction to observe that the adversaries
of mesmerism can only maintain their position by a dishonest
silence in regard to all facts which tell against their own
hypothesis.

The Quarterly Review, it is probably known to your
readers, has again come out on mesmerism. The article is
elaborate, but evasive; making large admissions upon points
respecting which very opposite views had been put forth
previously,—finding reality now where collusion and illusion
existed before, seeing the whole subject under a different
light, and treating it, in short, with a very different temper
and language ; and so far there is a change, and an important
one. But, indeed, our facts could no longer be denied, and
public opinion could not well endure a continued and affected
silence. But though there be this very essential alteration
in the tone of the Quarterly, there is no change in the inner
feelings by which the article is dictated. Though our oppo-
nents vary in style, they vary little in substantials. There
is in the concoctors of this article the same malignant hos-
tility to the great truths of mesmerism—the same unworthy
attempt to ignore the phenomena which oppose their own
explanations, and the same perverse ingenuity in dwelling on
those points only which support them—the same secret ill-
will against the leading promoters of the science, and the
same plausible assumption of candour in their consideration
of the question, which have distinguished certain other
writers on the subject. The author, or rather authors, stand
forth confessed by their very mannerisms. The materials
tell us by their quality what handicraftsmen have been em-


Former total rejection of Mesmerism. 391


ployed. A fancy Carpenter, who well understands the knack
of dovetailing his own semi-scientific views into the discove-
ries of others, and of then overlaying them with a smooth
veneer; and a practised embroiderer, who contrives on every
occasion to Braid and twist his one-sided facts into conse-
quences, which he knows are not true, would seem to have
been at work upon the fabric. The article, too, takes an
authoritative tone, and is apt by its air of ingenuousness to
impose upon the general reader; to those, however, who
really understand the subject in all its various bearings, its
hollowness and shallowness are conspicuous at a glance.

It is not my purpose in this letter to enter upon a formal
examination of all its sophistries: that task will better become
the very able editors of The Zoist. But, perhaps, it may not
be without use, if I briefly touch upon certain points which
more particularly struck me.

I have had the curiosity to run my eye over the article in
the Quarterly, which appeared in 1838; vol. lxi. There we
read of impostures, of falsehoods, of dangers, and of the use-
lessness of insensibility for surgical operations; but our
worthies are grown wiser now. The reviewers have found
out that great part of what the mesmerists asserted, and
which they denied, is undeniably true: perhaps, if we wait
a little longer, they will discover the truth of what they still
regard as yet unproved. The article, therefore, of 1838, and
the article of 1853, are in certain passages diametrically op-
posed to each other. ‘“ We believe that of a hundred who
pretend to be somnambulists, ninety-nine are impostors ;” so
said the Quarterly in 1838; p. 295. Again: “ We say, that
as a therapeutic agent, the magnetic manipulations are either
dangerous, or uncertain, or inferior to remedies in common
use in medicine,” p. 298. Again: “ Granting that there is
great corporeal insensibility, the question remains, is it ad-
visable to perform the capital operations of surgery in such
an unnatural state of the nervous system?” &c., &c.; p. 300.
It is hardly necessary to observe that this sort of language
is now abandoned ; and the only question really raised in the
recent article relates to the inner and physiological cause of
facts, which are at length acknowledged, and no longer
treated as the evolutions of impostors.

“ Suggestion,” “imagination,” “expectant attention,”
and “dominant ideas,” these are the notions which consti-
tute the staple of these great philosophers and instructors of
their age! This one idea pervades the whole article.

After a few preliminary flourishes, perhaps we ought to
say advertisements, about Mr. Braid’s “ first important obser-


392 The Quarterly now admits our facts.


vations,” and his employment of “ hypnotism, which did not
for several years attract the notice which might have been
anticipated for it ;’ and Sir Henry Holland’s “ universally-
admired Medical Notes and Reflexions ;” and Dr. Carpenter’s
Human Physiology, which, we are told, is a “ text-book in
every medical school ;” the article enters first upon a length-
ened examination of electro-biology, the effects of which the
writer attributes to the “action of external suggestion in
determining the course of thought.” It is not necessary to
trouble your readers with any comments upon the long and
tedious collection of truisms which are given on this point,
occupying, as they do, nearly twenty closely-packed pages of
the Review. The explanation originally appeared in The
Zoist, for April, 1851 (Vol. IX., p. 110), upon the first land-
ing of electro-biology in this country. “ We regret,” it was
there said at once, “that what is merely imagination with a
greater or less dash of mesmerism should be ushered in with
a new name.” In subsequent numbers of The Zoisi, the
subject was treated at greater length. The pompous parade,
therefore, of physiological wisdom which is marshalled forth
in the Quarterly, is rather out of date. We certainly did
hope for, from the pages of this leading periodical, something
better than a mere crambe repetita of old explanations, and
especially that the said crambe should not be dished up with
such prolonged and wearisome ceremonies, as to be cold and
tasteless before it reaches the palate. However, we must not
be over dainty on these occasions. It is a mighty stride that
the Quarterly has at length made in admitting that the facts
of electro-biology are not the product of imposture. ‘“ We
ourselves,” say these grand physiologists, “witnessed a re-
markable series of experiments, in which the character of the
‘subject’ placed him beyond the suspicion of deceit.” (p. 503.)
Why, this is the very language, we have been using time
after time; but when these very phenomena were formerly
developed by mesmeric patients of a humble calling in life,
the “ subjects,” young women of blameless and exemplary
conduct, were stigmatized as impostors by the soi-disant
savans of the day, and we ourselves sneered at as dupes or
accomplices. Truth is slow in making way; but it advances
at last; and even the cautious and conservative Quarterly
must fall upon its knees, and cry peccavi.

The reviewers proceed in the second place, to an exami-
nation of somnambulism ; and here again facts and opinions,
which have been stated at length in every work on mesmer-
ism for the last twenty or more years, are re-produced with a
most amusing gravity, as if the writers were for the first time


Facts long scorned are now admitted. 393


enlightening the world on the subject. ‘The somnambulist,”’
say our great discoverers, “‘must be regarded as asleep, (the
italics are theirs), his ordinary relation to the external world
being suspended.”

“In this form of somnambulism, there is usually as complete an
insensibility, as in ordinary sleep, to all external impressions, except-
ing such as fall in with the existing current of ideas. No ordinary
sights or sounds, odours or tastes, pricks, pinches, or blows, make
themselves felt; and yet, if anything is addressed to the somnambu-
list which is in harmony with the notion that occupies his mind at the
time, he may take cognizance of it, and interweave it with his web of
thought, &e. A case is cited by Dr. Carpenter, of a young lady,


who, when at school, frequently began to talk, after having been
asleep an hour or two, &c., &c.”


With these phenomena every mesmerist has been long
familiar ; but our readers will bear in mind, that when these
and similar facts were formerly narrated of the Okeys and
of other interesting mesmeric sleep-wakers, the leading phy-
siologists of the day shrugged their shoulders in contemptuous
silence, and treated all our statements as absurd.

I cannot also help quoting one very important passage
upon the subject of somnambulism.


“ There is abundant evidence that the sensibility of a patient in
this condition may be exalted to an extraordinary degree in regard
to some particular class of impressions ; this being due, as before, to
the concentration of the attention upon the objects which excited
them. We have known a youth in the hypnotized state find out by
the sense of smell, the owner of a glove from amongst a party of
more than sixty persons. In another case, the owner of a ring was
unhesitatingly singled out from amongst a company of twelve, the
ring having been withdrawn from the finger before the somnambule
was introduced. We have seen other cases, again, in which the per-
ception of temperature was extraordinarily exalted; very slight differ-
ences inappreciable te ordinary sense, being at once detected; and
any considerable change, such as the admission of a current of cold
air by the opening of a door, producing the greatest distress. Some
of the most striking examples of this kind are afforded by that refine-
ment of the muscular sense. . . . We have seen, too, an algebraical
problem worked out, w:th a neatness which could not have been
exceeded if the person had been awake.”—p. 531.


Here, again, we have the grave Quarterly admitting some
of those special phenomena, connected with the exaltation of
the senses, which had been the most frequently discredited ;
(we pass over the explanation), but when the Rev. Mr.
Townshend, and the Rev. Mr. Sandby, and Deleuze, and Teste
and other standard writers on mesmerism, referred to this
exaltation, no attention was paid tothem. Now, however,


the Quarterly says, that it “could fill many pages with the
VOL. XI. GG


394 Cures by Mesmerism are supposed only.


record of such marvels, which present themselves alike in
natural, and in artificial or induced somnambulism.” Com-
ment is unnecessary; but we must simply observe that in
1838, the same Review remarked that, “of a hundred who
pretend to be somnambulists, ninety-nine are impostors.”

There is one other passage in the section upon somnam-
bulism, which I cannot pass quite unnoticed.

**One point, which Mr. Braid’s experiments have brought into
prominent relief, is too important to be passed by on account of its
bearing on the supposed curative powers of mesmerism. . . . The
phenomena being acknowledged by scientific physiologists, there can
be no difficulty in believing that the peculiar concentration of the
mind in the ‘ hypnotic’ state may produce striking results... . We
are satisfied that, if applied with discrimination, the process will take
rank as one of the most potent methods of treatment, and Mr. Braid’s
Essay on Hypnotie Therapeutics, seems to us to deserve the attentive
consideration of the medical profession.”’—p. 532.

Here, then, at length we have the wary Quarterly, the
organ of medical as well as of all other conservatism, referring
to the curative powers of mesmerism, and pronouncing au-
thoritatively that the hypnotic process of Mr. Braid is “one
of the most potent methods of treatment, and deserving the
attentive consideration of the medical world.” Now it must
be borne in mind that according to Mr. Braid’s own theory,
the hypnotic process and the mesmeric process are but one
and the same thing; i.¢., the condition of the human body,
which results from them, being identical in each case; and
the influence of expectant attention upon the organic func-
tions being the actual cause of that condition in both in-
stances. Waiving, then, for the moment the examination of
this theory, 7. e., the consideration whether this said condition
of body be produced at times from withoul by manipulations
and a guasi-fluid, or originate always from within through
the action of the mind, let us observe that at last we have
this condition of body recognized as a fact. ‘The pheno-
mena,” we are now told, “are acknowledged by scientific
physiologists.” Nay more: it is further said that this con-
dition of body operates so potently that disease is combated
thereby successfully, and curative results obtained. The
manipulations themselves are, according to Mr. Braid, harm-
less and worthless; nay, Mr. Braid’s own staring process has
no property in itself, but is simply valuable as a contrivance
for fixing the mind. Whatever fixes the mind effectually and
thereby influences the organic functions, is the thing that is
wanted, ; and this process the Quarterly Review “is now satis-
fied will take rank as a most potent method of treatment :’”’ and
they therefore recommend it to the attentive consideration of


Mesmeric cures only supposed; Mr. Braid puffed. 395


the medical world! Now this language, it will be remem-
bered, is much the same as that which many of the best
friends of mesmerism, from Mr. Chenevix downwards, have
constantly employed in regard to our own art. ‘ Cure disease
as you can; alleviate suffering as you are able; dispute not
about terms or theories, but apply whatever palliatives nature
offers, and if they be still but in imagination, nevertheless
apply them, and the sick will thank you.” This, I say, has
been the unvarying recommendation of the mesmerists to the
faculty ; and now we have the Quarterly Review urging upon
the medical profession the very same thing, and suggesting
the propriety of curing by imagination! That is, it recom-
mends Mr. Braid’s method; and Mr. Braid’s method is one
for operating upon the body through the mind, as he himself
teaches. Now all this, though very far from being a correct
or complete view of the subject, is a great advance upon the
language of 1838, “when the magnetic manipulations were
described as dangerous, if used as a therapeutic agent ;” and so
far we have reason to congratulate ourselves upon this marked
change of opinion; and here we might stop; but there is still
one part of this paragraph which demands observation. The
writers speak of the “ supposed curative powers of mes-
merism ;” and yet we are told in the same page of the “ strik-
ing results produced upon the organic functions by the
hypnotic process.” Now what in conformity with their own
reasoning does this distinction mean? There is more in this
than meets the ear. For both systems we have seen, accord-
ing to these writers, stand upon the same basis, viz.: that of
expectant attention or action ab intra; and why, therefore,
are the “curative powers” of the one considered as real, and
those of the other as “ supposed?” Surely, this paragraph
looks very like a quack advertisement! It looks as if it were
written by somebody with a purpose, and from the hope of
turning something into profit! Alas, we have fallen upon a
low mercantile state of things! How aghast would old
Gifford and Mr. Lockhart, the former high-minded editors
of the Quarterly, have looked, if their contributors had at-
tempted to foist upon them a “ puff by implication !”’ Fancy
Sir Benjamin Brodie hitching into the corner of a paper
communicated by himself an eulogistic sentence about his
own doings! This, in truth, we had not expected to see.
But the old Tory journal has recently passed, it is said, into
fresh management. Surely the wits of the new editor must
have been wool-gathering, or he must have been building,
not castles in Spain, but Elizabethan structures in nubibus, or
dreaming of embellishments and additions to those already
Ga2


896 The Quarterly surrenders at discretion.


erected in terrd Bootoniensi, when he was guilty of the mon-
strous oversight of admitting this vulgar advertisement into
the drab-covered pages of the decorous Quarterly! Mr.
Murray had better look after his new man, or his well-estab-
lished journal will lose reputation among the brotherhood.

The article proceeds, in the third place to an examination
of mesmerism. ‘“ We are now prepared,” they say, “to sift
the reputed phenomena of mesmerism, with some likelihood
of being able to distinguish what is probable from what is
incredible, what may be admitted as scientific truth from
what must be rejected until more satisfactory evidence shall
be adduced in its support.” (p. 532.) A great portion of the
mesmeric facts are, in the next place, acknowledged; it is
“freely admitted that mesmerised subjects exhibit all the
symptoms analogous to these which are presented in electro-
biology and hypnotism ;” and therefore, that part of the con-
troversy is now closed for ever. Here, then, the Quarterly
Review has surrendered at discretion; and the old offensive
charges of imposture and falsehood are withdrawn.*

But now comes the next point. What is the cause, or
rationale, of the mesmeric effects? Here the writers reject
at once that which they consider the fundamental article in
the mesmeric creed, the principle of magnetic or other
dynamical force, or in other words, of an emanation ad exira
which passes from one human body to another. They say
that “all the evidence yet adduced to prove the affirmative of
this position appears to be utterly wanting in scientific avcu-
racy.” And they consider that the passes of the mesmeriser
simply serve to direct the thoughts of the patient towards any
part upon which it may be intended to act. And what they
require is that the somnambulistic or mesmeric state should
be induced without the consciousness on the part of the sub-
ject that any agency has been exerted.

They then group the mesmeric manifestations under the
three following categories.

I. Those whose genuineness may be admitted, since they
are conformable to previous knowledge, and can be ex-
plained, &c.

II. Those which, not being conformable to known laws,
or explicable upon principles already admitted, cannot be
accepted without a great amount of evidence in their favour,
—but which, not being in absolute opposition to recognized
laws, may be received upon strong testimony, &c., &c.


* In June, 1852, it denied that ‘‘ mesmerism in any of its shapes is more or
less than gross imposture.’’—Zoist.


Eats its words, but makes no apology. 897


III. Those which not only lie beyond our existing know-
ledge, but are in direct contrariety to it. Here, even though
the external evidence were strong, yet the force of internal
evidence must remain conclusive against the validity of all
statements. The asserted success of clairvoyants are the
especial points which are placed in this third category.

Now to begin with this third and last class of facts, I
have only to observe, that I have no quarrel with any man
who hesitates in his belief as to the truth of clairvoyance.
That it is a fact in nature, I am confident: nevertheless I
can make large allowance for the incredulity of others in
this respect. If, therefore, a scepticism as to clairvoyance
were the only point at issue between us, I should not tax the
writers of this article with dishonesty or voluntary ignorance.

In regard to the first class of facts, however. let it now be
well understood that quarterly reviewers at length admit
their belief “in the induction of comatose sleep and of som-
nambulism or sleep-waking, the establishment of a peculiar
rapport between the mesmeriser and his subject, the govern-
ment of the thoughts and actions of the latter by the ex-
pressed or implied determinations of the former, the produc-
tion of cataleptic rigidity or of convulsive movements in the
muscles,—the extraordinary exaltation of sensibility as regards
particular impressions, and the production of entire insensi-
bility with respect to others.” After the language that has
been often employed in regard to numerous sleep-waking
patients, it might have been decent if these admissions had
been accompanied by a few short words of apology and
regret. But, alas! that would be too much for human nature.
Henceforward, however, sleep-wakers may talk and laugh,
and exhibit rigidity in their limbs, and rapport with the
mesmeriser, and no longer be charged with trickery and
lying.

In the second class, the writers place those facts, which
not being in absolute opposition to recognized laws, may yet
be received upon strong testimony,—but upon which they,
the writers, hold themselves ready to offer or seek their own
explanation. Now there is no objection in itself to this
arrangement. The distinction seems based upon reasonable
grounds. The misfortune is that, when evidence in favour
of phenomena of this description is presented to these en-
quirers, they refuse to examine into it,—they make no allu-
sions to it,—they pretend ignorance of it,—they write on as
if nothing of the kind had been published.

For instance, here is this question respecting expectant
attention, which is pronounced by them to be the sole cause
of the mesmeric condition. There is no satisfactory evidence,


398 The cases telling against them are ignored.


they say, that this condition was ever produced after the
mesmeric passes, except where there was at the same time
consciousness on the part of the subject that some agency
was being exerted. All evidence adduced to prove the oppo-
site position is denounced by them as “ utterly wanting in
scientific accuracy.”

Now, in the first place, if it were so, would that settle
the question? I mean, that if there were no competent or
scientific testimony to the fact of the sleep-waking condition
being induced without consciousness on the part of the sub-
ject, would the absence of such testimony determine the point
at issue? I venture to think not; and for this reason. What
is required by these parties as an essential condition for their
experiments? It is unconsciousness in a being endued with
consciousness. That is, they demand that a human creature
who has eyes to see, ears to hear, nostrils to smell, and a
brain to comprehend and to act, should remain in as passive
and inert a state, as if he were brute matter. And because
a human being is not a piece of copper wire, or a solution of
tartaric acid, they rush to the conclusion that his conscious-
ness of an experiment is the cause of what takes place. I can
hardly regard this as a very logical sequence. If in every
instance that is recorded of mesmeric sleepwaking, the “ pre-
vious idea,” which means a consciousness of the act, could
have been shewn to be present, it still would not follow as a
conclusive point that the effects induced originated from
within. An agent might yet have been transmitted exter-
nally. And therefore to require unconsciousness on the part
of a sentient being as a necessary condition, is to require that
which is in itself absurd and inconsistent; and not properly
in the nature of the thing.

But supposing that there had occurred some carefully re-
corded instances, rare indeed, and few and far between from
the circumstances just touched upon, and in which it would
be shewn that consciousness on the part of the subject could
not be predicated, and had not existed; ought not such cases
to be fairly examined, and to obtain some weight in the
determination of the question? Every reasonable juryman
would say so. But what if these very cases were those which
were most studiously avoided, nay, actually treated as non-
existent? What should we think of the virtue of a judge
who could so act? And what, if the judge were a baronetted
physician? And what, if a quarterly reviewer?

For instance, if there were only one case told in which a
blind man had been influenced, without being spoken to,
without being touched, without being conscious of anything
being done or about to be done, and at a distance too of


Downright dishonesty of the reviewers. 399


twenty yards, would not that single instance recorded by a
competent witness, form a primd facié case for further in-
quiry? But what if there were more than one such case?
And what if there were several of an analogous nature?

But say these gentlemen-reviewers, “The witnesses are
not competent or scientific men.” I will answer for it, that
they are as competent and scientific as are the reviewers, and
much more to be depended upon, in the point of veracity.
Is not Dr. Esdaile a scientific man? Is not Professor Gregory
a scientific man? Are not the numerous medical men who
have contributed their facts to The Zoist, as competent to
form an opinion and to render testimony as these our op-
ponents? The silence of these latter gentlemen on all these
points is eloquent enough. They avoid our facts, because they
dare not examine them. I shall not lengthen this letter by
reference to cases, where infants, sleeping and blind persons
and the lower animals have been influenced without conscious-
ness, or to sundry other cases which bear upon this part of
the controversy. These facts have been brought forward
sufficiently often by some of your most able contributors ; and
I merely allude to them on this occasion for the purpose of
establishing my charge of dishonesty and wilful blindness
against the writers who joined together in this article.*

The question, then, as to mesmerism, stands thus. Facts
and phenomena, which had long been denied or discredited,
are at length allowed to take their place as established reali-
ties in the operations of nature. The efficient cause of these
phenomena is attributed in the Quarterly Review to the action
of the mind on the organic functions. Upon this point we
protest against the verdict, and make appeal for a new trial,
upon the ground of what we call in Westminster Hall, the
misdirection (or corruption) of the judge, and his purposed
suppression of the most important evidence on our side of the
controversy.

This theory of an expectant idea is applied, in the fourth
place, to the phenomena which the Baron Von Reichenbach
brought under notice a few years back. Here the writers
cannot help letting it be seen, that they are aware that if his
facts be established, their hypothesis is no longer tenable, and
that the principle of some physical emanation would be sup-
ported. “In some instances, we admit, there is no indication
of the channel through which the suggestion may have been con-
veyed ;” and therefore they deem it likely that some sort of
intimation was communicated by Von Reichenbach’s care-


* “* Speak, what trade art thou ?”’
“ Why, sir, a Carpenter,” (and joiner, he might have added).
Julius Cesar, act i., sc. 1.


400 Messrs. Rutter, Faraday, &c.


lessness in the matter. Here, therefore, their whole argument
breaks down: Von Reichenbach’s caution and patient system
of proceeding with his experiments are well known to those
who are acquainted with him,

Of the remarks respecting Mr. Rutter’s magnetoscope I
shall say nothing, simply because that gentleman is far more
able to deal with the question, and that it is well understood
that he is again preparing for the press. Mr. Rutter is
known to be a man of considerable scientific attainments,
and to be a philosopher both in temper and in principle; with
him, therefore, let the matter rest. I would, however, just
ask two questions: have these gentlemen, who criticise his
experiments, actually with ¢heir own eyes seen his instrument,
or are they relying on Dr. Madden’s statements? Secondly,
are they aware, that Mr. Rutter has produced his various and
discriminating movements, without contact with the instru-
ment, by the addition of a crystal held in his hands at a
distance ?

The examination, too, of the phenomena of table-turning
I shall also leave to those who have studied the subject.
Professor Faraday is, of course, the authority with the
Quarterly ; and his ingenious apparatus has supplied the re-
viewers with unanswerable proof. Without offering any opi-
nion on the subject of table-turning, I would only observe that
a more foolish and unmeaning instrument, than this much
vaunted apparatus I have seldom seen, and what it proves, I
cannot discern. Table-turning may be false: but this instru-
ment does not prove it to be so. Without dwelling either on
the great “modesty” of Professor Faraday, (with which the
reviewers are much charmed,) when he denounced every system
of education save that of his own, I should like to put one
little question here. Has the modest professor experienced no
misgivings in his own mind in regard to the accuracy of his
opinions, since he first put forth his memorable letter?
Perhaps, he too may have had his doubtings.

I shall leave altogether untouched the question of spi-
ritual manifestations, and satanic agency, and Mr. Godfrey’s
and Mr. Gillson’s ridiculous pamphlets. The subject is really
beneath serious notice. The reviewers, however, have devoted
some pages to its consideration; but there is nothing parti-
cularly new or particularly clever in what they have written.
let me rather seize the occasion of directing the attention of
your readers to something more to the purpose. The Rev.
Mr. Close of Cheltenham, who a few years back put forth a
lecture containing some most judicious remarks on the nature
of mesmerism, has recently published a small pamphlet on


The Rev. Mr. Close’s able pamphlet. 401


the subject of table-turning.* The pamphlet does him in-
finite credit. It is argumentative, temperate, and philoso-
phical: at the same time a thorough Christian spirit pervades
every sentence. Your pages have no room for an examina-
tion of his reasoning: but there can be no reader of The
Zoist who will not be gratified by a perusal of the following
extract :—


“For some time past there have been certain well-established
developments of powers, which to us are inexplicable, for which we
are unable to account by any known laws either of matter or spirit.
Beyond a doubt, large deductions must be made for imperfect expe-
riments, for credulity in some witnesses, and hypocrisy in others.
But after all reasonable deductions are made, enough of surprising
fact remains to perplex the wisest head, and to puzzle the most
scientific. There are well-substantiated facts connected with mes-
merism, clairvoyance, and table-turning, which yet remain to be
accounted for. It is true that some scientific persons have attempted
to sneer at the matter, and with a scepticism to which they are
specially prone who are deeply read in experimental philosophy,
affect to treat all such exhibitions as delusions. . . . It is unquestion-
able that many instances may be adduced, where tables have been
turned by designed or undesigned muscular movements of the thumb
and fingers, and not by any subtle power unknown before ; but at
the same time cases can be cited where such collusion, or such un-
conscious muscular motion, could not by possibility have produced
the result, Thus when a large heavy table is moved about, at will, by
two or three feeble and delicate women, who could scarcely move it at all
by the exercise of their natural powers, it is simply weak to talk about
unconscious manipulation. Manipulation, whether conscious or uncon-
scious, could not do this at all. Surely it would comport more with
the wisdom of science, if a fact is admitted which cannot be ex-
plained upon any of the known laws of matter, to wait further
results of experiment and of time to ratify or to refute the facts, or
to discover the hidden power by which they are performed. It is
really surprising that in the present day, when discoveries are con-
tinually made in the world of matter, that scientific minds should
yield to such vulgar scepticism. Credulity is pitiable—but scepti-
cism is mischievous: and there is no occasion for the exercise of
either the one or the other in the case under consideration. . . .
Doubtless the day will come when we shall smile, or our descendants
will smile, at our solemn difficulties,—when the principle by which
heavy tables are moved by feeble and delicate fingers, will be as
popularly known as the reason why a top spins and hums if it is

ollow and has a hole in it!”


Mr. Close adds many other observations equally judicious
and to the point, which coming from one of his character
and standing cannot fail to carry the greatest weight. In


* Table-turning not Diabolical. By Rev. F. Close.


402 The Zoist and its facts scrupulously ignored.


truth, there is far more genuine philisophy in the small
pamphlet by the “ Incumbent of Cheltenham,” ecclesiastic
as he is, than in all that pedantic elaboration of argument
and science with which these gentlemen of large Self-esteem
and little Conscientiousness have been so obliging as to favour
the public.

I have extended this letter to a length far greater than
that which I originally contemplated, and am fearful that I
may be thought as tedious as one of the aforesaid reviewers ;
still I must notice two other of their splendid omissions,
These impartial critics have been afraid to mention The Zoist !
We must approve their wisdom, though we may not admire
their honesty. To omit all notice of The Zoist in an exami-
nation of mesmerism seems much the same as if a writer
were to omit all reference to the Quarterly Review in an bis-
torical record of periodical criticism. However, let that pass ;
we know the reason and can appreciate it: but how is it also
that there is no allusion to one who knows more on the sub-
ject than any man living, and whose experience, judgment,
and professional superiority have at length given character and
position to that which was for some time an unpopular branch
of therapeutics? The animus which dictated this omission is
too transparent. It is as painful as it is humiliating to watch
the low personal motives by which some men are actuated :
but as this is a subject upon which, knowing what I do, |
cannot write without feelings of contempt and indignation, |
think it better to sign myself,

Your obedient servant,
Ant1-GLor10s0.


NOTE BY THE ZOIST.


The Reverend Editor of the Quarterly should send from
his eastern county an earnest exhortation to the concoctors
of this disgraceful article to be honest: assuring them that
honesty is not only right and dignified in itself, but one of
the best foundations of ultimate success and happiness. He
should rebuke them for madly passing over in silence the
contents of the ten volumes and three quarters—the forty-
three numbers—of The Zoist. “Supposed curative power of
mesmerism !” Why, in these ten volumes are splendid cures,
many such as medicine never produced : cures not of affections
of the nervous system only, but of various organs, and not of
merely functional, but of structural diseases, deposits, inflam-
mations, ulcerations, &c., &c. . Some of these cures were ac-
complished in those who had no faith in mesmerism and sub-


Shame upon the reviewers. 403


mitted merely to please their friends: some in persons who
did not know what was meant by the process, or did not know
its ultimate object: some in persons who scoffed at mes-
merism : some in children; some in the brute creation. In
these ten volumes are some hundreds of painless operations,
some terrific, performed chiefly upon ignorant Indians under
its influence, that did well, neither terminating immediately
or after some days in death, as is happening every week from
chloroform, nor followed, as chloroform often is, by long un-
pleasant symptoms. So with regard to the common effects of
mesmerism. The Zoist teems with examples of its power over
brutes, children, persons asleep, blind persons, and persons
unconscious of the agency, or, if conscious, not knowing what
it was for, or despising and defying its influence. Moreover,
the various phenomena at first come without the patient ex-
pecting any such result, and sometimes without his knowing
that such phenomena ever happen in human beings, and with-
out the operator intending that they should come.

We can only cry, Shame! shame! The writers disgrace
the medical profession, if they belong to it; and, if they do
not (we know not who they are), they disgrace the character
of men. But, indeed, the short-sightedness of their conduct
resembles insanity. No persons now think, if any ever did,
of explaining mesmeric effects by congestion of the vessels of
the fatigued eye spreading to the vessels of the brain: no
persons think of making patients stare upwards with a double
squint till perhaps their eyes water profusely and smart in-
tensely, the head aches, and aches long after the staring is
over, and convulsions take place.* All the world mesmerises
by quietly and pleasantly making passes, pointing, looking,
breathing, and willing, The folly which was to have mesmer-
ised by wholesale, not by retail, as we do, and which was to
have brought to its profound, candid, and benevolent in-
ventor, twenty or thirty thousand pounds, (as he wrote to
his most intimate and dear friend, no longer to be found
in England), is utterly disregarded : and the refined and un-
selfish gentleman universally laughed at for making mesmeric
passes and looking hard at his patients, as he always has done,
while making them stare.t


* See Zoist, No. III., p. 308; XI., pp. 342, 344, 351, 354; ‘* Hypnotism
is evidently coarse mesmerism ;’’ XIII., p. 155.

+ We beg our readers to peruse Mr. Sandby’s excellent refutation of Sir
Henry Holland’s absurdities, and his equally able exposure of the Westminster
Review, in No. XL., and the review of Dr. Wood’s American practice of medicine
in No. XLIII.: as well as the list of cures, operations, and phenomena, of our
ten volumes, that is given in the first seventeen pages of this the eleventh volume.


( 404 )


X. Sir James Clark’s distressing Fright.
By Dr. Ex.iorson.
‘* Among the chief rulers also many believed on him; but because of the
Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the synagogue :


for they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.’’—Sr. Joun’s
GosPet, chap. xii. 42, 43.


At the end of the first article, by a clergyman, in the last
Number of The Zoist, p. 234,—an article deserving of the
serious attention of every conscientious medical practitioner,
I said,—


“‘Oh! the barbarity of so many of my professional brethren in
exerting themselves from the first of January to the end of December
to prevent the sick from obtaining the blessings of mesmerism! All
the medical journalists co-operate by excluding from their pages
every one of the splendid medical and surgical facts of The Zoist ;
and it is a shocking truth that, when the last Number of the last
volume of The Zoist, mentioning in its index all the facts of the past
year, was presented to the College of Surgeons and to the Medical
and Chirurgical Society, neither of those institutions allowed it to be
placed on the table of their library with the other magazines and new
books.

“It is,most gratifying to mention that all do not follow their
bad example. Sir James Clark lately was willing that I should meet
him in consultation upon the propriety of trying mesmerism in one
of his cases, and consented to its use ; and Dr. Locock has frequently
acted in the same way; so that the Queen and her Consort have
those about them who set a good example.

**It is no pleasure to me to censure, but a very great pleasure to
bestow merited praise upon, my professional brethren.”


In the Medical Times for October 22, p. 433, is the fol-
lowing article :—

“SIR JAMES CLARK AND THE STATEMENTS OF THE ZOIST.
“ To the Editor of the Medical Times and Gazette.

**Sir,—As perhaps you do not read The Zoist, I send you a
quotation from the last Number. The following is from Dr. Elliotson,
and I think your readers should be made acquainted with it :—

«Tt is most gratifying to mention, that all do not follow their
bad example. Sir James Clark lately was willing that I should meet
him in consultation upon the propriety of my trying mesmerism in
one of his cases, and consented to its use; and Dr. Locock has fre-
quently acted in the same way, so that the Queen and her Consort
have those about them who set a good example.’

“I am, &e. .*

“In reply to a letter from the Editor of this Journal, Sir James
Clark has favoured us with the following note :—


‘ « Brook Street, Oct. 20, 1853.
«MY dear Sir,—It is quite-true that I did meet Dr. Elliotson


Misquotation in the Medical Times. 405


at the urgent entreaty of the wife of a friend and patient of mine
who had long been suffering from organic disease of the brain. I
refused to meet Dr. Elliotson in consultation on the subject of mes-
merism, but agreed to be present when he saw the patient with the
ordinary medical attendant, that I might ascertain from him whether
there was any risk in the manipulations injuring the patient. This
was the sole and only object of our meeting, and we never met again.
** «Yours very truly,
“* James CLARK.’ ”


The first striking thing is the misquotation of my words
in The Zoist. I did not say that I was consulted upon the
propriety of my trying mesmerism in the case; but upon the
propriety of trying mesmerism in the case. Was this an
accidental misquotation? I fear not. Because it was calcu-
lated to give an appearance that I mesmerise patients my-
self, and do not simply prescribe it as I prescribe cupping,
bathing, &c.—that in fact I am a professional mesmeriser.
I have detected a large number of medical men, of the highest
and the humblest grades, industriously spreading the report
that I do not practise any longer as a physician, but occupy
myself as a mesmeriser. The report has taken me many
years: to subdue by positive denial whenever it reached me,
and by the fact of my practising exactly as I always have
done, and never mesmerising for remuneration. The object
has been to prevent as much as possible my being consulted :
and in this the English enemies of mesmerism succeeded
for a time. I myself have mesmerised: but never since
I first heard of mesmerism have I mesmerised for remunera-
tion. I have never mesmerised a human being except from
charity,—from feeling a scientific interest in a particular case,
—or from regard for the individual patient or those who were
anxious that I should mesmerise the patient: and I have
mesmerised patients of the highest rank and of the lowest.
But invariably without remuneration.

Well might the person who made this false quotation be
ashamed to sign his name.

Did the Editor write the letter to himself? There is no
signature to it: why should there not have been? Why was
the writer ashamed? The Editor was bound not to publish
an anonymous statement if he did not know that it was true.


Now to the Editor’s friend, Sir James Clark.

He met me at the urncent ENTREATY Of the wife of a
friend and patient of his own.

Surely he need not have required “ urgent entreaty ” to
meet me, who stand quite as high, I trust, as a physician


406 Sir James Clark a lucky man.


as himself, though neither a baronet nor a royal physician.
I have never fancied an enlarged liver was pregnancy: or be-
lieved an innocent and afflicted single woman was pregnant.
I have never anguished the innocent, afflicted, and perishing,
nor the friends of the innocent, afflicted, and perishing ; nor
been indignantly and justly dismissed from the service of any
one. When an unmarried female has come under my care,
even of the poorest class, as was often the case when I was
physician to St. Thomas’s Hospital or University College Hos-
pital, for an enlargement of the body, I have never prescribed
for her before ascertaining what was her complaint. I have
never fancied she was in the family way, since this is but one
of many causes of enlargement of the body,—enlargement to
which men as well as women, children as well as adults, are
subject. I have never till after full enquiry even hinted
to her or to others the possibility of her being in the family
way: and, if others have hinted such a thing, have invariably
pointed out to them the cruelty and ignorance of holding
such a supposition for no other reason than that the body
was enlarged. J have felt it my duty to set them right, and
not to be led by them. I have carefully ascertained whether
the enlargement was from flatulence ; from fluid ; from en-
largement of the liver, spleen, or other digestive organ, an
ovary, or from some tumor in that portion of the body. I
never met with a lady or a poor woman, married or single,
old or young, who for one moment hesitated to allow me to
examine her stomach, any more than her chest: or any more
than a man would hesitate. Such an ordinary examination
will at once clear up doubt in almost every case. I have exa-
mined hundreds of cases of abdominal enlargement, and
never once made a mistake: nor could, I think, by any possi-
bility make a mistake, when the size is not trifling. A less
delicate examination might well be objected to by an unmar-
ried female, conscious of innocence: and can very rarely be
necessary in a case of any size.

Let Sir James Clark remember that he is only a lucky
man. His rise and progress have not been from hard work
in hospitals, for he has never, like me, been physician to any
hospital : nor from teaching successfully, for he has never, like
me, been a lecturer in a large medical school, or a lecturer at
all; whereas I raised the Medical School of St. Thomas’s from
nothing to a high condition, and that of University College
from a fallen state to a very high condition, from which each
fell as soon as I left it. Nor has he risen from writing any
thing worth reading. He has made no improvements, nor
advanced his profession in the least.


Sir James Clark’s littleness. 407


He has been only a lucky man. Obrepsisti ad honores,
exclaimed Cicero to Piso: and he added, errore hominum.
I will not be so rude.

He refused to meet me on the subject of mesmerism, but
agreed to be present when I saw the ordinary medical atten-
dant, that he might ascertain whether there was any risk in
the manipulations injuring the patient.

I repeat that I met him in consultation upon the employ-
ment of mesmerism in a certain case.

A lady living in Hamilton Terrace, St. John’s Wood,
called upon me requesting me to meet Sir James Clark upon
the propriety of employing mesmerism in the case of her
husband. I made the appointment: I kept my appointment :
met Sir James Clark and the medical attendant of the family.
Sir James Clark laid the whole case before me, and he saw
the patient with me: He had done the patient no good, and
did not seem to hope he could do the patient any good. The
ease was one of shaking palsy, without the least disturbance
of the mind. He told me that the family were anxious to
know whether mesmerism was applicable, and for that reason
I was consulted. I gave my opinion. He asked whether
mesmerism would do harm, and I replied that I did not
conceive it would. I added that I feared mesmerism would
not cure, but only soothe in the case: and, as nothing else
had done or would do good, I advised its use. He then asked
me how it was to be done. I gave him the addresses of two
persons in the neighbourhood who went out mesmerising.
The medical man of the family took no part in this conver-
sation.

Now if this was not a consultation between Sir James
Clark and myself on the subject of the employment of mes-
merism, there never was a consultation in the profession.
And yet, poor man, forsooth, he consented to be present
when I saw the patient with the ordinary medical attendant !
The folly of such language disgraces him. The ordinary
medical attendant would rather have had the right to say
that he consented to be present when I saw the patient with
Sir James Clark : and the chairs and tables that they consented
to be present when I met Sir James Clark.

The conduct of the man in insinuating that I had
misrepresented the fact is miserable. I gave a true state-
ment: and defy him to disprove it.

I never have considered it an honour to meet Sir James
Clark. I never gained an idea or heard a sagacious remark
from him. I wrote kindly and complimentarily of him : and I


408 Sir James Clark’s want of courage.


am sure he has never deserved either kindness or respect
from me.

He finishes by saying this was the sole and only object of
our meeting, and we never met again.

Why, of course. I was called in to give inforniation on a
subject of which he was ignorant, and upon which he ought
not to have been ignorant: and of which he will in time
be compelled not to be ignorant. “We never met again.”
How anxious the poor man is to assure the profession that
we never met again. I do not know whether the patient
was mesmerised: or what has become of the case: for it is
a rule with me never to call upon a patient to make a
civil enquiry, to whom I had been summoned when he was
already attended by others.

When I examined Sir James Clark, to ascertain his fit-
ness for a licence to practise in London, (he is not a Fellow
of the College of Physicians,) I little thought he would have
turned out so unpolite a practitioner. He assures the world
that he did not meet me till after long solicitation: that when
he met me he did not meet me in consultation, but was only
present when I met the family surgeon: and that, though he
met me once, he really never met me again.

Sir James Clark may be naturally timid, but that is no
excuse for being unfair and little. When a young man he
went out a very awkward Scotch body to take care of the
sick son of a gentleman of rank and fortune. This gen-
tleman has told a hundred amusing anecdotes of the young
doctor’s awkwardness and timidity. When the family was
about to leave Rome, and Dr. Clark was to remain in the
hope of making a little practice and a connexion, the gen-
tleman wished to introduce him to the Duchess of Devon-
shire. “Oh dear no!” said Dr. Clark, “ I’ll not be introduced
to her: I never was in the presence of a duchess in my life.
What could I say to her? No: I won’t be introduced to
her.” No wonder that he now fears the profession and the
journalists. I fear neither, when they are wrong.

Before Mr. Wakley had terrified the profession into oppo-
sition to mesmerism, Sir James Clark requested with a Ger-
man Baron to be allowed to see my cases at the hospital. But
strangely they expressed a wish to see the cases when not
being shewn to others. I cheerfully granted the request
and spent an hour in demonstrating the exquisite phenomena
of the Okeys. Sir James Clark merely looked on most
unintellectually, and departed apparently quite unable to
appreciate what he saw. I have ever since lamented that I


Sir Andrew Aguecheek. 409


wasted my time upon him. The gentleman who accompanied
him was, I believe, secretary to Prince Leopold, and had
accidentally called in Dr. Clark at Rome; and afterwards
introduced him to his royal master, Prince Leopold, who
introduced him to his sister, the Duchess of Kent, who intro-
duced him to her daughter, Princess Victoria. Prince Leopold
became King of Belgium, and Princess Victoria Queen of
England.


But after all, this affair is very ridiculous. He does not
complain to me: nor does he complain in The Zoist, in which
the offence was committed. But he writes, no doubt by a
little arrangement with his friend the Editor, to the Medical
Times, that the medical profession may believe that he really
eschews mesmerism, that he is ignorant of it, and did not
meet me upon the hateful subject—did not meet me in con-
sultation.

He reminds me of the valiant Sir Andrew Aguecheek.

** Viola.—I beseech you, do me this courteous office, as to know of the knight
what my offence to him is: it is something of my negligence, not of my purpose.”


“« Fabian.—I know the knight is incensed against you, even to a mortal
arbitrement; but nothing of the circumstance more.


“‘ Sir Toby Belch.—His indignation derives itself of a very competent injury :
therefore get you on and give him his desire.’’


‘« Viola.—I beseech you, what manner of man is he?
“* Fabian.—Nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him by his form.”
‘« Sir Toby Belch—For Andrew, if he were opened, and you find so much
blood in his liver as will clog the foot of a flea, I’ll eat the rest of his anatomy.”
Sir Andrew Aguecheek knew himself, and thus con-
fessed :-—


“Methinks, sometimes I have no more wit than a Christian or an ordinary
man has.”—-TweLrra Nicat.


XI. Cure of Insanity, attended with Constipation. By Mr.
GarpineR, Secretary of the Mesmeric Infirmary, No. 36,
Weymouth Street, Portland Place.


. ‘* Every other speciality besides insanity can boast of rapid progress.
Yet with one or two exceptions, all the physicians of our great public charities
for the insane have entirely neglected their opportunities, and the pathology of
cerebral disease is, for all that the modern London school has done to further its
advancement, almost wholly stationary.”

“‘ Private asylums, when the lunacy practitioner is the proprietor, and stands
to the patient not only in the relation of physician, but as the purveyor of his
meat and drink, lodging and washing, are, in one sense, nothing more than huge
lodging-houses for lunatics. Whatever arguments of convenience or custom may
be used, it must be confessed that it is most derogatory to the respectability of
professional men, that they should be concerned in such housekeeping details,

VOL. XI. HH


410 Insanity doctors.


and that, too, as a personal question of profit and loss relating to their patients
and themselves. What should we think of surgeons or physicians who not
merely operated and prescribed, but lodged and boarded their patients en masse,
and avowedly looked to the profits of such a speculation for a large slice of
income? This evil custom weighs, we are convinced, as an incubus upon psy-
chological medicine, and the sooner it is abolished the better. It renders the
special practice of lunacy discreditable, or at least suspicious in the eyes of the
public. It removes the question of success in the treatment of insanity from that
of intellect and capacity to one of mere house-keeping. No student need care to
devote himself to the study of this special subject, because unless he possess
capital, he cannot hope to set up a lunatic lodging-house, and therefore he cannot
hope to succeed in this speciality. The genius of Pinel or Esquirol could not,
according to our present arrangements, succeed in London without a private
asylum. Qualifications far removed from mere fitness are by the present system
absolutely necessary to success. A psychological physician may buy the goodwill
of an asylum and the care of its inmates, just as a tradesman may buy the good-
will of an hotel. The proprietor of an asylum filled with chronic cases of lunacy
amassed in a long course of practice, dies and leaves it to his son, just as he
would make him his successor in a farm or a brewery. It cannot be gainsaid
that such a state of things, looked at rigidly, is far more demoralizing to the pro-
fession and to those concerned in this branch of practice, than any amount of
polypharmacy or medical shopkeeping would be.

** Both in the metropolis and in the provinces, certain families have fastened
upon lunacy, and it must be confessed with advantage to themselves rather than
to the interest of cerebral pathology. Given certain names, and we know that by
hereditary succession their wearers can be nothing else but mad-doctors. This
preservation of the race of lunacy physicians, like the castes of ancient Egypt,
is an impediment to progress, and is opposed to excellence in the department in
which it prevails. It is a kind of professional breeding in-and-in, which is no
more wholesome in a moral, than it is to be found in a physical point of view.
Nothing is more rare than for any particular talent to run through three or four
successive generations. In the law, where competition is more open and severe
than it possibly can be in particular provinces of medicine, we hear of no legal
families, except indeed amongst the abuses of Doctors’ Commons. The tendency
to the formation of family parties, and the lodging-house, in psychological medi-
cine, render this branch of practice an object of suspicion to the publie. Every
trial relating to lunacy affords evidence that the friends of lunatics suspect their
medical attendants far beyond the common suspicions of self-interest which attach,
in some degree, to nearly all professional men, not only in medicine, but in the
law and the church.’’—Lancet, Nov. 19, 1853.

Thus writes the Editor of the Lancet at the close of the year 1853.


Thus wrote Dr. Elliotson in June, 1843, and was totally disregarded :—

“The treatment of the chronically insane is little more than hygeienic and
moral. Of the importance of preserving the general health of the system, and
the absolute necessity of surrounding such patients with all circumstances calcu-
lated to induce and maintain a natural and happy exercise of the cerebral func-
tions, no one can doubt. The benefit that results is incalculable. Even this,
however, has been very badly—very imperfectly—put in practice in most lunatic
asylums; and the greater part of those insanity doctors who thoroughly enrich
themselves by these diseases are little more than Joarding-house keepers, the in-
mates being mad instead of sane, and do little more for their patients than a
boarding-house keeper does, and whenever I have met with them have seemed to
know no more of that wonder of wonders—the brain, in its healthy or diseased
functions, than the most ordinarily-informed of medical men :—being not only
ignorant of phrenology, but of what it really means. Were it not so, what
careful and valuable intelligence should we not have had long ago from the phy-
sicians of great asylums! What collections of skulls, what casts, what drawings,
what details, what general views, what results of various modes of treatment, what
noble improvements! But what have we? Nothing. But those doctors amass,


Insanity treated in vain by Insanity doctors. 411


as the country people say, cruelly. Even some insanity doctors who have the
credit of being phrenologists and doing much for insanity know nothing of it,
and deserve not half the credit which they have.

‘Seeing that other medical treatment, bleeding, blisters, drugs, are of so
little avail in the majority of cases, and that we possess so powerful an instru-
ment in mesmerism, shewn not only by its general influence as in the case just
related, but in acting upon the individual organs of the brain, according to dis-
coveries made in America and England, and as I have seen proved beyond all
dispute in four cases of my own—it is the duty now of all who treat the insane
and fatuitous to give these unfortunate beings the chance of benefit from mes-
merism. On many I know it can do no good: but many I am persuaded it
would calm and improve ; and many it would cure.’’—Zoist, No., III., p. 185.


Mrs. L. M. F. was placed under my care by the request of
her husband and friends at the end of January, 1853.

She had been confined in a very respectable asylum in
Middlesex for several months.

Her treatment was the old practice of physicking, blister-
ing, &c., in order to reduce the system and to keep down
irritation and inflammation. Extra doses were also adminis-
tered with a view to secure obedience and order.

These plans, however, failed to reduce the system, and
increased the irritation. As to obedience and order, they
were partially secured from sheer debility, the jacket, and
the overwhelming power of several nurses.

Her friends were advised to remove her from this place,
lest her case should become confirmed by such harsh mea-
sures: for she possessed a determined will, and her brain
was powerfully developed at the organs of Firmness, Com-
bativeness, and Destructiveness.

My opinion was, therefore, sought as to the powers of
mesmerism : and I at once decided from my experience that,
when all such measures failed, mesmerism frequently was
almost sure to succeed.

The lady was formally handed over to my care: and,
when I received her, she seemed interested in the change,
for she had desired to leave the asylum.

On her arrival at my house, she endeavoured more than
once to maintain her power of governing, and, when opposed,
she would either resort to violence, or settle down into statue-
like torpidity, and stand or sit for hours. She was sometimes
in a violent phrenzy : sometimes in utter despondency ; some-
times indifferent to all around her. But, such is the power
of mesmerism, she very soon became sensible that some
great agent was at work, and, though she laughed at the
humbug, she, like the iceberg under the sun’s influence,
began to lose her power of resistance; and this resolute
woman became very soon tractable and orderly from the in-
fluence which was wielded over her. .

HH


412 Mesmerism cures it.


She was mesmerised twice a day; great kindness was
shewn her; every little requirement was supplied to her; a
chapter from the Divine Word occasionally read to her: and
she gradually improved.

But her appearance was not what could be wished. Her
skin was dryand full of pimples; her secretions offensive, though
her appetite was tolerably good ; and constipation had begun
to assume a serious aspect: and extreme care was needed to
select the kind of diet suited to such a state.

Mesmerised water was carefully and plentifully supplied ;
the body washed daily with brown soap, and powerfully mes-
merised, especially her abdomen. But the third, fourth and
fifth days passed over without relief.

Walking exercise was then resorted to; and injections of
cold and warm water with olive oil, soap, &c., were given:
but not until the tenth day could relief be obtained. It was
fully accomplished, and from that moment not the slightest
difficulty occurred in this respect.

Mesmerisation never produced sleep or any other phe-
nomenon. But she used to grow quiet under the process,
gradually became quite calm and orderly, and within three
months was perfectly cured, and restored with joy to her
family.

Several months have now passed over, and she is still
well. Some of the enemies of mesmerism have suggested
that she will be sure to relapse. The answer that has been
given is, “ Well, if it should be so, she must go again and
be cured where she found help before.” Thus mesmerism is
to be the agent in spite of the enemy should it be required.

Tuomas GARDINER.


XII. Table-moving, Rappings, and Spiritual Manifestations.
By J. W. Jackson, Esq.


Aut Europe has of late been moved by a phenomenon re-
cently imported from America. The New World, it seems,
has at last begun to re-act on the Old to some purpose. The
movement of the tables may be strange, but the movement
of the movers is decidedly stranger. In society the most
aristocratic, and in circles the most exclusive, the republican
process of gyration has been at once and unhesitatingly
adopted ; nor have coteries the most conservative, or parties
the most loyal, been found capable of resisting this universal
tendency to tabular locomotion.


Mesmerism neglected ; Spirit-rapping, &c., run after. 413


In this marvellous outburst of enthusiasm for the occult,
however, many things are noteworthy. People who never
cared whether mesmerism were true or false, and who would
not have gone the length of a street to see a fellow-being
affected, who were utterly indifferent to the refined and
beautiful experiments in which not merely the physical but
the mental powers of humanity were brought into manifesta-
tion, have been all belief, enthusiasm, and excitement, because
dead furniture can apparently be brought under the influence
of some strange power. While those who heard of the painless
operations and surprising cures of the new agent without the
least interest or gratification, as if the diminution of human
suffering were indeed no business of theirs, have been full of
the surprising wonders of domestic locomotion and drawing-
room sorcery. Can that state of society be sound, or that
frame of mind desirable, which thus conduces to so palpable
and stolid a disregard of the useful, and to so manifest a crav-
ing for the morbid excitement of the merely wonderful.
Were the safe and painless operations which took place at
Calcutta under our illustrious countryman Dr. Esdaile so
utterly worthless, and the table-moving at New York so all-
important, that the former were rightly neglected as of no
account, while the latter have been seized on with an avidity
bordering on the ridiculous? The amiable sensibility which
can weep over the refined woes of an imaginary heroine in
the last new novel, and turn with callous indifference from
the stern reality of actual suffering, has already received its
due from the lash of a vigorous intellect descending to the
correction of fashionable folly; but the perversity of mind
which could refuse mesmerism as a science and receive it as a
wonder, which could despise its application to man and admire
its presumed infusion into things, yet awaits its exposure
from the withering pen of wit and its deserved castigation
from the dreaded couplets of satire. On the hollowness, both
morally and intellectually, in the present constitution of
things, which such a manifestation of taste and tendency
displays, this, however, is not the most fitting place to dilate ;
suffice it, that he who runs may read, and as “ diamond neck-
laces” and other trifles were not without their significance in
the last century, so also this feverish adoption of America’s
last new portent by the aristocracies of Europe is not devoid
of meaning in ours.

But table-moving has been not merely the rage in fashion-
able, it is also a text in literary circles. It has not only
found its way into parties but pages; and is not merely the
subject of conversation but also of articles. And such articles !


414 Table-moving and rapping not a novelty.


“Oh!” said the wise man, “that mine enemy would write a
book ;” may we not add by way of emphasis, “an article,”
without preparation. Alas, for facility of composition when
it becomes the vehicle of ignorance, and the extent of a com-
munication does but serve to demonstrate the limited extent
of the observation or reading whence it was derived. Talent
may do much and genius may do more, but really some little
knowledge of a subject is required on the part of him who
would presume to direct the thoughts of thousands. Profound
and absolutely abysmal as is our respect for the editorial We
—that monosyllable more mystic and potent than any cabal-
listic sound ever yet used in the most terrible of invocations,
we nevertheless have been absolutely amused at the blissful
innocence of the subject displayed in some of those manifold
learned communications and lucubrations with which the
columns of some leading journals have lately abounded,
whether to the edification of their manifold readers must of
course remain for ever an open or rather hermetically sealed
question. Suffice it that two fundamental errors pervade
nearly the whole of these most recondite attempts at disserta-
tion ; firstly, the idea that table-movings and rappings are
quite new, whereas they are very old; and secondly, the
notion that the performances of the media now in London
exhibit the sum total of results yet achieved in American
thaumaturgy ; and that, consequently, their exhibitions are
the admeasurement of what the transatlantic spiritualists have
effected, when in truth they have yet afforded but a very
commonplace example of the lower range of phenomena. As
to their being new, the thumping of walls, the slamming of
doors, the knocking of boards, the clattering of pans, the
breakage of china, and the dancing of chairs, &c., are precisely
the stock phenomena of all good old-fashioned ghost stories
for the last three or four centuries, and there is scarcely a
village in Europe where such things have not been the tradi-
tional talk of the rustics for many generations. The drummer
of Tedworth, the noises heard in the house of John Wesley’s
father, the domestic catastrophes occasioned by the Stockwell
ghost, and the wonders transacted in the castle of Prince
Hohenlohe, in Silesia, are all of this class ; while the pheno-
mena developed in the Seeress of Prevost, in Angelique
Cottin, and many other European media, prior to the Ameri-
can outburst, suffice to shew that we have to do with pheno-
mena which have long been the subject of observation both to
the learned and the unlearned, the scientific and the ignorant.
In short, the movement of furniture, not only with but with-
out contact, and the production of sounds, varying in character


Turn from lifeless views to superstition. 415


and intensity, without the intervention of any physical agency,
are facts with which the records of the preternatural have
long rendered us familiar. The only apparently new feature
developed in the present transatlantic movement is the very
decided addition of intelligence—that is of clairvoyance to
the incoherent raps antecedently experienced.

On an enlarged view of the subject, the present rage for
the mysterious may doubtless be considered as simply a reac-
tion from the tyranny of an antecedent materialism ; as such,
it was very proper that it should first appear in practical |
money-getting America, the favourite home of matter-of-fact ;
and, shall we add, in Paris, the focal point of scientific infi-
delity. For the celestial telegraph of Cahagnet, the amiable
and visionary Swedenborgian mesmerist, shews obviously but
another phase of this same tendency to adopt mesmeric phe-
nomena as facts, but to misinterpret them as the result of
spiritual agency. Rightly did Napoleon say that extremes
meet. Beautiful is the analogy afforded by nature, who no
sooner brings her tide to its lowest ebb than she provides for
the return of the flood. Thus it is, that no sooner has the
belief of man been apparently extinguished than it begins
again to bud forth. No sooner is faith at the nadir, and
matter-of-factism and dollarism at the zenith, than the latter
begin to descend from their thrones, preparing to vacate them
for the approaching ascension of the former. There is a class
of minds that having long refused to hear living prophets are
at last compelled to listen to stocks and stones. Doubtless
there is in all this a perfect analogy; a wooden-headed gene-
ration are best addressed through timber tongues, and in the
grand sequence of events it is quite just that an age that
would not listen to the plain utterances of clairvoyance from
the mouth of a living extatic should at length be compelled
to stoop to the pitiable succedaneum of an inanimate block,
rendered for the nonce not vocal, but yet resonant, by in-
fluence radiated from the fountain whence at firsthand this
species of revelation was contemptuously refused. Desperate
diseases doubtless demand desperate remedies, and the extra-
vagant folly of a materialism which could derive primal intel-
ligence from the negative pole of the univercceelum, which, in
its apotheosis of brute force and superficial reliance on merely
sensuous experience, could suppose that spirit was a depen-
dency on matter; such a fatuity, I say, could only be rightly
preached to by a sermon from that very sphere to which its
grovelling proclivities had caused it to descend. The philo-
sophic mind of modern civilization had become so utterly
devoid of the least pretensions to soul, was so thoroughly


416 Spirit-movement comes from America.


defunct, so completely enshrouded and entombed in sense,
that no “Lazarus, come forth,” uttered through any other
medium could have reached it. But we are becoming sarcas-
tic; in very truth making merry at the laughable spectacle
of a most respectable world, whose whole faith consisted in a
firm reliance on matter and money-bags; that derided all
supersensuous exaltation, and treated psychology as insanity ;
I say, we are cruelly enjoying the mad dance of this very
prosy world, in its wild pursuit of the first faint glimmering
of clairvoyance and dim spiritualism, revealed at last through


that most befitting medium, the wooden unconsciousness of
household gear.


** To what base uses may we not come, Horatio.”


Matter-of-fact philosophy, listening at a table for a message
from the spirit land, could only be pictured by the pencil of a
Hogarth, and effectually described by the author of Hudibras.
The pretensious wisdom that, in its insane superficiality and
self-sufficiency, would have dethroned an omniscient God,
and excluded his worship from the usages of society, now
devoutly heeding the timber oracles of the upholsterer, is a
spectacle compared with which the grovelling herbivorousness
of the royal Chaldean, as contrasted with his previous pomp,
is scarcely more pitiable.

But to be serious, what are these table-movings, table-
rappings, and spiritual manifestations generally? To what
order of phenomena do they belong? What is their history,
and whither do they tend? ‘These are in very truth rather
serious queries. The spiritual movement is already among
the most important which have occurred in the New World,
and judging by the rapidity with which table-moving, the
simplest phase of the matter, has spread in Europe, we have
some grounds for anticipating a rather serious impression on
the Old World. It behoves us, then, not only from motives
of pardonable curiosity, but also from a sense of duty to the
public, to thoroughly investigate, and, if possible understand,
the essential character of phenomena, so unusual as to be at
once admitted by vast multitudes to be supernatural, and on
whose recurrence and regulations a large and growing school
of experimentalists have asserted their ability to hold frequent
and even habitual intercourse with departed spirits. The
domestic movings and household raps indeed, however in-
teresting as facts or fallacies to the philosophic, have a still
more important bearing on society, as the leverage by which
a new theological sect seeks to modify our estimate of the
present and our anticipation of the future. It is a movement


Vast numbers of the superstitious. 417


by which the churches of America have already lost thou-
sands of their members, and by which the lunatic asylums
have received a considerable accession to theirs. It is a
system, by which, under its present aspect, every medium
claims to be a preacher, with authority to reveal directly
from the spirits of the dead the truth or error of all doctrines,
the propriety or otherwise of all actions, and the condition
and experiences of all deceased persons. In the rapidity with
which it has effected conversions it laughs Mormonism to
scorn, and in the extent to which it modifies the sense of
responsibility in its votaries it is unsurpassed by any form of
faith ever yet promulgated. Protean in form and flexible in
doctrine, the religion of the rapping spirits adapts itself more
or less to the preconceived ideas and antecedent creed of
every medium. Generally inclining to a Swedenborgian view
of the next sphere of existence, however, we are told that
“houses, clothes, and books, music and dancing, and even
eating and drinking,” may be enjoyed in the next world
much as they are in this, with the exception that there desire
obtains its objects without the inconvenient obstacle of “ cash
prices.” As all spirits from Adam to the latest defunct seem
amenable to the calls of these favoured media, it need
scarcely be said that a vast amount of information is being
rapidly accumulated in reference to the past and present
opinions and experiences of all generations. Moses explains
the purport of his laws; Plato reviews his sublime doctrines ;
Shakspeare authenticates his own dramas; and Shelley dic-
tates fresh poems, wild yet harmonious as the tones of a
wind-swept olian. The prophets, bards, sages, legislators,
statesmen, and heroes of all time, are now made conversible,
and the desideratum of ages has been attained—the living
may be guided by the wisdom of the dead.

This singular phase of superstition is not confined to a few
ignorant fanatics. It has its warm adherents among the first
families in the Union, the majority of its communicating
media, or prophets and prophetesses, being individuals mov-
ing in a respectable sphere, who receive no pecuniary remune-
ration from their admirers. It has an extensive and increas-
ing periodical literature, consisting of weekly, monthly, and
quarterly serials, devoted to a diffusion of its principles. It
has given birth to several goodly volumes purporting to be
the post mortem productions of deceased authors of eminence,
and containing their opinions, corrected and enlarged by a
wider experience than their temporal life could afford. In
addition it is often the theme of transatlantic pulpit oratory,
and as such has been the occasion of many learned exposi-


418 The fallacy deserving of study.


tions, of much eloquent advocacy and of many terrible denun-
ciations. If it has in some instances unsettled the opinions
of the orthodox, it has in others often rendered the sceptical
devout. And while justly a source of alarm to divines of the
old school, is trumpeted forth by its more zealous believers as
the great and providentially provided panacea for the world’s
otherwise incurable infidelity. And although its ravages may
be lamented by the denominations, its triumphs are an-
nounced with much laudatory self-glorification by its apostles.

That such a movement can proceed on its course so
extensively, in a country intimately connected with our own
by the close and increasing ties of consanguinity, language,
and commercial intercourse, that such an explosion of fanati-
cism in America, should prove wholly ineffective in Britain,
is too improbable an idea to be seriously entertained by any
one at all competent to estimate the amount and character of
the mental action and reaction maintained between the two
great divisions of the Anglo-Saxon race. We shall have to
drink of our brother’s cup although it is to be hoped in a very
modified form. Our safety from its noxious effects is to be
sought, not in ignorance but knowledge, not in avoidance but
preparation. And as I feel fully assured that the phenomena
on which the American Rappists base their pretensions to the
maintenance of a spiritual intercourse with the departed are
perfectly natural, and that consequently this idea of a direct
communication through such means with deceased friends or
strangers is a fallacy which, however ridiculous, is neverthe
less dangerous, I trust that the importance of the subject will
plead my excuse for addressing you upon it and for attempt-
ing to give something of the history and philosophy of this
extraordinary popular delusion.

To fully understand and appreciate the character and
importance of that transatlantic movement, whose wave has
reached our shores, it is necessary that we should know its
history, and, by observing the nature and extent of its effects
in the States, be, in some measure, prepared to estimate its
probable results nearer home. It is, I feel assured, from an
entire misconception as to its real bearing, that public atten-
tion has not been more forcibly directed to it already. I will
then, without more of prefatory remark, endeavour to give a
condensed narrative of the rise and progress of that theologico-
philosophical sect, whose sudden appearance and rapid growth
has so effectually aroused the interest of Brother Jonathan,
and indeed thoroughly startled that usually self-possessed
individual from his propriety.

It was in December, 1847, that the Fox family removed to


The Misses Fox. 419
a house in Hydesville, Wayne County, in the State of New
York. It seems that the previous occupant of the premises
had occasionally been troubled by unaccountable knocks at
the front door, in the perpetration of which the juveniles of
Hydesville, though suspected, remained, it is said, undetected.
With the entrance of the Foxes, however, matters waxed
immeasurably worse, and the knocking boldly advanced from
the exterior to the interior of the devoted domicile. Doors
were mysteriously shut and opened, rappings were heard on
walls, floors, and bedsteads, and the invisible enemy, despite
every precaution, was obviously in possession of the domestic
fortress. In this state of affairs, the Misses Fox, instead of
becoming hysterically demented, according to the usual rule
in such cases made and provided, actually became so com-
fortably familiar with the mysterious invader as to use him
for a playfellow; one young lady not in her teens knocking
for fun on finding that the ghost would reply by raps in
number and character similar to her own. Eventually it was
discovered that these raps had a meaning in them, for on
being asked so to do, the spiritual visitant would knock out
the age of any one present or even absent, intimate the num-
ber of persons composing any given family, and by silence
imply negation, and by a single rap affirmation, in reference
to any question propounded. At last it was found that by
the aid of an alphabet, the ghost condescending to knock
whenever the right letter was touched, a complete system of
telegraphic communication could be maintained with the other
sphere of being. During some months, this extraordinary
and enviable gift of evoking the spirits and providing the raps
seems to have been confined to the Fox family, and some of
their immediate relatives, so that on their removal from
Hydesville to Rochester, the former locality was comparatively
liberated from, and the latter particularly infested by, these
spiritual visitations, and even the latter place was for a time
vacated in favour of Auburn. Ultimately, however, the en-
dowment of mediumship became more common; and a Mrs.
Bushnell, then practising at Cincinnati, as a consulting medical
clairvoyant, became a formidable rival to the claims of the
Misses Fox to be considered as the sole depositaries of this
mysterious lore, and the only legitimate interpreters of the
spirit-will sublime.

The cause progressed, however, not merely by the diffu-
sion of its principles, but also by a marvellous exaltation in
the character of its phenomena. Some of these, indeed,
though apparently well authenticated, do so far transcend all
probability, that I greatly fear my readers, were they nar-


420 Judge Edmonds.


rated, would scarcely credit that they were taken from
respectable works and authorized expositions of the doctrines
and practices of the Rappists. What shall we say for instance
to the occurrences which are related on the authority of the
Rev. Dr. Phelps, of Stratford, Connecticut, as having taken
place in his own house, commencing on Sunday, March 10th,
1850. Here we have clothes taken by invisible agency from
one part of the house to another, and then disposed ina
peculiar order, a child eight years old, the doctor’s son, lifted
from the ground without hands, and sundry other equally
astounding portents, all gravely stated by the rev. gentleman,
and more or less corroborated by many friends and neigh-
bours. Then we have the career of Judge Edmonds of the
Supreme Court of New York, whose character as a lawyer, a
scholar and a gentleman, is deservedly among the highest in
the Union. We find this clear, cool-headed jurist becoming
himself a medium, and as such connected with phenomena as
startling as ever furnished the pages of a romance with its
most exciting subject matter. Nor are the facts which we
have to grapple with purely physical; for we have not only
some really good poetry, said to have been dictated either by
alphabetic rapping, or more directly through writing media,
together with dissertations, political and philosophical, com-
municated by the spirits of the illustrious dead, through
individuals seemingly incompetent to the production of such
compositions, but we have the still graver fact of passages in
Hebrew, Greek, Chaldee, Persian, Sanscrit, Chinese, Thibe-
tan, and other languages, written by persons utterly ignorant
of all such recondite matters. And these things are vouched
for by such authorities as Professor Bush, and other oriental
and classical scholars, distinguished alike by intellectual at-
tainments and social position. To refuse belief in such nar-
rations, because the facts which they relate seem impossible,
is, of course, easy; but what then becomes of human testi-
mony; and if we feel authorized in refusing such evidence in
the present, where are our vouchers for the past? To laugh
at such things as simply ridiculous may be pleasant, but the
converts to this phase of spiritualism rise above wit, and are
invulnerable to banter; and while the good-natured smile,
and the satirical sneer, the new creed marches onwards, con-
quering and to conquer. And we now behold it, as was said
above, with thirty thousand preaching media, each one the
centre of a circle of anxious enquirers, many of whom have
already become devout believers in the new faith. Nor can
we consider this as the ultimatum of the movement, for not
only are fresh converts daily acquired, and new media con-


Andrew Jackson Davis. 421


tinually developed, but the phenomena which the latter are
capable of producing seem to be steadily advancing to a higher
point of exaltation, the wonders increasing as the adepts
obtain more power by practice and experience.

History informs us of the birth of various faiths in past
ages, and almost in our own day we have seen Joanna South-
cote in Britain and Joseph Smith in America obtain adherents
to doctrines so irrational, that at first we might be tempted
to think such absurdities could never find acceptance beyond
the walls of a mad-house. Unenlightened zeal and blinded
fanaticism, however, have but too often laughed common
sense to scorn, and put all calculated anticipation to defiance.
Not on any mathematical formula of probabilities can the
progress and development of a rising sect be safely predicted,
and we will therefore not here attempt to sketch the possible
career of this strange manifestation of spiritual potency. To
give the reader, however, a correct idea of the forces at work
in modifying the faith and practice of the model Republicans,
I will endeavour to give a condensed statement of the com-
munications hitherto received from the spiritland, together
with the circumstances under which these telegraphic mes-
sages have been generally transmitted. In doing this, I shall
also sum up the phenomena produced, whether of a physical
or psychological order, and thus be better prepared for the
attempted explanation which I purpose hereafter to afford.

I have already stated that this movement commenced
with the Misses Fox, in what would be called a haunted
house, the noises connected with which constituted the primal
phenomena now known as the rapping manifestations. I shall,
however, altogether mis-estimate the essential character of
this extraordinary display of credulity if we suppose it to have
originated purely in the fantastic tricks of two excitable girls,
without any previous preparation of the public mind for the
easy reception of new and extravagant ideas in reference to
man, and his relation to other spheres of being. The revela-
tions of Andrew Jackson Davis, “the Ploughkeepsie seer and
clairvoyant,””—a country grocer’s errand boy—who, in a state
of extatic lucidity, is said to have dictated a voluminous work
containing a new cosmogony, a new theology, and a new
social system, or rather a reproduction of ideas already far
better elaborated in The Vestiges, the rationalism of Germany,
and the communism of France. This work, commenced on
November 28th, 1845, and finished January 25th, 1847, and
of which I have the New York imprint now by me, affords
both in its subject-matter and its favourable reception, ample
evidence of the tendency to extravagant belief, which shortly


422 Lifeless objects move.


afterwards embodied itself into the existing schools of spiritual
manifestation. The fact is, the theological mind of Christen-
dom is unsettled; and whether we look to the mysticism of
fatherland, the scepticism of Paris, the unknown tongues of
our own Irvingites, or the recurrent fanaticism of the States,
as exhibited in revivalist camps, in Mormon migrations, or in
the more scientific furor now under consideration, it must be
obvious that we have fuel asking for the torch, a mine waiting
for the match, a volcano on the eve of explosion. But to
return, the phenomena in the case of the Misses Fox, and of
all the earlier media, consisted in the production of raps,
taps, and knocks, in which there was intelligence, and of
sundry movements of tables, and other household furniture—
the latter being produced with, and the former without, con-
tact—and it is to this point only that the matter has yet been
imported into Europe. Eventually, in the scale of ascension,
facts of a much more wonderful order were developed, and
are now, it is said, ever and anon experienced among our
transatlantic friends, and may consequently be expected, like
the inferior table movings and rappings, to make their ap-
pearance among us in due course. Furniture and clothes
were, as we have already stated, moved without contact ; and
media in the art of revelation were, like some of the old sor-
cerers, lifted into the air and sustained by invisible means
during several minutes at some feet from the ground. While
in some few instances it is stated, on reliable authority, that
papers, documents, &c., have been signed without human
agency, with the autographs of deceased persons, facsimilies
of which have been published in the quarterly publication of
the spiritualists, with all the requisite authentication. Such
are some of the physical facts.

The psychical, or, as the rappists prefer calling them,
pneumatic phemomena, consist of such revelations as the
students of clairvoyance are already familiar with, and embrace
thought-reading and the reproduction of all the past impres-
sions of the enquirer, or any other person present, communi-
cated, however, through the cumbrous instrumentality of
knocks instead of the more direct process of spoken language.
In this respect, the ordinary American media are immeasura-
bly inferior to Adele, the extatic subject of the late Cahagnet
of Paris, who professed to converse directly with the deceased,
and used to give viva voce a correct description of their per-
sonal appearance, manner, dress, &c., when alive, and in
addition enable enquiring relatives to carry on a conversation
with the departed through their intervention. The writing
media, however, occasionally equal, and even transcend this,


Remarkable effect of high excitement. 423


and in them we have the old phenomena of possession repro-
duced. Thus we find individuals of seemingly ordinary mental
calibre, not only exercising the gift of tongues, but professing
to be inspired by the spirits of departed men of genius, and,
as they say, without any conscious effort, muscular or mental,
inditing productions which in manner, and occasionally even
in matter, bear a striking resemblance to the known compo-
sitions of the authors, in whose names these mystic scribes
afford us these posthumous addenda to their already published
works. I was particularly struck with some lines which
appeared last year in the Spiritual Telegraph, professing to be
dictated by the late Edgar A. Poe, giving a description of his
meeting with The Lost Lenore. The rhyme, rythm, and spirit
of which might render it well worthy to be considered as a
continuation of that wild and wonderful poem, The Raven.
Poets alone can conceive of the difficulty to be surmounted in
thus providing for every feature of resemblance to an original,
especially distinguished by peculiarity in the structure of the
versification, and by a succession of wild and fantastic yet
beautiful presentiments of the imagination, such as the Ancient
Mariner, and a few other of Coleridge’s more inspired pro-
ductions have alone approached to. Occasionally, as we have
said, these ghostly dictations are prolonged to the extent of a
volume, and the once notorious Thomas Paine, of infidel
celebrity, has thus been made to recant, in a volume profess-
ing to give us his “ pilgrimage.” Such are some of the more
prominent facts on which, as well-attested realities, the mis-
sionaries of spiritualism profess to found their claims to be
considered as the authorized exponents of some rather start-
ling doctrines in reference to the condition arid prospects of
man as an immortal being. Let us now, then, &s a conclusion
to this rather extended epistle, endeavour to give a curt,
though if possible lucid, exposition of the general creed of the
Rappists as to the usual occupations, ideas, intellectual
development, and moral status of the departed.

The fundamental principle of this body of believers is,
that all spirits are evocable, not, however, at the pleasure of
the medium, but of their own free will. The spiritual move-
ment commenced with the dead and not with the living, and
is in itself an indication of universal progress, the develop-
ment of being permitting this interpenetration of the lower
by the higher sphere. All mortals belong, even while on
earth, to one of seven orders or conditions of spiritual intelli-
gence, to which they ascend either at death or by successive
progressions and purifications afterwards. All are better and
happier after death than when alive, but the moral and devout


424 The spiritual doctrines.


are far more advantageously situated in this respect than
others; each one, in short, reaping what he has sown, the
spirit being conditioned in its new, by its prevalent habits of
action and desire in the old, sphere. The next world is the
analogue of this, or rather this is the shadow of which that is
the substance. There, ideas are realities; and to will is not
only to do but to possess. Spirits, like all other forms of
being, are in a state of progress; and as the mind with them
creates or rather projects its own environment, its capacity
for expansion and improvement is immeasurably greater than
with us. Spirits of the same sex form friendships and those
of an opposite sex “mate.” This, we are naively told, differs
from marriage—in what respect, however, is not, I believe,
precisely stated! Such is the present creed of more than a
quarter of a million of our fellow-Christians in the United
States, in this same year, 1853. The Student of Sweden-
borg’s writings will be at no loss to detect the fountain whence
these rapsodies were more immediately derived—the dreamy
old Swede has founded a church to some purpose at last.
Even the Baron’s ideas, however, had their preparation in
the reveries of Jacob Behmen, and German mysticism as a
whole is probably but a derivative result from the Sooffeeism
of western and the Brahminism of eastern Asia. Extasy
with its interior illuminations and subjective revelations, pro-
jected into apparently objective visions, is at the basis of
the whole; and hence probably the fundamental agreement
of all creeds that depend for their origin and form on the in-
spired intuitions of clairvoyant seers. Suffice it that in this
latest American edition we have obviously the germs of a
belief in manifold rather terrestrial heavens, that is of the
Moslem order, with gardens, palaces, and “ mating” houris.
In addition to this, we have the immortality of animals, more
especially pets, not only dimly hinted at, but in many cases
directly implied or asserted, as a logical sequence to which
we may expect the doctrine of transmigration to once more
appear, and be taught in the west as it once was and indeed
still isin the east. In short, we have here the long-exploded
dogmas of the Indian, Egyptian, and early Greek, that is,
Pythagorean, schools of theosophy, reappearing with all the
force and freshness of a new revelation among our dear dollar-
loving cousins across the Atlantic, and threatening to intrude
upon us with such an intolerable invasion of obsolete ideas,
refurbished after the most approved Yankee fashion, that it
may well make us pause to consider what may—nay, what
must—be the consequence of such an unwelcome visitation.
All attempts to explain the newly-imported American


What are table-movings with contact ? 425


phenomena, by a reference to the table-moving only, must
of necessity fall very far short of their intended object, if
that be to afford us a satisfactory exposition of the entire
transatlantic mystery. Neither will a reference to the per-
formances in London suffice, for these supply us as yet with
but a very mediocre sample of the spiritually wonderful ;
aud whether true or false, honest or charlatanic, cannot yet be
considered as affording sufficient data for arriving at a correct
judgment in reference to the entire subject. Neither is it
much wiser to have recourse to Paris (now that poor Cahagnet
is gone to join his beloved spirits), or Berlin, or Vienna. This,
indeed, is but running away from the more important facts,
and is in truth about as wise a procedure as going to London
to inquire how the people raise the coals at Newcastle.
America has developed this phase of mystery in our day—
what say her people, and what say those who have been
among them? I have endeavoured to give a succinct statement
of the principal facts yet developed, and the effects which
these, rightly or wrongly explained, have thus far produced
on the American mind. Having thus placed the reader in
possession of the most important data, I will now, in fulfilment
of my purpose, endeavour to briefly, but clearly, state my own
opinion of the phenomena under consideration ; and in doing
so shall treat them as I have done others of a similar charac-
ter in connection with the superstitions of various ages.
What then, are ordinary table-movings with contact, and
extraordinary without contact? what is the nature of the raps
as physical phenomena perceptible to ordinary observers, and
whence comes the supersensuous intelligence they are ad-
mitted to display? What are the rapping media—that is,
what is their physical and psychical condition during the per-
formance of their feats? What are the writing media? what
is the essential character of the possession under which they
profess to act but as scribes for the dictation of departed
authors? and what is the nature of that mental exaltation
which they undoubtedly exhibit? These it must be confessed
are rather searching queries, and, if satisfactorily responded
to will, I think, go far to solve the American mystery, as far
as it has yet been developed. Ordinary table-moving with } y
contact, then, I hold to be the result of involuntary muscular
motion. My reason for so thinking, irrespective of such re-
fined mechanical tests as those of Faraday, is that the phe-
nomenon is too common, too easily elicited, too generally
successful with all sorts of operators, to be considered as
implying any unusual susceptibility in the experimentalists.
It proves too much. What is my own experience? Why,
VOL. XI. 11


426 Not dependent on vital force in wood.


that in calling persons promiscuously from a public audience,
the experiment is successful in fully nine cases out of ten,
in less than twenty minutes, and I have never known it to
fail but where the parties trying it removed their hands fre-
quently from the table, and so prevented the development of
the involuntary motion of resting the muscles by change of
position (I have known an inveterate snuffer thus occasion a
a failure), or where, from a case of mesmerisation, or some-
thing of interest being proceeded with in another part of
the room, the minds of the movers were diverted from the
object in the hand, that is, their nervous system was thus
relieved from the strain of continued attention. The mus-
cular motion, however, is so decidedly of the involuntary
and unconscious order, that in every instance where I have
subsequently questioned the parties, they have, without ex-
ception, declared, each one, that the table, hat, or other
object moved without his or her assistance. This is the case
also where only one individual suffices to give the requisite
impulse. Now, when we consider that the persons thus
taken at “‘ hap-hazard” must, in the majority of cases be devoid
of high susceptibility, and must be untrained to will steadily
and intensely, we shall at once see that neither as operators
nor subjects do they fulfil the conditions requisite for either
the efficient radiation or easy reception of the nervo-vital, or,
if the term be preferred, odic force. Much has been inge-
niously said about “the vital principle of wood, which is or-
ganized to carry its modification of vital force as we can ours,
and so our magnetism takes hold of its structure, and can
give this dead vegetable organization some of the principle of
our living one.’” All very pretty and plausible no doubt, but
what then becomes of the movement of pewter platters, china
basins, and felt hats? What sort of vital organization do
these conveniences possess for transmitting living force?
Granting that tables do move by other than mechanical
arrangements, it is obvious that some more enlarged hypo-
thesis must be eliminated to account for the motion not only
of organic but inorganic bodies by the subtle agent which
transcends the ordinary range of motive powers. Such, then,
is my opinion as to ordinary table-moving, now almost uni-
versally admitted to be a physical fact, whatever its proximate
cause, but which was once loudly vaunted by the rappists as
the direct result of spiritul intervention—as, in short, a
miracle produced by extramundane forces. Before concluding
this paragraph, I ought perhaps to observe that the Rev.
| George Sandby and the Rev. Chauncy Hare Townshend, two
| very high authorities on this subject, are both of opinion that


What are raps ? 427


there is an actual radiance of mesmeric influence, which,
pervading the substance of the table, occasions its motion.
Of extraordinary table-moving without contact, I will speak
after having disposed of some other and less rare phenomena.
What are the raps?—we mean the genuine, in which we
believe—not committing ourselves, however, to the un-
doubted authenticity of any one medium’s tattoo, but simply
taking it for granted that such phenomena have been really
produced by some persons. Here we advance to higher
ground,—that is, rarer manifestations. Almost anybody may
move a table with perseverance, but it is not every one or
every dozen who can produce the raps. Here we want the
presence of the hierophant or the pythoness; we must, in
short, have a medium ere we can enjoy the felicity of listen-
ing to these celestial pulsations. Shall I be fully understood)
when I term these little delicate taps, neuro-electric or odic/ ”
phenomena. I fear not; perhaps indeed I do not quite) /
understand myself, a circumstance, by the way, not so un-|
common with those oracular personages, popular authors, as
their admiring readers, the uninitiated public, are apt to sup-
pose. Let me then attempt a farther exposition, not forget-
ting therein the honest confession of an illustrious scribe of
the last generation, who, when complimented on his lucid
explanation of a rather obscure topic, frankly admitted that
he did not write on it because he understood it, but con-
versely understood it because he had written on it. But I
am becoming rather diffuse with these antimasonic revela-
tions of literary imperfections: so to the raps. These, I
conceive to be produced by the powerful radiation of
nervous energy, from a system in a state of exalted action
approaching to, if not identical with, those forms of extacy
under which lucidity or clairvoyance is also generally mani-
fested, and hence the high-wrought and supersensuous intel-
ligence occasionally displayed in these extraordinary sounds.
But how the requisite degree of force for their manifestation
is generated, and by what apparatus projected, sometimes to
one part of the room, and sometimes to another, I cannot
pretend even to hint. I only stand by the opinion—un-
founded notion, perhaps, as the spiritualists would call it—
that these sounds, for aught that has yet been shewn to the
contrary, must be considered as the result of natural forces,
our present inability to explain their proximate cause being
no more an argument for receiving them as preternatural,
than is our corresponding inability to account for the funda-
mental cause and essential character of ferro-magnetism, a
sufficient reason for our at once receiving its phenomena as


428 Wheat are the media ?


being decidedly magical and miraculous. The only plausible
reason, indeed, yet assigned for considering the raps as spi-
ritual in origin is, the extraordinary intelligence of which
they are sometimes the vehicle. Let us then examine this,
and see whether it will authorize us in coming to such a con-
clusion. Does the intelligence revealed in these sounds tran-
scend that exhibited by a good clairvoyant or mesmeric
extatic? It is admitted that it does not. Hence if mesmeric
exaltation of the mental faculties be received as a fact in
nature, so also must the correspondent state induced under
the rapping experiments. This, then, brings us to the next
question.

What are the media, what is the essential character of
those exalted functions, which they are said to habitually
display? I reply, they are waking but unconscious clair-
voyants, in short, extatics or seers, either natural or induced ;
that is, some are lucid from native susceptibility, (like
Frederica Hauffe, the Seeress of Prevorst, who also could
produce raps,) some from sympathy with persons already
inducted, and others from the frequent repetition of mes-
meric manipulation, and the consequent evolution of high-
wrought and extraordinary nervous impressionability in their
system. The Misses Fox, like almost all founders of similar
systems, belong to the first class, many of their disciples to
the second, while of the third, we will allow a spiritualist
writer, rejoicing in the magniloquent title of “ member of the
first circle” to speak. This learned initiate in his History of
the recent developments in spiritual manifestations in Philadel-
phia, thus describes the means made use of to induct a
medium. He tells us these “are of a magnetic or mesmeric
character,” and which, as they are applied, “carry the sub-
ject deeper and deeper into a state of insensibility.” Else-
where he observes, “sometimes the process of preparation or
development is easy and quick, at other times protracted and
difficult; but it is always rendered more easy aud much
quicker by perfect resignation and entire non-resistance.”
The media then are extatics, spontaneous or induced ; and, as
regards the intelligence of which they are the channels, they
only differ from ordinary clairvoyants as to the manner in
which it is enunciated; and even in this shew a gradual, but
very observable, approximation to the old standard, as the
number of writing and speaking media is decidedly on the
increase. And no wonder; for who, after the novelty had
worn off, would like the very tedious and cumbersome process
of having a sentence wrapped out letter by letter, when com-
munications of equal value, intellectually and morally, might


The Rev. Mr. Godfrey and Satan. 429


be obtained by the much more rapid process of conversation
or writing. These media, then, are the Sybils and Pythia,
the magi and enchanters of old, rebirthed in the guise, or
rather disguise of modern ladies and gentlemen, beneath
whose unexceptionable silk and broadcloth, it is doubtless at
first rather difficult to recognize anything so monstrous or
antique.


(To be concluded in our next.)


XIII. The Rev. Mr. Godfrey and Satan at the Hanover Square
Rooms.


On Thursday, the 15th ultimo, the Rev. Mr. Godfrey, 8.C.L.
of St. Catherine’s Hall, Cambridge, and Incumbent of Wort-
ley, delivered a Lecture at the Hanover Square Rooms, on
“Table Moving, Spirit Rapping, and Clairvoyance, in con-
nection with the Antichrist.” The extraordinary subject of
the lecture attracted an immense audience, which however
did not “listen to the lecturer with breathless attention,” for
they frequently interrupted him with loud bursts of laughter.
And well they might! For of all the nonsense to which it
has ever been our lot to listen, and we have heard much, this
far surpassed it. The credulity of this reverend gentleman
is unbounded. The most ridiculous trash ever conceived
was swallowed with the greatest avidity, and theories were
founded upon stories without any foundation. Spicer’s
Spiritual Manifestations and Cahagnet’s Celestial Telegraph
were his text books. Few sensible persons would think of
quoting the former flippant, unphilosophical, and loosely
written book, full of narratives from hearsay, all “ embel-
lished” by Mr. Spicer. The Celestial Telegraph even sur-
passes it in the absurdity of its stories, and we would engage
to shew that as much reliance could be placed on the ravings
of men confined in St. Luke’s and Hanwell, as in the reve-
lations of the ecstatics of Cahagnet. Yet this book was
quoted as the authority to shew that clairvoyance was:the
Antichrist! A great deal was said of the blasphemy* of the ¥
tables, and a great many touching appeals were made to the


* Mr. Dibdin asks a table, ‘‘ Is Christ in heaven or hell !’’ and receives the
answer, “‘ Hell !!!"’ If the writer had asked whether Mr. Dibdin ought not to
have been whipped for putting such a question, the answer would certainly have
been in the affirmative.


430 The Satanic clergymen sing and vanish.


audience to have nothing to do with them, The most awful
denunciations were held over the heads of table-movers, and
poor innocent creatures who never saw any wickedness in the
motion before, were made to feel that they were steeped in
the gall of bitterness and bound in the bonds of iniquity ; that
Satan had thrown his coils around them, and unless they re-
pented they would all be consigned to eternal punishment.

Bursts of indignation frequently broke forth; but at the
conclusion of the lecture, Mr. George 8S. Nottage, who a year
or two since completely exposed the biological quacks at the
City of London Institution, rose and requested permission of
the chairman to say a few words relative to the subject before
them. This was the signal for a general rising of the whole
of the clergy on the platform, who attempted to put Mr.
Nottage down by singing,

‘* Praise God, from whom all blessings flow,

Praise him all creatures here below ;

Praise him above, ye heavenly host,

Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.”’
On finishing which, they all made a rapid exit. The
audience however insisted on Mr. Nottage being allowed
to speak, and loud calls were made for another chairman. A
gentleman having been appointed, Mr. Nottage proceeded to
point out the utter absence of anything like reasoning or
reason in what they had been listening to with such excessive
politeness. He urged that Mr. Spicer himself, in a subse-
quent work, had denied that he believed in the manifestations
being the work of spirits. Mr. Nottage explained to the
audience his own experience with the spirit-rappers, and how
they failed in all the tests, simple though they were, which
he had applied. He farther explained how to detect the im-
posture.

At this point a man started up and exclaimed, “T am a
medium, sir.” “ Indeed, sir,’ replied Mr. Nottage, “ perhaps
you will prove it.” The “medium” then advanced to the
table on the platform, and the whole audience, in the greatest
state of excitement, rushed forward also. Mr. Nottage took
his stand by the side of the table to “ try the spirits ;” but
when he asked the “ medium” to bring the spirits from the
vasty deep, all that the man could do was to place his hand upon
the table and to request the assistance of others to perform
the ordinary experiment of table-moving! Thus this in-
stance, like all others which Mr. Nottage had known, signally
broke down when reduced to the actual test. Mr. Nottage
was therefore called upon to continue his remarks. He pro-
ceeded to state that, with respect to the answering of tables


Mr. Nottage’s censure of the Satanites. 431


to questions put to them, it resolved itself into a very sim-
ple matter. He said it was ridiculous for men to assert a
thing to be supernatural before they applied, or refused to
apply, a simple and natural test. He was ready to pay a
handsome penalty, if the reverend gentleman who had been
so horrified got a single answer if he only put a corrective to
his unconscious impulse. Let any two of the audience take
a book and key, tying the key in the book, and suspending it
by the forefinger ; then let him ask a question, having pre-
viously settled that if the book turned to the right it would
mean, Yes; if to the left, No. Now let them believe that
this was some device of Satan, and then put the question, Is
God a just God?—and believing that Satan, the enemy of
God, would answer in the negative, an unconscious motion
takes place in the direction of the left, and you recoil from
the innocent book and key, and exclaim, How wicked! This
was exactly the case with Mr. Godfrey and Mr. Dibdin. They
put the most blasphemous questions to the tables, and then
recoil from them with horror.

“Sir,” exclaimed Mr. Nottage in conclusion, “ these men
are doing real religion a frightful injury by their foolish fana-
ticism. They are prostituting their reason and outraging
common decency. The impiety and the blasphemy of the
answers rest not with the table or with Satan, but with those
reverend gentlemen whose piety should be rational, and who
should shew that reverence to religion which they profess to
feel.”

The audience warmly applauded the sentiments of Mr.
Nottage, and then separated.


DISHONEST BOOK-KEEPERS.


We are sure that far more dishonesty exists in the world than transpires in
courts of justice. We have frequently been requested to hint to persons who
have borrowed numbers of The Zoist and copies of other mesmeric books that
it would be grateful to return them. The last request of this nature is from a
gentleman from whom have been borrowed many numbers of The Zoist, Sandby
on Mesmerism, and Elliotson’s Physiology, which might as well now be returned.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


In our next Number we purposing continuing and concluding Mr. Jackson’s
article, giving the history of the cases of the Okeys, an account of the brain of
the late Mr. Haydon the painter, and some striking cures.


432 Books received, Notices to Correspondents, &c.


BOOKS RECEIVED.


The Reflection of Divine Truth. October and November. Edinburgh: 1853-

The Exposition of Life and Immortality. Edinburgh. December, 1853.

Spirit; or, the Hebrew terms Ruach and Neshamah, and the Greek term
pneuma. By William Glen Moncrief, author of ‘‘ Soul,”’ “‘ Dialogues of Future
Punishment,” &c. London: 1853.

The British Journal of Homeopathy. London.

Mesmerism solved, divested of mystery, and shewn to be simply an overlooked
branch of Medical Science, to be received and practised as an auxiliary by the
Medical Profession and Heads of Families for curative purposes. Jones: London.

An Inquiry into Table-miracles; their cause, character, and consequence :
illustrated by recent manifestations of spirit-writing and spirit-music. By R. C.
Morgan. Bath: 1853.

Satanic Agency and Table-turning. A Letter to the Rev. Francis Close, 4.M.,
in reply to his pamphlet, “ Table-turning not diabolical.” London: 1853.

Table-moving by the power of the Will: similar manifestations obtained by
the divining ring: being a statement of original experiments reprinted from the
“* Kentish Independent” newspaper of December 25, 1852, and March 19, 1853.
With additional observations. By George Barton. London: 1853.

Table-moving and Table-turning reduced to natural causes: with special
reference to the Rev. E. Gillson’s recent pamphlet. By Charles Kock, M.A.,
Ph.D. Bath: 1853.

Mesmerism and the diseases to which it is most applicable: together with a
Sew interesting facts. na letter. By Falconer Miles. Dublin: 1854.


THE ELEGANT MR. WAKLEY’S CHRISTMAS COMPLIMENTS.


** Coffinites and herbalists, nostrum-mongers and syphilitic doctors, cancer-
curers or mesmerists, professors of biology and a host of other childish nonsense
and iniquitous folly,—all these, without exception, are ignorant impostors, whose
sole object is to cheat and defraud the public, and gain an easy, because dis-
honest and disreputable livelihood. Too idle to work for their daily bread—too
ignorant to be able to gain subsistance from the common callings of life, the
reckless adventurer, the broken-down tradesman, the ruined gambler, the con-
victed thief,—these are the persons who assume quackery as a dernier ressort,
and by every trick and plausible device, by every practised fraud or cunning
scheme, dupe, victimize, and plunder the shallow, credulous, and weak-minded
persons who are foolish enough to trust them or rely on their false promises.””—
Lancet, Dec. 24, 1853; p. 605.


Erratum.
page 418, line 19, for ‘‘long,’’ read urgent.


*,* It is requested that all communications be sent before March.


END OF VOL. XI.


No. la, FITZROY SQUARE.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS.


Dons.
£ 2.
A——, Mrs., per Thomas Capern ........seseeeeee8 1 1
A Visitor ........ ° 0 5
Abadurn, —, Esq., Midderton Hall, Cusmnttmnition (by
Dr. Ashburner) ..... © ve ve ne cece tebe et
Adams, N., Esq., Surgeon, Reuteaien.: ccsoocee IL 1
Adlard, H., Esq., jun., Hatton-garden .......
Aglionby, Miss, Wigton Hall, be or Cuntalend,.
—_——_—_—_——., a Friend of ....... ixedevesc’ 2: 9
Akroyd, Edward, Esq., Banktield, Halifax. cosee 5 O
Allison, —, Esq., Edinburgh .. cebseccsccccocce LO


Amor, J., Esq., New kat 1


(donation of money
expended by him in Mr. Baume’s affair). . 3
Anonymous, Hampshire . crecoscocscs &
’ , by Dr. MMR as nace iKines 1
Archer, Major, Hampton Court .
Armytage, Mrs., Gaussin, Senabeny crt Dr. Ashbarer
Arnold, —, Esq., Stamford, Essex. . os veee O
Ashburner, Dr., Grosvenor-street ............se0+2 10
Ashness, Dr., Clapham .......+eeeeeceeeeereeees


_


B.C. F., by Mr. Capern ........0+00%-

B.S, Big GR. 2 dc cdcowceracevweveevsscsecerst ts
Bagnold, Colonel, 28, Hamilton-terrace, St. John’s
Baldock, T., Esq., Dockyard, Plymouth............ 3
Brigstock, Mrs., 11, Hyde-park-square .........++
Baikie, Dr., 11, Inverness Road, Bayswater .........+
Bailey, Samuel Esq., Burn Greave, Sheffield ........ 5
Bailliére, H., Esq., 219, Regent-street. .


\ for his is due,
who recovered under ionaien.. ovevesseeoes §&
Baillitre, Miss, 219, Regent-street..........+.++


MESMERIC INFIRMARY,


&


oo


—


Ann, Subs.
£sd
ste
’ 3-<¢
100
} 10
110
110
y-F ¢
100
110
010 0
: to
s 3 ¢
. 2 &


Barth, George H.,


Barnes, James, Esq., 6, West-place, West-square ..

Barrett, Jonathan, Esq., Croydon ...........

Barrett, Richard, Esq., Croydon .....

Barrett, Rev. R., King’s College, Giclidie..

Esq., 4, Mornington-crescent . ‘

Barton, Edward, Esq., Gloucester-cottage, Dountary-
road, St. John’s Wood. .

Batson, H., Esq., 23, Albert- ad Gieuaties ate,


Regent’s-park .


Baume, P. P., Esq., Sibent alin Senin: "Middlesex...

Benson, W. H., Esq., 22, Gloucester-place .. .

Bentinck, the Lady Mary, Harcourt House, Guaniibe sq.

Bertie, the Hon. Brownlow C., Second Life Guards. .

Bettinson, Thomas, Esq., 21, Charles-street, St. John’s
Wood (Mrs. Bettinson having derived benefit at
the Infirmary) ......

Biggs, J., Esq., Leicester .....

Biggs, Wm., Esq., ditto.... poses

Bishop, John, Esq., Hastings..........

Black, Dr., Surrey-street, Strand .

Black, Mrs., ditto sede

Blunt, Edward, Esq. Suntchout Basingstoke. née

Blythe, P. P., Esq., Sion House, Lower Clapton .

Boutflower, Rev. Douglas, Exeter.....,......

Bowdoin, Miss Temple, 37, Gloucester-square ........

Briggs, J., Esq., = papbaate — 8- walk soee

Briggs, W., Esq., York.. eees oes coc

Brine, John, Esq., South-row, ‘to ell,

Brine, Mrs.,

Brine, Charles, Esq.,

Brine, Miss

Brine, Miss E., gees cane

Brine, Misses, collected by the :—

Anson, H. T., Esq., Bishopsgate-street........

A. L., Gray’s-inn-place .... 2.000000

Dinan, —, Beg, 9.00.05 00cccrccee

H. G., Camden-town ........

Herring, Miss, Brighton .. .

J. A., Southampton-street ..........0...005

J. P., Esq., Great Queen-street............45

Matts, —, Esq., Regent’s-square ............

M. D. G., Miss, Walthamstow ..............

M. A. P., Holloway ......

Taylor, Mark, Esq., Upper Baker- rainy

Collected also by the Misses Brine. .

Ditto ditto.... op.epescoccesescess

Ditto WN Ad cakeinsk ck cecssadeomle


ditto. .


22 0...


—_ > oO
_
oc oc


owoarcococcocococeccse oo we WS &
a = _
eQmvonwvovnvgansS coon NN WNW SO


—


—)


escooooooocooseoo


eceeceo


mn.
£
1
2
2
1
2


on


=


oe nw we & DR


_


i


coooe FP


coco 2


i)


_ Bull, J., Esq., Bridgewater oc cece


£


Dons.


8.


Brine, Misses, by the servants in their family... ; 1 10


Brown, Berry, Esq., Hamilton House, St. “John’s
Browne, J., Esq., Bridgewater ....
Browne, W., Esq., ditto........ bade
Brunning, Miss, 10, Stafford-street, Sisieme ~grove ....
Buckland, T., Esq., 25, Euston-square, London .
Buckley, Major, Bengal Cavalry...........+.
, @ Friend of..... ose svesecce
, Second Friend of ......4...6066


is}
mo


ow RK He ee


Burney, Miss, Morton Hall, Shout «

Butler, Edward, Esq. . ee

Buxton, Dr., I enewds

Byrne, Miss, 25, Charlotte-street, Portland- en:
Byrne, Miss E., 25, Charlotte-street, Portland- sees o @


Carlisle, the Right Hon. the Earl of, Grosvenor-place ..
Cautley, Rev. Joshua, Thorney, — ee
Chambers, Alex., Esq., Ratcliffe-highway .. coccce |
Chandler, T., Esq., Surgeon, Rotherhithe. . .
Chandler, M., Esq., Surgeon, 53, Sete unmties
Hyde-park. . °
Clark, James, Esq., Suan, Acton-plae, Kingsland-on
Clarkson, Miss R. ‘ as . wésceee
Caden i, etede " deavaduces tee
Coles, Mrs. J., Beulah Spa, Reet: cue
Collins, Miss E., The Park, Lincoln .
Collis, Mrs., 59, Russell-square. .
Colvin, E. J., Esq., Gloucester- shiek Disbsiens aie
Cook, Rev. Joseph, Purley Hall, Oxfordshire ........
Coombe, J., Esq., 3, Cambridge-terrace, Regent’s-park 1
Creyke, Ralph, Esq., Rowcliffe Hall, Selby, Yorkshire... 5
Crewse, A. F. B., Esq., 8, Marlborough-hill, St. John’s
Croft, Col.; Shellington Hall, Yorkshire «:......6... 5
Crompton, Joshua, Esq., Sion-hill, Thirsk .......... 10
Cryer, —, Esq., Brentford . ice ee e¥ua heey
Currey, F. E., Lismore Castle, ied. cited ete ee Seles


_— oO


D’ Aguilar, Lt.-Colonel, Albany... 2.6.00 see ee ceee
Davey, W., Esq. .

Davidson, Captaie, 40, “Charlotte- street, " Portland- psc
Davies, J. Silvester, Esq., Pembroke College, Oxford .
Davis, R., Esq., 9, Great St, Helen’s .. 0.2... 0005
Deverel, John, Esq., Purbrook- a Portsmouth ee
Deyman, C. O., Esq., Gray’s Inn..


oe
wnor~


~— ©


ocomwrw rw OS


10


o-


—


o


nor ©


d.
0


ecoooooc so ooo fe


o


—


oo


—


ooo oe


Ann.


£


~~ Oo


8. d.


~~ om =


ecco


—


—)


_


Dobson, H. H., Esq., 32, Piccadilly ......

Dobson, Mrs., 32, Piccadilly .........2-+eeseeee
Dodsworth Sir. C., Bart. ..... peeeecesoes
Dowman, Mrs., Peacock-street, Meiledon « 09 9p tonees
Downshire, the Marchioness of, jeg aes
Dublin, we ecasecccccccscoccscsees 10


- Oe


Ducie, Earl of .. ee ee
Duke, Miss, io. P ooeesees
Dunlop, Mrs., 2, Howley pace " Maida. bill. sees
Dunraven, Earl of . evececeracccossbbicoesescs OD


E., Mrs. (by Dr. Ashburner) ..........+0seseeeeeee
Edwards, Rev. John, Cheltenham ........+++++se0++ 2
Ekins, Rev. Jeffrey, Braintree, Essex ..........+++. 1
Elliotson, Dr., F. R. S. . ee cocccccese 50
Ellis, A. J., Esq., pasepelean, Bilt. cooves &
(in addition to his
former subscription of £2) .....5++.00+ cesses

a Friend of . eves |
Ellison, C. J., mn +» 24, Old 7 Lantafe-len
Enfield, —, Bn. "Nottingham .

Espie, Robert, Esq., Surgeon RN., "Blythe Hill, sy.

denham (by Mr. Barth) . °

Espie, Mrs., Blythe Hill, Seichen (by ‘Mr. Bar) 1
Evans, Treyer, Esq., Notting-hill . enceasesecces &
Ewart, William, Esq., M.P., Cantaldgn-equen vescee 5


F. F., a patient of Mr. Tucker, Mesmeriser .......... 1
Farley and Boys, Messrs., 16, Mincing-lane.......... 4
Farrow, W. Esq., Leighton Buzzard ..........++++0+
Featherstonhaugh, D., Esq., Ealing ......sesesee0++ 1
Featherstonhaugh, J. D., Esq., Ealing ..........+++s
Fitzgerald, Mrs., 26, Euston-square ..........++0+0+
Fletcher, Major, Ulcombe-place, Maidstone ..........
Pesbes, Gir Chastes, Bart. «oo 2c ccccacccccesccsccsos Sh
Ford, Mrs., 123, Park-street, Grosvenor-square ......
Fradelle, H. J., Esq., 5, Brecknock-cres., Camden-town
Friedlander, Rev. E. W., Clapham... ......0+++.+e0e
Mite Gis Bie GN 90 n0'00nccs cccccecccees
Friend, a, by Mrs. De Morgan ..........seeeeseeee


Dy Bir. Bilste 2. cscs ccccccccccccccsccces
p by Bir. Caperm occ ccc cccccscccsescccs


corre DO


~
fond


————-, per Mr. J. Ellick, 7, Canterbury-villas, Maida-
WEEE 0 00 cose asngcens cecs.0cccanchense gous


—
occ eo


o


co -


- OC = we:
ecco:


oc = w&


o


eoeooco


coco


—


— =


we


-_ ©


=


fo)


occ O°


‘


De, TE. v0 cade cn oecy ve io 090% 6Cbwieee enn sans


, H. T., Bog. ..,.. elheeiens a
Frere, J, Esq., Stamford- seeks, “Chiswick . acoe 10
Garnier, the Lady Harriet . oui —


Gibbs, D. A., Esq., ate Villas, on ‘Sim.
Gibson, A., Esq., Saffron Walden ,......eseseeeee02 1
Gill, W., Esq., 42, Inverness-road, Daseetiens.

Goff, R., Esq., 21, Kensington Gore


Goldsmid, Baron de, F.R.S. ........ cienewan
Goldsmid, Miss, St. John’s Lodge, Repeats. Park cee
Goldsmid, Miss C., St. John’s Lodge, Regent’s Park ..
Goodwin, R., Esq., Acton-place, Camden-road :
Gordon, J. A., Esq., Naish, Bristol . he dieaiewie eee
Gossett, Mrs., 3, ee ae Hyde pa 1
Grattan, Colly, Esq. occcccces

Green, Thomas, Esq., Chichester seeee

Gregory, Dr., Professor in the sh of (nburgh.
Grignon, the Rev. W.S., Brighton... oe


Halse, W. H., Esq., 22, Brunswick-square ...


Hamilton, W. H., Esq., Brighton .. ee 5
Hammersley, Charles, Esq., 25, Park- wanah, Portland-
place .. eeeees
Hands, J., Esq., - Sargon, Dake- anh, Gum
square ...... 5
Hankin, Mrs. Suen? Marlborough vice § "St. “John’s s
Hare, Lieut., Bath . ‘aaa ssnaseaseuee
Harrison, Leonard, me. Contene one coccsee ©
Hayman, S., Esq., Sidmouth . ee svoscese 8
Heath, H., Esq., 123, Bageware evel, West ceeeeses
Hebert, M., Paris ..... nceeesispeedmsasese  2o


Hennen, Mrs., Denmark- hill . - eoescess
Herring, Mrs. W., St. Faith’s- pears eth. easinenaae. >in
Herring, the Rev. Armine, Thorpe Rectory, Norwich .. 1
Hewes, J. T., Esq., East Lodge, East Greenwich......
Hicks, Captain, Bath .... Perererrrr tr rT
Hill, Mrs., Hanover Square ........eeeeeeecereeee O
Hoare, —, Esq., Deptford .. os coeceee
Hockley, ‘Mr. a abe aie Street, ity ‘enna’
Hodgson, Captain Ellis ......... atieseeoses &
Holland, James, Esq., 6, Laurie-terrace, » Slee Cross ee
Hollings, J. F., Esq., Leicester . - soe
Holtop, L., Esq., 4, Renibyleen, Piteoy-s oquwe ewes J
Horn, Mrs., Clapham-rise .......0000seeeeeeeees


i)


—


—


i)


—— we


—e t=


cou


ecco fo


oo


Ss


S


Houghton, W. N., Esq., 162, Bond-street :
Hudson, Captain, 5, Chesterfield-street, Liverpool ....

Hussey, Edward, Esq., Scotney Castle, Lamberhurst.. 5
Ishan, Sir Charles, Bart., Lamport Hall, Northampton.. 10


James, Captain, Littlebourne Rectory, Kent.......... 5


James, Captain John, nn da ohne ae 8
Janson, H. U., Esq., Pennsylvania Park, Batee.. 20
30


Jeaffreson, Mrs., 14, Green-street, Grosvenor-square ..

Jekyl, Captain, Bramley House, Guildford ... ee

Johnstone, F. G., Esq., Surgeon, Conduit-street...... 5

Jones, M. Lewis, Esq., 47, Conduit-street, Hanover-
square ...... éesaens


Jones, J., Esq., Peckham - eo ceccce 0
Kavanagh, Morgan, Esq,., 4, Charlotte- street, Paap.
square ..... .


Kingdom, W., Esq., ‘Reform Club... een . 10
King, the Rev. Dr., Master of Que s Coles ‘o-


bridge ....... cccccccee 10
Kinnard, H. J., Esq., leon Works, Falkirk : ,
Kiste, A., Esq., 37, Maddox-street ...... ase’ &
Knatchbull, the Rev. Dr. Smeethe Rectory, Kent... 2
Knight, C. Allinson, Esq., Duke-street, St. Samee' s.. 10
Lady, a, by Dr. Ashburner... .......--.eeeeseeeeees 1
Lang, W. S., Eeq., Glasgow ......cccccccsccccesce |
Langhorne, Mrs., Kingston, wee as denial at tne warebe
Langston, J. H., Esq., M.P. . 66 0006 cece secs os 108


Laurie, Dr. W. Forbes, esttite..
Law, Rev. Edmund, D.D., Chaplain t to ~ British Em.


Dasey, St. Petersburg sc cccccccccccccccsccee §&
Lloyd, W. W., Esq. 77, Snow-hill saa
Lloyd, —, Esq., Rockville, Roscommon, Sadan’. 5
Lloyd, Sten, 30, Dorset-square . cee


Louch, W. S., Esq., 12, Sutton street, t, Adelphi -- 10
Loverton, Mr., 26, Hertford-street, eet ocee
Lucas, Major, Newport-pagnel . Sédvovodcveces * ‘lh
Luxmoore, J. C., Esq., Alphington, Gene. ones

Lyle, W. G., Esq., 17, Bloomsbury-st., Bedford-s -square.. 10


So


Maclin, J., Esq., Surrey Square, Old Kent Road .... 0
Majendie, A., Esq., F.R.S., Hedingham Castle, Essex.. 5
Marshall, James G., Esq., Munk Coniston, Ambleside .. 50
Martineau, R., Esq., Edgbaston .. ..¢.. 06.5 eeebes


occ ev


wo


10
10


©:


esee


uo -— ©


_


—_


ou


Mason, Miss, Harmony Hall, Wilnthorpe, Westmoreland
Matthews, Miss, Wigton Hall, Cumberland .....
Maurice, Miss ......cccece
Mc Donald, Dr., Professor in oe: University “of ‘St.
pg ee rere
Meek, Captain .... 02.200 cece ‘
Melhuish, Mrs., 9, Bedford. ae, “Rea Sia —..
Miller, W., Esq., 4, Baker-street, London street
Brighton ....... eee
“ Milnes, Monckton, Esq., M. P., enw Bushs men és
Minto, Miss, 32, Cambridge-terrace ......
Miss » by Mr. Capern ...
Mitchell, George, Esq., Thonhdiiemnes, Islington.
Mitchell, Miss, 10, Abbey-place, St. John’s Wood ....
Mitchell, Mr., jun., PR énns caster acencees
Moffatt, George, Esq., M.P., Eaton-square ..........
Molesworth, the Dowager Lady, Lowndes-street ....
Moreton, Hon. Augustus, 8, Great Cumberland-place. .
Morgan, Mrs. Angustus de .....2cccscccscccsctees
Muskett, Mrs., en
Mowatt, J., Esq. . ee ce cece secs ceccccece
Myers, I. J., Esq., Peete... 00s pes 00 6640 0000


eee eee eee eee ee eee


Newnham, W., Esq., Surgeon, Farnham ...........

Nicoll, Mrs., Hendon .. doves cieuse

Nicholls, H. F., Esq., Bridgewater .

Nottage, George, S., Esq., 67, Upper Thames- ann.

Noyes, Sarah Ann, (a servant cured by Mesmerism after
all other means had failed) ...


Opening of the Donation-box (1852) .......0..see0e08
——_———— Donation-boxes (1853) ..........0+5
Ormerod, Miss, 7, Oriental-place, ar ercanenes
Ormerod, E., Esq. . . eccceceee
Ormerod, H. E., Staten College, Oxford.


Page, A., Esq., Dover......seesescsssreecescveces
Paget, Lady . oeee 09 O88 cb.c0cs eo cccsceeece
Paine, J. M., n. ‘Sede. ea “a
Parks, Mrs., 1, Westbourne- seaietaantin ‘Paddington. .
Parker, Mr., Mercer-street, Long-acre.........+ ++
Partridge, Dr., York-place, Portman-square. . praete
Patten, H., Esq., 50, Berners-street .......+eeeeee0s
Paul, the Rev. C. K., Oxford... oc ccescccccecs cece
Pearson, Miss, 22, Upper Baker-street ....... eee
Pearson, Miss A., 22, Upper Baker-street.........++-
Pearson, the Misses, 22, Upper Baker-street


1 0
1 0
22
4 0
5 0
5 0
2 2
i
» 3
:<
ss
5 5
g. 3
3 0
27 13
1 0
0 10
0 10
2
1 0
1 0


ee


oo


coown


n=


~


—e w=


0


eoce


oo


Dons. Ann. ’
£8. d. £ s. d.
Phipps, Miss, niece of the Misses Brine. . ccoscee & O @
Penrice, David, Esq., Surgeon, Thorpe, near » Norwich... 1 1 0
Pettit, James, Esq., 16, Allsop-terrace, New-road .... 1010 0
Preston, Miss Jane (a small donation from an obliged
patient of H. U. Janson, Esq., in grateful acknow-
ledgment of his kind services)..........s-+-+. 15 0 0....1 0 0
Purland, Theodosius, Esq., Mortimer-street, Cavendish-


BQUATE ocr cccccccccsccsccnccessecsceeses 2.8 ¢@
RB. G. oc ccceee s 8-4
Rhynhart, Sengh, an. 9 ‘21, Great Gum aout, | Hol-

born . ee
Riviére, Frederick, ae 95, ‘Gt. Seats Bedford.

square ..... eo bees coeceess : 24
Robertson, Rev. T., Blandford-s “square ....... ee
Robertson, —, Esq., Editor of Mechanic’s Magusins . $3 8
Robinson, A., Esq., 5, Woburn-square. . occcces i a
Roth, Dr., Old Greet ete av sau caceovas.cves 110
Ruck, J., Esq., Clapham ......-0cessccceccvccees 110


Salmon, James, Esq., Red Lion-street, Holborn ...... a 28
Sandby, Rev. G., Flixton, Suffolk...............55. 5 0 0....1 1 0
Sandby, Mrs., ditto. sorb 110
Saunders, S. D., Esq., ‘1, ‘Deusen Cottage, Clifton eee 10 0
Scarlett, Captain the Hon., Scotch Fusileer Guards.... 5 5 0....1 1 0
Scripps, Mies, Bromley .. 0... 0scccccccccscecccces a oe
Schonburg, the Prince of, Dresden. . ccoccccesee 8 0
Selfe, S., Esq., a * ccccccccccccccccccoese | 1 O
Shackleton, E., Esq. oc ssesecee 1 1 0
Shaw, T. A., Esq., Lincoln’s s-inn- n-fields .. ee 12 0 0
Shepherd, Miss, North Heddon Cottage, Menguties.<. 2 @ &...3 6 8
Shepherd, G., Esq., Claremont-place, Dover ........ ae a
Simpson, Dr., York.. eee ass BH O60 C
Simpson, Mrs., 21, Gloster- wont Portman-square a
Sims, C., Esq., Hubbard’s Hall, Harlow, Essex . io. ee @
Sims, Rev. H. B., Great Parndon Rectory, na «--» 1010 0O
Skipper, H., ree -» 16, Park-place Villas, Maida-hill,

West.. ee coccoce 1010 @6....58 & O
Slade, Edgar, be. 3, ‘ene on, ee Sonieaten.. 110
Smith, Hubert, Esq., St. Leonards, Bridgnorth ...... 1 1 0
Smith, Wm. G., Esq., jun., 2, Deptford-bridge ...... 1 1 0
Smith, Miss, Champion-hill, Camberwell ............ 1 0 0
Smith, Mrs. G., GAD. cv cccccece cscs ctsccesess  s |
Smyth, Isaac, Esq., Acton . es i hetewe bees . b@
Snee, —, Esq., Giideeteon, iets. (bbe iseabees 2 8
Sneed, Sou Esq., 1, Beresford-terrace, Walworth.... 010 6


=>


Snewing, —, Esq., Kenilworth-lodge, Kenilworth .... 1 0


9


Trevelyan, A., Esq., Wallington, Morpeth eececesoes


Dons. Ann. Subs.
8. d. £ «8. d.
Snewing, C., Esq., eee mete is sea —
park . ‘ ee oss 8 §& O38 2 6
Snewing, Mrs. C., “ditto ‘ditto eo once s&s
Snewing, W., Esq., Wells-street, Oxford-street . 1 0
Spedding, Miss, Mirehouse, Cumberland . ~ eo @
Spicer, H., Esq., 100, Mount-street, Guemeemen 5 &@
Spiller, Joel, Esq., Bridgewater .. oes sseseteoes z.4.46
+ Stanhope, Earl, Chevening, rat die ene § 5 0
Stapleton, Captain W. P., saenenenacieee Sidmouth 8 €.H8 8 Fe
soneaeeeene vinwe wee
bibods wend - 50 0 0
Stapleton, —, Esq., Ballingtore iabet 110
Steele, C. W., Esq., Surgeon, Lewisham . 110
Stirling, W., Esq., Glasgow ° - 10 0 0
Stringer, Mrs., Goudhurst, Kent sssetvdeweree EE OS
Stringer, Mrs., Ventnor, Isle of — jive 5 FE
Sullivan, J., Esq... eee se ceescece » 249
Swanneck, Miss, 27, Weems -square. . 1 1 0
Symes, Dr., Grosvenor-street. . 5 5 0
Symes, Mrs., ditto 110
Talbot, G., Esq., Honeybrook, Kidderminster........ es |
Tanner, Mrs., Blacklands, Calne, Wilts +e @. 0 0
Tanner, Mrs. no 200
Taylor, Thomas, Esq., 12, Duke- aanh, Borough. i. -2
Taylor, —, Esq., nd hall, Cumberland . « &4.6
Taylor, chatee, Esq. . . coves 0.90 86
Taylor, C., N., Esq., 4, Augen eam ‘Gray’ 8 ion. t 2-8
Thomas, Capt., Longearn, Carmarthenshire . ay oe el
Thompson, H. S., Esq., Fairfield-house, near York. ver 4 OG
Thompson, Mrs., ditto . ened woes $3 0
Thomson, Adam, Esq., 25, New Bond- oe ee nhwdee ga ¢
Tillet, Ann (a patient) .. oe 05 0
05 0
Tillerton, —, Esq., Masten. ss : AAG
Todhunter, Miss, 19, ashen-4mnem, iin : 2.8
Topham, Captain, Conservative Club.. coccee 5 O O
Topham, the Rev. Edward, Ticehurst, penta seen eds 2s 6
Towgood, Frederick, Esq., St. Neots, Hunts eee oe
Townsend, Mrs., 14, Upper Marylebone-street, her
child having been cured of white — of the
knee at the Infirmary . 3 2@:¢
Townsend, B., Esq., 5, Kidbrook- tith, Blackheath . 100
Townshend, Rev. C. Hare, Norfolk-street, Park-lane .. "10 , é4..8f 4
Travers, Miss H., Champion-hill ...........0 0000s .-e9
Trevelyan, Sir Walter, Bart. coves sereevecee & O O2..8 F SC


10


Trigg, Mrs. James, Westfield, Hoddesden ..
Truelove, Mr. 22, John-street, Fitzroy- anna. ‘
Tubbs, Ww. J.» — ° — —— Isle, , Cambridge.


Udall, Henry, Esq., Temple ..........eeeeeseeees
Underwood, W., Esq., Vere-street. .

Underwood, C., Esq., 13, Holles-street ,
Upjohn, T. R. S., — —_— 6, Cuticmunctin,


Von der Heyde, Mrs., Sydenham .........
Vernon, Mrs. Edward, Shrawley, Wenuteitie..
Vieusseux, F. T., Esq., 6, Gloster-place, Regent's 8-
VERE 0000 cece cece ce te sece cs cesccccecececesecs


Voltege, —, Esq., Victoria-square, Reading..........


W. G. W., Esq., Great Portland-street.........
Waleen, W. H., Esq., 6, Lodge-road, St. John’s Wood.
Wallace, Miss, 4, Russell-place, Fitzroy-square
Wallis, H., Esq., 64, Long-acre. . ° eves
Walton and Mitchell, Messrs., 24, Casio. puny eves
Walton, Mrs., 1, Blenheim-road, St. John’s-wood ...
Walton, Richard, cd Oak- ear Norfolk-road, St.
John’s-wood.. PITTETETITT RTE te
Wedgwood, Mrs........
Welsh, meted Esq., Harvington- aqme, » Hampstead
road .. ee
West, T., Esq., , Bastoee, 6, , Pump-< onan, Temple.
West, Mrs. eee Sees owes . ‘
White, General, Bath . ee ee evce ce ceee
Whitfeld, H., Esq., Suapie, Ashford. ee ccccceccecce
Whitear, Rev. W., Thornhill-square, Islington.......
Wilberforce, W., Esq., 51, Cadogan-place
Williams, Mrs. T. G., Hackney-road.. pb okies
Woods, —, Esq., 3, Newman-court, Cornhill coaeeeee
Woods, S., Esq., Walthamstow ..


Young, Mrs., Lymington........seeseseseeeeeecess 0


Walton and Mitchell, Printers, Wardour-street, Oxford-street.

==============================================================================

IN DEX.


PPS GUO oko 00 be 6h 0 ce seieccacecedesnceccsecedebsteee se
Meee Che Fessessed COMGWOE. oo 0 ccc ccesccccccccccccassecc es seceee
American document, disgraceful omission in

Anti-Glorioso on the conduct of the Clergy in the persecution of Witchcraft
British and Foreign Medical Review. .


exposure of the Quarterly Review


Archbishop of Dublin cured at once............


his suggestion of latent faculties ............++5:
Arnold, Rev. Dr., his belief in Mesmerism .. ....ccccccccscccccscccce
NE CUED 5 occ. 00 04-00 06 dn nd ok nt0s 4ead es O6eeeneneeee ns

Birch’s, Surgeon John, own epitaph for his folly

NED GION oc tccncecctoscencses

i SE, CD on on.tu Gite ae Abas BU eb ne Os Bipods Ned eeeeun


British and Foreign Medical Review, its confession to mesmeric cures ....


its appalling dishonesty............
Burq, Dr., on the use of Metals in Cholera... .......... 4. cece cece eens
Dn ccna bk 6 Seae ones en ewes

Capern, Mr., his cures .......-

Chase, Mr., his cure of Diseaseed Gums .... 2... 20 -.ccccceeesececees


of Palsy ......


Chilblains, pain of, cured .......... 000005

Si CD «5c n ce SONGS Adin Sheela Ae eee
Clark, Mr., his vain glory ............-+ eee

Clark’s, Sir James, fright .........

Clairvoyance, case. of, by Mr. Chase... .....0ccccsccccccccccccccees
S. D. Saunders....

Rev. C. H. Townshend

——— in dreaming, by Mr. C. H. Cottrel.......... 0.0. cee00e


——_—--————- occasional peculiarity of


428882


vi INDEX.

Page
College of Surgeons, its love of progress ........eececeereeeeeee 234
Conolly, Dr., his praise of Dr. Rose Cormack............0.++ 008 350
Coma cured 352
Constipation cured .......0cccccccccccccccccccsecccsccccscccs MAL, 169
Convulsions, Puerperal, benefit of Mesmerism in 235


Cormack’s, Dr. R., contempt of Mesmerism and the Archbishop of Dublin 350


Cottrel, Mr. C. H., instance of a Clairvoyant Dream ............-+000: 79
Cross-mesmerism 354
Deafness cured 207, 208, 377
Debility cured. . 142
Devil, said by the Abbé Nisseni to have » troughs t tobacco to vitae. 143
Diarrhoea cured .... , 141
Didier, Adolphe, his Clairvoyance..............sceececceeceececeses§ 79
Doctor of Divinity, his cures. . 223
Dreams, Clairvoyant, ancient accounts of... .... 6.6.0. cece cece ences 81
Ear-ache cured ... one ee 144
Ekins, Rev. Mr., on Mesmerised Water . 84, 350
Blephantiasis, 20 called, cured ..... cscs cccccccccocccccccccccecsecss S99
Elliotson, Dr., on Clairvoyance in Dreams ............+ 80
om the departed Bolelli... .. 2. co cccccscccccecceesess 191
—— cure of Epilepsy 240
i Pe ctenctcecetewatbecduseecsee Me
——-————— on the cruel treatment of Children ..................4. 244
—————— mischief of alcoholic drinks .. .. ........ 000. ceceuee 242
notice of Wood's Practice of Medicine..............404+ 254
reply to Sir James Clark ...........20.05 404
Epilepsy cured...... 45, 55, 210
Esdaile, Dr., his address to Congress .. 294
Eyes, Inflammation of, cured . “Pe 142, 384
Fall of man, an effect of, ieee by Dr. eee. 349
Faraday, Professor, can he never be wrong ? 320%
Forbes, Sir John, late Dr., his honour and praise.................. 352, 356
Fracture, great benefit in 56
Fradelle, Mr., his cure of Salivation...... 317
PO 6666 S000 cee cecenectce Mine 367
Gardiner, Mr. Thomas, his cures ..........s000es-eeeee0s+- 380, 384, 409
Gengulphus, Lay of, in Ingoldsby Legends .... 2.6.6... eee eeeees 18
ee Te es Wig MNT: 0.06 ae be ceie ce bess we cowsssceSanenns Ee


Gout, Rheumatic, cured.. ..


19, 20,


26


25,


INDEX.


Gregory, Professor, his view of an effect of man’s fall...
ee, NI, GU 06 06 00 6 085 60 ci 000s 66 ce ka nc bets Wee ee access 68
Hend, injury of, grent bemeGt tm ..oc.ccccccccccccsscccccicoseccsel’ SEB
I IN ia 0 i in chad bs bs evince eectascideseineees Bee
Hitchcock, Rev. Dr., his belief in Mesmerism............0.00-. 000008 53
Hudson, Captain, his successful labours ............eeeeeeeee0e+ 212, 270
Hypochondriasis cared ........scccccccsscvccccccccccccesccce 145, 208
Fi yatente CUEOE occ. cece cc cece cs cecwedeccenssececeescesceseesece 21
SaGicanery, Eamtom Mamnete on. occs ceiccccsss cccssesvecccsscocecs: SUM
Inflammation from an injury cured ........00ceeeeeeececceseeceeeee 29
IE bs on koi 606s oo be ca onda cn senk ss knee sand venue ee
BN GRMRIUD oo 0 6060 40 0s oe neindcs cacencecsovenssaseccssésance Ge
DREN CHIR. wo ce ccccccccceccecccesscaccceccs Say Ody Beep Obey Gee
Jackson, Mr., on Spirit-rapping and Table-moving..........++.++++2++ 412
Sis Fae CR ockcan ces 6h tte 60 ihdées acti Bee
SE, Tike, DD av ce cwrdwnens 6000 sabe aelckeecebeeenstoeenl ee
Lancet, its true remarks on Insanity doctors ........eeeeeeeeeeereeee 409
Laurie, Dr., cure of Epilepsy, with extraordinary circumstances ........ 45
Leader nowepape?, its folly 2... cc cccccccsccccccsccccccccscceses SOF
Lewchewans, their good breeding ...........0cccececsececescesccees 380
Lewes, Mr. G. H., his groundless dogmatism .. .... 0.0. sseeeeeeeeeeee 75
Raed, Bie. Wa, Whe GUUOR 6000 os aecccesccccccccecccsevecSscsacsese «SOD
Ragen, Gesebe 68, GORE. 6 6c cc ccccccccsscvvcslevcetsavepoecessbeyes. SO
Macaulay, Mr., his amusing self-sufficiency... ..........eeeeeeeeeeeeee 175
i Ses Ee GND 55 Srne kw un de bd 4s on as 2500 9N ORD Os Salen 30
Medical Times, its folly . er be da es Chee oh wk ok an ee


ieninauitietts Macbean . ocreeccesccssceseccccs mae
Moadical Corewdae. oc ccscccccccccscsccccccccccesescscccscescceses EO
Motals, their curative powers. .....csecccccccscccccccccccccccnccccs 148
Miles, Captain Paloomor, bis CGrOe 20 oc cc cccccccccccccccccscvcccces * OOO
Moore, Dr. J., epitaph for bis wisdom............seceeeeeeeesecssee 316
Mouat, Mr,, benefit of Mesmerism in ieee Convulsions. . .. . : 235
Neuralgia cured .........2+....++.++ 20, 21, 23, 28, 141, 208, 226, 227, 378
Norman, Mr., of Bath, his striking acuteness and knowledge............ 71
Od, etymology of the word 2.02.6 cccccccccccccseccccccccccccscses §6(§OD
Painless Operations .. 2.0.02. cccccccccccscccccccccccces SB, 56, 57, 307
Ballay CUtOd oo occ cess cesvcccs ccccccecsccccccoevecccsc cs Seep Map aee
Parker, Mr., his cures and painless operations ................ 53, 302, 352


Parker, Dr., in America, his barbarous and useless treatment of Epilepsy 240


Vili


Prevision

Psoriasis cured

Recapitulation of the contents of the ten first volumes
Reichenbach on the Od Force

Rheumatism cured


Salivation cured .


Sandby, Rev. A seth on Table-turning


Saunders, Mr., cure of diseased toe .......


Io bw ic oe sk beh 0d 02-46 Mawes ane


Scrofulous knee cured


Scott, Dr. W., his foul antimesmeric language


Society, Royal Medical and Chirurgical, its love of progress ............


Southam, Mr. George, his great penetration ............++


Spirit-rapping


its fearful effects


Sprained ankle cured at once... .. 2.2... 62s eee cee eee eeeeee


Spry, Dr., his barbarous experiments .......... 0+ cece ceeeeee


Sympathy of taste .........


Table-turning .. iia ‘ .-» 175, 185, 320, 324, 412 ~


Tobacco said to be white to naan wy the Devil
Toe, diseased, cured ....

Tooth-ache cured. eee :
Townshend, Rev. C. H., on Table-turning .


Tubbs, Mr., his cure of Constipation


GUND OE WUE xs hiica pe 00 ics 00 6c ur nsnectentsentenata


Voice, lost, restored


OD -.0 Ss <t.d0'pe onas'en bank en dems on seiekewoebe
Wakloy, Mir., his viodemes 2... 2. ccc cccccccccccecccsce
RU ee


Wells, Mr. Spencer, his fancied worldly wisdom ..............


What is Mesmerism ? reviewed
Wood, Dr., his admission and ignorance of Mesmerism .. .


Zoist, a list of the store of facts in its first ten volumes ...


101, 274, 329


50, 297, 306, 378


coos SAI
175, 320
76
297
23
387
234
357, 365
86, 412
366

377

248

21


143

71

145, 305
185

169

173

eee 54
304, 305
169, 185, 376, 432
84
252, 353
