THE ZOIST: A Journal of Cerebral Physiology & Mesmerism, and their Applications
to Human Welfare. Vol. X (April 1852 to January 1853).
Edited by John Elliotson. London: Hippolyte Bailliere, 219 Regent Street.
Public domain. Assembled from the five microfilm issue scans on the Internet Archive (sim_microfilm collection); no bound-volume scan of this volume is available.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. XXXVII.


APRIL, 1852.


I. On the Theory of Imagination as the cause of Mesmeric
Phenomena, and on money challenges in Mesmerism. By
Wit11am Grecory, M.D., Professor of Chemistry in
the University of Edinburgh. Communicated by Dr.
Elliotson.


‘* Dr. Davey cross-examined by Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.—Are you a contributor
to a work called The Zoist 7—I am.
‘* Do you believe in mesmerism ?—Most certainly, and so do all right-thinking
men.

‘Then any man who does not believe in mesmerism is not of sound mind ?—
He either does not think sufficiently, or is prejudiced.

‘* Do you believe in clairvoyance ?—I do, Sir.

**Do you believe that all right-thinking men believe in clairvoyance ?—I do.

‘* Have you ever effected any cure by mesmerism ?—I have cured three per-
sons by mesmerism who were insane.

‘* What is your definition of delusion ?—A belief in that which is untrue. I
don’t pretend to give a perfect definition of it, but that is the general definition.

‘* Now, for instance, I am not of a right thinking mind because I don’t believe
in clairvoyance ?—That is because you have not sufficient opportunity of inquiry.

‘* Mr. Serjeant Wilkins.—Never mind; I should not at all object to break a
lance with you upon that subject. But you say that the fact of my assertion that
clairvoyance is nonsense argues unsoundness of mind on my part ?

“ Witness.—To a certain degree (laughter).

‘Then you would say that every gentleman who advances the same thing is
to a certain degree of unsound mind ?

“* Witness.—His mental state is to be pitied ; he does not know what is true
(laughter).’’— Times, Jan. 14, 1852. Report of the Commission on the state of
mind of Mrs. Cumming.


“When doctrines essentially false, and which have been over and over again
proved to have a notoriously demoralizing tendency, are brought to bear upon
the realities of life, more especially upon the practice of the medical profession,
then indeed we are called upon with one voice of acclamation, to repudiate them
in the strongest terms; and, if necessary, by appeal to the public authorities.
Upon this principle, therefore, we are glad to observe that Dr. Davey’s unqualified
declaration in favour of mesmerism was the following day brought under the
notice of the magistrates at the Middlesex Sessions, when, after the annual report

VOL, X. B


2 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


of the visitors of the Hanwell Asylum had been read, ‘ Mr. P. Laurie rose and
said he wished to put a question of great importance to Mr. Rotch, the chairman
of the visiting committee of the Colney Hatch Asylum, and also to Mr. Wilkes,
chairman of the visiting committee of Hanwell, relating to one of their medical
officers, formerly at Hanwell, but who had been transferred to Colney Hatch.
He referred to Dr. Davey, and he saw that in his evidence before the Commis-
sioners of Lunacy, in Mrs. Cumming’s case, he stated his belief in clairvoyance
and mesmerism, and his opinion that every right-minded man entertained the
same belief, and that disbelief showed a want of sanity in a men (laughter), al-
though he perceived their feelings on the subject, from the manner in which the
statement had been received. He also stated that he had cured three persons
from insanity by mesmerism. As a public officer, entrusted with the sole care of
nearly 500 pauper lunatics, he thought the public had a right to know whether
such proceedings had been carried on in these asylums with the consent of the
visiting justices. Considering that they contained nearly 2,000 pauper lunatics,
many of them having no friends but the visiting justices, the public had a right
to know that these poor people had not been tampered with or eaperimentalized
on; and that these asylums were places of mercy, and not theatres for practising
these abominable delusions. Dr. Davey might believe in what he liked, but they
were the guardians of these poor persons, and he must confess it was most alarm-
ing to him to find a medical officer of one of the asylums expressing these opi-
nions, although he believed him to be sincere in what he said. He wished to
ask, therefore, whether the visiting justices were aware of anything of the kind ;
and whether or not the inmates of the asylum were liable to be tampered with or
experimentalized on, by any of these abominations ?’

“In reply to these very pertinent remarks, ‘ Mr. Wilkes expressed his satis-
faction that the inquiry had been made, and, on the part of the visiting com-
mittee of Hanwell Asylum, assured them that no experiments of the nature
alluded to had been announced to the committee, or had any such proceeding
been sanctioned by them. To the best of his belief they had neither been made
at Hanwell or Colney Hatch.’

‘* The assertion, that no such experiments have been reported to the committee,
does not appear to us, as we shall presently shew, satisfactory: nay, if the asser-
tion of Dr. Davey that he has cured insanity by mesmerism, be true (which we
do not believe), we do not perceive upon what principle he should withhold the
same curative measure at Colney Hatch as he adopted at Ceylon.”

“ Here is a physician who declares not only his unqualified belief in mes-
merism, and asserts that not to believe in clairvoyance indicates, to a certain
degree, unsoundness of mind, but who goes yet further and insists that cases of
insanity may be cured by mesmeric treatment.”

“* They (medical officers to our great public charities) should be known to
walk in the legitimate paths, and adhere strictly to the recognized, and, we may
emphatically add, orthodox principles of their profession. If instead of adopt-
ing this, the prescribed honourable course, the physician or surgeon at the head
of a large public institution should condescend so far to forget his trust as to
disseminate empirical doctrine—if he should set about teaching or practising mus-
MERISM, homeeopathy, hydropathy, or allopathy (!), he ought as sure to be de-
posed from his situation as any clergyman of the church of England, who may
take it into his head to declare from the pulpit his belief in the miracle of Prince
Hohenloe, or in the miraculous conception of Joanna Southcote. The cases are
precisely analogous. All the learned professions are founded and raised upon
fixed principles, and those dissentients who find it their interest to defeat and un-
dermine them by scattering spurious doctrines abroad, put themselves clearly
enough beyond the pale of the profession they originally adopted.”— Medical
Times, Jan, 24, 1852. Proprietor, Mr. Churchill, Princes Street, Soho.


To Dr. Elliotson.


Edinburgh, 17th December, 1851.
My dear Sir,—I enclose a paper which I have just written,


By Professor Gregory. 3


on the present state of mesmerism, especially with us, which
among the doctors and physiologists, including Brewster, who
lately alluded to the subject in a public lecture, is this :—
They admit, nay, consider it absurd to doubt, the facts
which have been most absurdly called biological, and which I
call those of suggestion, which, and which alone, some of
them have seen and tested, the subjects, as you know, being
in a waking and conscious, but somehow impressible state.
The very same facts as occurring every day in the mesmeric
state, they had rejected till about a year ago without enquiry.
Having admitted these facts, they ascribe them all to the
imagination, and as suggestion is employed directly, this may
pass, although it merely amounts to saying that the facts are
produced with the aid of a mental impression; how, or in
what manner, does not appear. Delighted with this fancied
explanation, they proceed to declare that all the phenomena
of mesmerism, including those of the sleep, are due to the
same cause, in so far as they exist at all; but they have not
studied these, they do not even know what they are, or they
could never ascribe to the imagination things with which it
has nothing whatever to do. The secret reason is, that they
thus fancy they escape the nauseous necessity of admitting
an external physical agent, the existence of which is as cer-
tain as that of electricity, as the commonest facts shew. The
first part of my paper is designed to shew how entirely ignorant
they are of the facts to be explained, which is no wonder,
since they have never looked at them. This, you will see, is
the position of Dr. Simpson, Dr. Bennett, and their followers.
The second part is devoted to the extermination of the
wretched fallacy of bank-note challenges, &c., one of which,
to the extent of £500, is ascribed, whether truly or not I
cannot say, to Dr. Simpson. He has never alluded to the
subject to me. There cannot be greater nonsense, and yet I
am every day bothered about this trash, even by those who
call themselves mesmerists, but who if they knew anything
of mesmerism, know nothing of logic or common sense.
Ever yours faithfully,
WitiisM Grecory.


The disputed question of mesmerism has now, in this
country, passed into a new phase of its progress. Not many
years ago, the whole of the facts alleged by mesmerists were
denounced as flagrant imposture and miserable humbug, be-
cause, in the opinion of the critics, they were impossible,
and to admit them would contradict all the laws of nature.
Every one must have heard, times out of number, the remark,

B2


4 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


that no absurdity could be greater than to believe that one
person could throw another into a state of sleep or coma,
simply by mesmeric passes or by gazing, with or without
contact. That one man should, by these or similar means,
or in any way whatever, be rendered subject to the will of
another, and incapable of resisting it, while yet able to rea-
son upon his condition, was said to be not only absurd, but
dangerous, as annihilating man’s free-will. No one but a
fool could believe that a mesmeriser had the power of causing
his patient to see with his, the operator’s, eyes, to perceive
his sensations, to think his thoughts. The notion, that the
patient could sympathize with persons with whom he was
placed en rapport, with or without contact, was only fit for
Bedlam. As to clairvoyance, in its various forms of vision
without the use of the eyes, vision through opaque bodies,
vision at a distance, introvision, intuitive perception of dis-
eases or of remedies, retrovision, and prevision, no doubt
could be entertained that the whole thing was the result of
imposture. Such, according to our personal experience, which
is confirmed by abundant recorded testimony, was the lan-
guage of sceptics of all kinds, and more particularly of medical
men, down to a very recent period. It is worthy of notice,
that those who proclaimed the above opinions most loudly
and most confidently had notoriously no practical knowledge
of the subject. They had not investigated it for themselves,
and felt secure in their position a priori, the most untenable,
surely, that men can occupy in questions of fact. Animai
magnetism had to pass through the stage of virulent opposi-
tion, without enquiry into its merits, and founded on a fore-
gone conclusion, which inevitably awaits all discoveries in
natural science.

But the scene has changed. Mesmerism has passed
through a large portion of that stage of its history; or rather,
a large part of mesmerism has left that stage, and entered on
anew one. How has this been brought about? Partly by
the slow, but sure agency of time; but chiefly because acci-
dental circumstances have led many who were previously scep-
tical, to see and examine for themselves certain facts, which
up to a recent period they had rejected without due enquiry.
The result has been, that these enquirers have seen those
facts, and now declare that it is impossible to doubt them.
The class of facts here alluded to is that which has most ab-
surdly been called Electro-biological ; and when Sir David
Brewster, in his recent address to the Philosophical Institu-
tion of Edinburgh, declared to his audience that these pheno-
mena must be admitted, he was ‘only expressing the senti-


By Professor Gregory. 5


ments of a large number of persons who, like himself, had
been little more than a year before, utterly sceptical as to
these very phenomena. But Sir David Brewster and many
other gentlemen had in the interval availed themselyes of the
opportunity of investigation afforded by the visits to Scotland
of Mr. Lewis and Dr. Darling, who exhibited the phenomena
in question on persons in the waking state.

Before proceeding further, it is necessary to state, that
every one of the phenomena exhibited by these gentlemen,
and also by many who imitated their modes of proceeding,
had long ago been described as occurring in the magnetic or
mesmeric sleep, and were quite familiar to all practical mes-
merists. They had been fully described in many works on
mesmerism, and had, along with the mesmeric sleep itself,
been unhesitatingly and without enquiry, rejected by many,
perhaps all of those sceptics who now admit them.

Moreover, it is to be noted, that all the experiments of
Dr. Darling, and all the public experiments of Mr. Lewis,
belong to the class of suggestive phenomena, in which the
operator, by command or by suggestion, directly and avowedly
acts on the mind or imagination of the patient. The pheno-
mena produced by thus acting on the imagination had, as
above mentioned, long been observed in the case of persons
in the mesmeric sleep. Nay, it will be found, on examina-
tion, that they had also been recorded as occasionally present-
ing themselves in persons in the waking state. The only
thing new, presented under the novel title of electro-biology,
was the remarkable fact, that the state in which command or
suggestion operates on the mind of the patient, may easily
be produced without throwing him into the mesmeric sleep.
This state is called the impressible state.

Such, then, is the general state of matters. There may
be produced in a large number of persons, whether as accom-
panying the mesmeric sleep, or in the waking condition, an
impressible state, in which the patient is subject to the ex-
pressed will, command, or suggestion of the operator, which
he cannot resist. His sensations, emotions, memory, fancy,
belief, his muscular movements and bodily sensibility, are all
completely under command. -This is now recognized as cer-
tainly true of persons who, in all respects, except the one to
which the command or suggestion refers, are wide awake, and
in full possession of their bodily and mental faculties. Of
course, those who have often seen and have been satisfied of
this, cannot hesitate to admit that it may also be, as it un-
doubtedly is, true in the case of persons in the mesmeric
state,


On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


Let us now consider for a moment what the facts are,
which are thus at last recognized, as occurring in the waking
state, after having been so long and fiercely denied as accom-
panying the mesmeric sleep.


I. The impressible state is produced in the patient by his
gazing fixedly at an object in his hand or elsewhere, and pos-
sibly, or even probably, in consequence of the concentration
of his thoughts, and the accompanying stillness. Or it may
be produced by the operator’s fixed gaze, while the patient’s
eye is also fixed on the operator. Or, further, it may be
found as a characteristic of the mesmeric sleep, however that
may have been produced. Or, finally, it may be found to
exist spontaneously in certain individuals. In the two first
methods it is, in all probability, induced by an internal change
in the patient’s nervous system, caused by what may be called
an appeal to the imagination, or, in other words, by the phy-
sical effects of fixed gazing on the nervous system of him who
gazes. When the mesmeric sleep occurs in consequence of
passes, gazing, or contact, the same explanation applies ; but
when that sleep is caused without any appeal to the imagina-
tion, as we shall see it may, we are not entitled to ascribe to
that cause the impressibility of the patient. Neither can we
do so in those cases in which the patient is naturally impres-
sible. But it is certain, that in the greater number of cases
the impressible state is produced by means of an appeal to
the imagination of the patient ; and when he is in that state,
the very character of the phenomena now to be described con-
sists in their connection with, and dependence on, the ima-
gination ; that is, on mental impressions made on the patient.
For this reason, we call them the phenomena of suggestion,
or suggestive phenomena.

Il. The impressible state being present, we find, in a
large proportion of cases, that the muscular powers of the
patient are entirely under control. The operator has only to
command, or to suggest, in a tone of firm conviction of his
power, that any muscle or series of muscles shall act or shall
be incapable of action, and the result follows. The patient
clenches his hand, and cannot open it ; or opens it, and can-
not shut it: he is compelled to sit down and rendered unable
to rise, or he must rise and cannot sit down. He is desired
to strike out at the operator’s face, but cannot touch it if the
operator tells him that he cannot; his blow falls short, or
passes to one side or other ; he is unable to perform that easy
act, but that only. He is rendered unable to pick up a bank-
note, which is his if he can only séize it; or when it is placed


By Professor Gregory. 7


in his hand, he cannot drop it if not permitted to do so. He
cannot jump on, but comes down before or behind, or to one
side of a handkerchief on the floor. His hand is laid flat on
that of another, back to back, or palm to palm, or the tips
of his fingers touch those of another, and in neither case can
he, if forbidden by the operator, take his hand away. If
commanded to move to a certain point, he will overcome any
resistance offered to him, or, if overpowered by many men
with main force, he will struggle till utterly exhausted. Or
again, if told that he cannot move, no inducement can pre-
vail on him to do so. His will is exerted, but its power is
gone, and he looks and feels, no doubt, very foolish. In
short, the command of the operator urges to instant and
powerful action, or utterly paralyzes one or any number of
the voluntary muscles, in spite of all the efforts of the patient.

III. His sensations are equally obedient to the operator.
In an instant his whole frame becomes insensible to pain,
nay, to touch; the sense of touch is annihilated, and as
quickly restored. Or, while the rest of his body is in its
usual state of sensitiveness, one finger, one hand, one arm,
one leg, or both, or the head, or any other part, is struck
with instant insensibility. When that member is pricked,
pinched, cut, or burned, he knows nothing of it, unless he
happens to look towards it, and at such a time a limb might
be cut off without his suspecting it, provided his eyes were
directed elsewhere. Any common object in his hand, a knife
or pencil for instance, becomes at the word of command, but
slowly and leisurely, burning hot or intensely cold, heavy as
lead, or light as air. The water he drinks becomes milk,
beer, wine, brandy, lemonade, punch, soda-water, syrup, or
wormwood, boiling hot or icy cold, according as he is told.
In a hot and crowded room he is made to shiver with cold,
and that so effectually, that in a few minutes his hand feels,
even to others, like that of one who has been kneading snow-
balls; or on a frosty day he feels oppressed with heat, throws
off his coat, is drenched in perspiration, flushed and hot to
the hand ; according to the orders of his tormentor.

IV. In like manner, his eyes deceive him. He takes a
piano-forte for a horse, a watch for a snuff-box, a man for a
child, a lady for a gentleman, a friend for a stranger, but
only in obedience to the suggesting voice. He will insist
that the clock before him marks half-past four, when the
hands point to noon, or vice versd, if told so. He will see
all manner of things and people before him, where none of
them are. He will see and bag, too, game, invisible to all
eyes but his. He will see a balloon rising from the floor, and


8 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


follow it with his eyes through the roof or window till it is
lost in the heavens; and he will likewise follow the aérial
voyage of Mother Bunch on her broomstick, or of Mephis-
topheles hurrying through the air to the Brocken on the back
of a goat. His ears are equally under control. At the word
of the operator, he hears the sweetest music, the loudest
thunder, or the most eloquent speech. And the same word
can render him both blind and deaf. He also smells the
snuff in a snuff-box, which is really a watch, and not only
smells it, but is thrown by it, if the operator calls it high-
dried Scotch or Lundyfoot, into a severe paroxysm of sneez-
ing and coughing, which we have seen last for fifteen or
twenty minutes. All the senses, in short, are subject to the
sway of the operator. It is useless to resist. The patient
knows and can tell you that he sees only delusive objects, or
hears delusive sounds, but still he cannot but hear, see, feel,
taste and smell, as he is commanded. In the case of expe-
riments on muscular motions, the patient often makes super-
human efforts to resist, but finds it all in vain.

V. The memory of the patient is completely under the
control of the operator, at whose command the puzzled victim
in vain tries to recall his own name, or that of the operator,
or those of his relations and friends. In like manner he finds
himself unable to recall a single letter of the alphabet, and
his countenance, while trying to do so, is ludicrously ex-
pressive.

VI. The operator can call up any emotion, by the same
simple command. Fear, anger, grief, pride, pugnacity, laugh-
ter, &c., are in turn vividly felt and exhibited, in spite of
the utmost resistance on the part of the patient, who may
in the course of a few minutes be drowned in tears and sore
with laughter. He may be made to believe any assertion,
and to act in consequence, to quarrel with a bystander for a
supposed affront, to fancy himself to be any individual named,
and to act and speak in character ; to engage in any occupa-
tion suggested, such as fishing, shooting, tailoring, painting,
singing, spouting, swimming; to take shelter from a storm,
and swim for his life in the flood; to fly for safety from a
bear, a lion, or a snake; and to become, after drinking water
as whisky, so helplessly drunk as to exhibit even the unplea-
sant physical consequences of inebriety, to stagger and fall
on attempting to walk, and in some cases to be with difficulty
sobered after a considerable time, his intoxication apparently
interfering with his impressibility.

VII. Lastly, the operator can cause his patient to fall
into a quiet (not somnambulistic or mesmeric) sleep, in one,


By Professor Gregory. 9


two, or more minutes, according to the command, and in
spite of all his efforts to keep awake. In this sleep, the
patient neither hears nor answers any one except the operator,
when the latter says, “ Awake!” Nay, the loudest noises
at his ear, as well as pulling, shaking, pinching, &c., fail to
awake him, till the magic word is spoken, or the allotted
time has expired.


Such are the facts, the phenomena of suggestion, which,
under the name of electro-biology, are now admitted to occur
in persons in the waking but impressible state; and many
more, analogous to these, might be mentioned. All those
above described have been witnessed by hundreds, by thou-
sands of intelligent persons; we ourselves have often seen
every one of them.

Surely we have here a body of most striking and won-
derful phenomena, worthy of our best attention, were it only
from the obvious benefit to be derived from the application of
this power of suggestion to the purposes of medicine and
surgery. How grateful will not many be for the boon of
compulsory sleep, or for that of insensibility to pain in the
limb to be operated on, without the necessity of losing con-
sciousness !

Now, observe, that the very persons who have recently
seen and admitted these wonderful facts, had for many years,
without enquiry, denied and rejected the whole of them, as
described by mesmerists, that is, as occurring daily in the
mesmeric sleep. Had they examined for themselves the phe-
nomena of that state, they would have found the same facts
to be true long before electro-biology was heard of.

But the facts being admitted, what is the explanation of
them? Here the recently converted sceptics are quite ready
with an answer. They are caused by the imagination. If
you ask them, what is the imagination, the reply is not quite
so ready, but it appears to mean, that the facts are the result
of a change in the nervous system of the patient, which
change is caused by a mental impression. Now, admitting
this explanation, and, in spite of its vagueness, we do not
feel disposed to deny it, surely the knowledge that such won-
derful effects may be produced by the imagination is not only
new but of great practical value.

But if we ask, further, how the imagination acts in pro-
ducing these results? how it happens, that a man’s hand, his
foot, or his memory is paralyzed by acting on his imagina-
tion? how his imagination acts in subjecting him to the will
of another, or in making him see imaginary objects as real,


10 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


and real ones different from what they are, or taste water as
wine or tea? we think it will be found that this boasted ex-
planation amounts only to this, that the patient’s mind is
appealed to, and somehow concerned in, the matter. But it
is difficult to see how this should diminish the value of the
phenomena, as physiological and psychological facts. In
short, we may admit this explanation, which amounts to de-
claring that suggestive phenomena are phenomena of sugges-
tion, a proposition which we trust no one will be found hardy
enough to dispute.

Here, however, arises another question ; namely, are all
mesmeric phenomena suggestive? It would appear that the
formerly sceptical physiologists, who now admit the pheno-
mena above described, are of this opinion, and having found
the imagination a key to the facts which they have seen,
conclude that it must suffice for all the rest, which they have
not seen, for all the forms of sympathy and clairvoyance so
far as these may be true. But this is not quite so clear.
Have these gentlemen studied the facts? Have they found
that in these, as in those of suggestion, the mind or imagi-
nation of the patient is always appealed to? We rather think
not, for we, who have examined them, have met with nu-
merous facts in the production of which suggestion has no
share whatever. How then does it happen, that they, who
have not even seen these alleged facts, are so easily satisfied
on this head? We rather imagine that it is because the ima-
gination theory which we admit to apply, and have ourselves
applied, to the phenomena of suggestion, (although it hardly
explains them quite satisfactorily,) will enable them, if ex-
tended to all the phenomena, to get rid of the obnoxious
idea of an external physical agent, or, as it is called, a mag-
netic fluid. But we need hardly say, that if this is to be
done at all, it can only be by a careful study of all the facts,
and by proving that all are equally dependent on mental im-
pressions. We shall now proceed to examine this part of the
subject.

The first remark we would make is, that, even in those
experiments in which an appeal is made to the imagination
of the patient, by command, suggestion, or otherwise, the
best cases are not those in which a lively imagination is ob-
served. On the contrary, persons of a very lively and excit-
able temperament are less easily operated on, and the best
subjects are those whose minds are sluggish and passive. We
do not mean to say, that the latter are not impressible, and
easily impressed ; but that a vivid imagination is an obstacle
to impressibility, rather than a help to it. All experienced


eee


By Professor Gregory. —


magnetizers know this, and find, in consequence, a larger pro-
portion of impressible subjects among illiterate peasants than
among persons of active intellect and high imaginative powers.

But, secondly, many phenomena occur in which no appeal
is made to the imagination of the patient. Thus, for instance,
infants, sleeping persons, and animals, may be strongly af-
fected by gazing or passes without contact. Dupotet states
that sleeping persons are peculiarly susceptible to magnetic
action. We have seen sleeping children and sleeping animals
strongly affected by gazing, as well as by passes without con-
tact. The report of the Committee of the French Academy
of Medicine (reporter, M. Husson) in 1831, which Mr. Col-
quhoun has published, not only admits the fact that physical
magnetic effects are produced without the knowledge of the
patient, and consequently without appealing to his imagina-
tion, but actually deduces from the fact the logical inference,
that the theory of imagination, proposed in the report of
1784, is quite inadequate to explain it.

Thirdly ; it is a matter of frequent experience with prac-
tical magnetizers, that persons who have at first been thrown
into the mesmeric sleep by the usual processes, and who ex-
hibit a high degree of susceptibility, may be put to sleep
without their knowledge. We have ourselves seen and done
this, and cannot entertain a doubt of the fact. Nay, it has
happened frequently, and on one occasion at least in our own
experience, that when the mesmeriser has been acting on one
patient, another patient, in a different room, and not aware
of this, has not only experienced the influence, but has been
put to sleep. When this happens, it is frequently observed
that the effect on the patient actually operated on is dimin-
ished, or altogether neutralized.

Fourthly ; blind persons may not only be acted on and
put to sleep, but this may be done without their knowledge.
Dr. Esdaile mentions an instance of a blind man, whom he
could at any time throw into coma without his having any
idea that he was acted on, and this not only through a wall,
but at the distance of 80 yards. We have ourselves seen a
blind patient strongly affected, nay, put to sleep by our silent
gaze, while he was engaged in conversation with another
person. The same patient, while conversing, has also been
put to sleep by another operator, who was trying at some dis-
tance, unknown to the blind man, to put another to sleep.
This we have seen, and the same patient could distinguish,
when thus accidentally or unexpectedly affected, the person
whose influence put him to sleep, by the very different sensa-
tions he experienced from the two operators.


12 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


We see, therefore, that the mesmeric sleep may be pro-
duced without any appeal to the imagination. We might
add another proof of this, namely, the fact that, in some
susceptible cases, magnetized or mesmerised water will pro-
duce the sleep, totally unknown to the patient ; while unmag-
netized water, if given as magnetized, and therefore aided by
a direct suggestion, will fail to do so.

And this leads us to consider the phenomena of the sleep,
once produced, whether by a direct appeal to the imagination,
that is, with such an appeal, or without it, as we have seen
it may be.

This mesmeric sleep, in one stage, is identical with spon-
taneous somnambulism, and it is well known that the recorded
cases of sleep-walking (see Colquhoun’s Jsis Revelata, and his
translation of Wienholt’s Lectures) afford many proofs of the
existence of powers unknown to the waking state. New
senses, as it were, are developed, and influences are perceived
and recognized, by which the same persons, if awake, would
not be affected. Taking, here, artificial somnambulism, the
first fact we would adduce is the power of instantly and with
certainty distinguishing water, or any other object, which has
been mesmerised or magnetized, from such as has not. If
a glass of water be mesmerised by the hand or breath, or
magnetized by a magnet, or by a crystal, or by a current of
electricity, or by means of a wire connected with substances
in a state of chemical change, &c., &c., and if this glass be
placed among any number of others, exactly similar, except
that they have not been so acted on, and all this in the ab-
sence of the patient, he will, without hesitation, pick out the
mesmerised glass from all the rest. This simple experiment
we have tried very often, with every precaution, and have
never seen it fail, although there may be some persons
who, in the sleep, do not possess this power. Nay, it has
been shewn by Reichenbach, that many sensitives possess the
faculty of distinguishing mesmerised water even in the natural
waking state.

Now, we maintain that this one experiment is alone suffi-
cient to prove that there does exist a something external,
whether we call it a fluid, an influence, an imponderable, or
a form of motion, which may be communicated by the human
hand to water, and if to water, then to other substances, in-
cluding the human nerve. But it also proves that there are
facts beyond the reach of the imagination theory ; for here,
not only is the imagination not appealed to, but if we try to
mislead the patient, he detects the truth, in spite of our sug-
gestion or appeal to his imagination. We recommend to


By Professor Gregory. 13


those who now so loudly cry out that all mesmeric phenomena,
as well as those called biological, are produced by the imagin-
ation, to try this experiment, as we have done, before they
make so sure of their explanation. It has been tried by
others, times out of number, and, in our humble opinion, it
demonstrates the existence of physical emanations perceptible
by the sensitive nerve, and capable of passing from one person
to another. It is a fundamental and most important fact,
easy of verification.

The second fact we would mention, as bearing on this
question, is that of the existence of luminous emanations
from magnets, crystals, the human face, hands, and breath,
and in a lower degree, from all natural objects. These lumin-
ous emanations are visible in the dark to many waking sensi-
tives. We know of one lady, who perceives them so brightly
and so constantly, that she is afraid to sleep in the dark ; and
we know many, who see them from magnets, crystals, or the
hand, All persons in the mesmeric sleep, so far as our ex-
perience goes, see them, and the more sensitive perceive
those of magnets, crystals, and the hand or face, even in day-
light. And so far is the imagination from having any share
in this phenomenon, that it is hardly possible to throw a
person into the mesmeric sleep, without having our attention
called by the patient to these luminous emanations. And a
few cases will soon convince the enquirer that these sleepers
describe a real external phenomenon ; for each spontaneously
gives his own account of them, and never fails to notice the
bluish tinge of the light at one pole or on one hand, and the
reddish tinge on the opposite one; as well as, in the case of
great power in the magnet, crystal, or hand, or extreme sen-
sitiveness in the patient, the occurrence of all the rainbow
tints at both poles; red, however, predominating at the posi-
tive, and blue at the negative pole. An ingenious writer in
the North British Review has attempted to explain the beau-
tiful general agreement of numerous observers, by the sup-
position that the luminous appearances described by them are
altogether imaginary, excited, it is to be presumed he thinks,
by suggestion acting on a very excitable nervous system.

Now we do not hesitate to say, that such an agreement,
occurring, as it has done in the experiments of Reichenbach,
in at least 100 different waking sensitives, the majority of
whom were healthy and who were not subjected to leading
questions, but left to tell their own story, and who, in a per-
fectly dark chamber, followed in their descriptions the changes
caused in the light by moviug the magnets, or approaching
other bodies to them; or in tie light from wires, which, out-


14 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


side of the room, were alternately in contact with, and sepa-
rated from, magnets, crystals, hands, metals, heat, light, elec-
tricity, chemical action, &c., &c., &c., cannot logically be
attributed to anything but the existence of a real, external,
physical fact. To suppose otherwise, is to admit a degree of
coincidence in the fancies of 100 dreamers, which we do not
hesitate to pronounce absolutely impossible, both physically
and morally. And when we find the observations of these
waking sensitives confirmed by all mesmeric sleepers, without
the slightest knowledge of what others have observed, and
without any questions, leading or otherwise, being asked, we
regard the evidence of the external, objective, existence of
these luminous emanations, and consequently of their cause,
as thoroughly established. Nor must we forget that we have,
in the sensations already spoken of as caused by mesmerised
water, &c., an additional body of evidence to the same truth.

The third fact we shall adduce is also observed in the mes-
meric sleep, but is known, too, as a spontaneous phenomenon
in the waking state. We allude to that extraordinary sym-
pathy with another person, by which the patient perceives all
the sensations of that other person. There are many suscep-
tible sleepers, who, if they be in contact with the hand of
another, will instantly tell what sensation, painful or other-
wise, that person feels, and this, by feeling the same on the
same spot themselves. If a person hold the sleeper by one
hand, and the other hand of the operator be pinched, pricked,
cut, or burned, unknown to the sleeper, the latter not only
feels it, but complains loudly of the injury, and fixes at once
on the suffering spot. This we have seen and tested very
often. But a still more remarkable fact is, that whatever the
experimenter tastes is also instantly perceived, and often
named. Nay, we have seen a sleeper suffer acutely from
nausea when the other tasted a nauseous drug, without any
suggestion whatever, nay, although it was said, loud enough
to be heard by the sleeper, to be sugar, or an orange, or a
fig, &e. Such facts evidently prove the existence of sym-
pathy or community of sensation by contact, and we cannot
form any idea of their causes which does not imply a physical
influence, or at least an external influence, acting on the
nervous system of the sleeper.

But when we see the very same results, as we may see in
some peculiarly susceptible cases, occurring without contact,
this conclusion is as it were rendered palpable and irresistible.
We have seen the sleeper feel and taste everything felt and
tasted by the operator, while the latter stood at several yards
distance, and was concealed from sight, had the sleeper’s eyes


By Professor Gregory. 15


been open, by a door or wall. This fact has very often been
observed and recorded; and it has often happened that the
sleeper has felt and described accidental pains or sensations
of the operator, and has drawn attention to the fact. Here
again, the imagination theory fails, and we are compelled to
admit an external influence.

The fourth fact is this: the sleeper will often exhibit, as
indeed many waking persons do, a strong antipathy to certain
objects, and to certain persons, and will at once detect their
approach in spite of every precaution. We have often seen
a magnet thus detected, and we have seen a still more striking
instance of it in the case of a large globe of glass, between
three and four inches in diameter. One sensitive sleeper
would invariably detect this globe, by the disagreeable sensa-
tions it caused, as soon as it came within a certain distance
of her, whether in front, laterally, from behind, or from above,
and would try to escape, whatever might be her occupation.
And if it were brought within an inch or two, especially of
her head or hands, she would begin to complain of it, and be
struck dumb and rigid before she finished her sentence. We
took every precaution possible, concealed the globe before
she entered the room, never alluded to it, but spoke of other
matters. In vain. If concealed near her, she was sure to
discover it, and if prevented from removing, became rigid all
over. We saw also a strong effect produced by it on a pow-
erful mesmeriser, who experienced such unpleasant sensations
from holding it near his face, that we could not induce him
to repeat the experiment. It had nearly sent him to sleep.
But we managed to conceal it on a sofa on which he sat, on
another occasion, and soon perceived that he was uneasy. At
last he changed his place, and on subsequent enquiry told us,
that he had done so because he felt the same unpleasant sen-
sations as when looking at the globe. Similar facts are very
frequent with ‘mesmeric sleepers, and it is well known that
many persons, in the waking state, have strong antipathies to
certain animals or minerals, or plants, and can detect these
if ever so carefully hidden. Many persons have been able to
tell that a cat was concealed in the room or the house, by the
painful sensations it caused them. Liston the comedian was,
as we have been told, one of these. It is, we think, impos-
sible to account for such facts, except by admitting the exist-
ence of an influence or emanation, capable of passing from
one body to another. At all events, suggestion has no share
in them. Were we to hazard a conjecture on the subject, it
would be that suggested by Reichenbach, namely, that the
influence in question being polar, but in all objects one pole


16 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


exceeding the other in power, each individual has his own
place in the scale, being more negative than some, and less
negative or more positive than others. Now in the case of
polar forces, it is well known that like repels like, and that
opposites attract each other. If therefore the emanations of
a cat be highly negative, antipathy will be felt by a person in
whom the negative influence also predominates, and sympathy
of the positive influence prevail; and vice versd. In most
cases, the two opposite poles are in an average condition, and
no marked effects ensue. But it is very probable that in the
sleep the balance is disturbed ; hence the sensitiveness of the
sleeper to such bodies as have exalted polarity.

Fifthly ; it is a well-ascertained fact, which we have fre-
quently verified, that persons in the mesmeric sleep are af-
fected in a peculiar manner by certain metals, while the
action of other metals is quite different. Thus, one sleeper,
if gold be brought in contact with her hand, or even into
close proximity with it, is so strongly acted on that her fingers
are firmly clenched and become so rigid, that the hand cannot
be opened by force. And this occurs, not only without her
knowing what the metal is, but when she is allowed to sup-
pose it to be another which has no such action. If now,
without the patient’s knowledge, steel be substituted for the
gold, the hand is gradually relaxed, and even before this
takes place, she detects the change without contact by the
sensation produced. Here again the imagination is not con-
cerned in producing the result. Cases of this kind are very
frequent.

In the sixth place; we have often seen persons in the
mesmeric sleep, who could see and describe correctly what
was done behind them, or otherwise out of the range of their
vision had their eyes been open, whereas their eyes were fast
closed, turned up, so that when forced open only the whites
were visible, and moreover insensible to light. In other
words, we have often seen and tested the fact of vision with-
out the use of the external eye. This fact is observed in
natural somnambulists, and the evidence for it will be found
in a clear and compendious form in Wienholt’s Lectures on
Somnambulism, translated by Colquhoun, independent of ar-
tificial somnambulism. When a person with closed and in-
sensible eyes perceives, both in daylight or in the dark, and
sleep-walkers often do so better in the dark, the objects which
surround him ; when his motions and actions are readier and
more exact than in his waking state, nay, when he performs
feats of climbing, keeping his balance in dangerous positions,
writing, and various handiwork, which in his ordinary state


By Professor Gregory. 17


are beyond his powers, it is impossible either to ascribe this
to imagination, or to doubt that he has a peculiar means of
perception of external objects. And this implies some ex-
ternal influence:which finds its way to the sensorium com-
mune.

We have seen mesmeric sleepers, without the slightest
attempt to use their closed and insensible eyes, discover the
contents of sealed packets and closed boxes, either by putting
these on the head, or holding them in the hand, and some-
times by laying them on the epigastrium. We have seen the
contents, unknown to any one present, described with the
minutest accuracy. In Major Buckley’s remarkable experi-
ments, upwards of 100 highly educated persons have read
mottoes, enclosed in nuts and boxes, the nuts being procured
at various shops by different persons who were totally ignorant
of their contents. Hundreds of mottoes and thousands of
words have been thus read, and many of the readers have
never been mesmerised at all, but have found themselves
enabled to read the contents of the nuts, &c., by the aid of
a light which, when Major Buckley made passes over his own
face, and perhaps over the nuts, rendered them transparent
to these readers. Can any one suppose that imagination will
explain these facts? And is not the natural conclusion from
them, namely, the existenee of an external influence, greatly
fortified by the testimony of Major Buckley’s subjects to the
luminous emanations ?

We have ourselves seen the substance of the contents of a
closed letter, unknown to ourselves, and the name of the
writer, deciphered in an instant by a sleeper, who placed it on
her head, and who could not read. The letter had that mo-
ment arrived, and was totally unexpected, and, as we were
then trying some experiments on the sleeper, we asked her,
before looking at the letter, whether she could tell me any-
thing about it. She gave me at once the whole substance of
it with perfect accuracy. Whatever may have been the
means by which she acquired this knowledge of its meaning,
imagination at least was not concerned ; and the very remark-
able nature of the letter no one could by any possibility have
guessed. But this patient was always extremely susceptible
to the influence of handwriting, and could accurately describe
the writer of any letter shewn to her.

Seventhly : we have also frequently seen persons in the
mesmeric sleep who described, with perfect accuracy, things
and persons at a distance, whether in another room, another
house or street, or at greater distances still, to the extent of

VOL. X. c


18 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.,


300 or 400 miles. Some did this with the aid of the writing
or hair of the absent person ; some obtained the trace of the
absent from persons present ; some from knowing the absent
themselves. But in all cases they had a more or less vivid
vision of the place and of the people in it; and in all those
we have studied there was convincing evidence that they did
so, having once obtained the trace or clue, independent of
thought reading. They uniformly stated some facts, after-
wards confirmed, which were either unknown to us or to any
one present, or even contrary to our firm belief; and, when
they persisted in their own account of a fact, they were
always right. No doubt some of these persons possessed the
power of thought reading, even when they did not use it: but,
granting, for the sake of argument, what is impossible, that
they learned all they knew by thought reading, is that less
wonderful than vision at a distance, or is it more explicable
by the imagination? Nay, is not thought reading itself
vision at a distance, and through opaque bodies too? Surely
our mind or its organ, the brain, are not in contact with that
of the sleeper, and, if in communication with it, this can only
be through some external medium, such as is implied in the
facts previously adduced. And, admitting such a medium,
distance is a matter of as small importance as it is in the case
of light, electricity, or gravitation. But, whatever be the
true explanation of the facts, and they are facts which every
patient enquirer can verify, they cannot be explained by the
theory of imagination. For the sleeper evidently perceives
for himself, and, in spite of suggestion, or of leading ques-
tions, or of direct contradiction, adheres to his story, and, as
we have often seen, is found to have been right. In the Ap-
pendix to Mr. Colquhoun’s historical work on Magic, Witch-
craft, and Animal Magnetism, just published, will be found a
very beautiful case of vision at a distance in a young lady of
Edinburgh, the operator being a gentleman of high character
and literary standing, who, before he mesmerised this young
lady on that one occasion, had never even seen one person in
the mesmeric sleep. In that case the sleeper was found
right on disputed points. We ourselves have seen, within
the last six or seven months, and repeatedly tested, three or
four most interesting cases of the same kind, in which the
same fact presented itself. And we have also lately seen a
sleeper thoroughly blindfolded play cards, beating all oppo-
nents, dealing more rapidly than they, and reading their
hands as easily as her own. We confess ourselves utterly at
a loss to perceive how imagination, granting it to have pro-


By Professor Gregory. 19


duced, or to have had a share in producing the mesmeric
sleep, can explain facts like these, which, we repeat, are well
established facts.

Eighthly: we have also had frequent opportunities of
seeing the interesting facts of medical or rather physiological .
and pathological intuition. We have heard uneducated per-
sons, in the mesmeric sleep, describe in their own language,
which although not technical was usually superior to their
waking speech, the structure and functions of their own
bodies, in a manner truly striking. We have seen them do
the same for persons en rapport with them, and point out
with singular accuracy the weak or diseased parts, so as to
astonish those who best knew the truth. We have seen this
repeatedly done, in the absence of the persons whose symptoms
were described, from their hair or handwriting, and, in one re-
markable case, without farther aid than the name and resi-
dence of the sufferer. We have seen the sleeper go over the
whole of his own person, and point out, as he did so, the
parts in which pain was felt by the other party, whom he had
never before seen or heard of. We have seen two sleepers,
unknown to each other, give the same account of the cause,
the precise nature of the treatment, and the cure, of an acci- -
dent occurring at a great distance from either of them: and
their statements were in all points confirmed. One of these
sleepers was told that an accident had happened, but nothing
more. The other discovered it on being simply asked to visit
the sufferer, which she was in the habit of doing in her sleep.
The imagination theory is quite inadequate to explain these
and hundreds of similar facts, which are recorded by trust-
worthy observers.

We might go on to adduce many other varieties of mes-
meric phenomena, equally beyond the reach of that theory.
But this would be tedious, and is quite unnecessary. Those
already given are sufficient to establish our proposition, which
is, that, granting that the imagination suffices to account for
the phenomena of electro-biology, or, more correctly, those in
which suggestion is employed, there are yet many facts which
cannot be brought into that category. Those physiologists,
therefore, who, after having long denied the suggestive pheno-
mena, when observed and described by the cultivators of
animal magnetism, as occurring in the magnetic sleep, now
admit them under a new name, as occurring in the waking
state, are mistaken in supposing that the same explanation
applies, or can apply, to all mesmeric phenomena.

This mistake has arisen from their very imperfect and
partial acquaintance with the phenomena to be explained.

c 2


20 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


Had they studied the phenomena of the mesmeric sleep, as
they have those of suggestion in the waking state, and this,
as we know for certain, they have not yet done, they would
have been less confident in their theory, or at least in the ex-
tent of its application. And we cannot doubt that, when they
shall have done so, they will find themselves compelled to
acknowledge the existence of facts which that theory is
utterly inadequate to explain.

It is of no avail for them to deny the facts here adduced,
because they regard them as impossible, or because they can-
not bring them under their favourite hypothesis. Such con-
clusions, @ priori, and more especially when the alleged facts
have not been investigated by those who reject them, have no
logical value whatever. They denied also till a very recent
period the very facts which they now admit, and yet these
facts are true; nay, they were as true when described by the
mesmerists as occurring in the sleep, as they are now. We


know, in addition, that these particular phenomena may -


easily be produced in the waking state, but the phenomena
are identical. And surely those whose account of these truly
wonderful and long rejected phenomena are now found to
- have been accurate and faithful may expect that their state-
ments concerning other equally wonderful phenomena will
also, when examined, prove to have been equally faithful and
true to nature. Such, we predict with that confidence in the
truth which is given by the consciousness of earnest and
honest efforts to ascertain natural phenomena, will sooner or
later be the inevitable result. We cannot say what may ulti-
mately be found to be the true explanation or theory of those
facts to which we have drawn the reader’s attention, and of
many others which our limited space has prevented us from
detailing ; but at least we may say that, so far as our present
knowledge extends, the imagination theory will not supply
the desired explanation.

We may even go farther, and say that, had the phenomena
exhibited by Mr. Lewis been carefully studied, although
most of them belong to that class of facts in which direct
suggestion or command is employed, others would have been
noticed, not less certain, in which no suggestion was or could
be employed, and some in which it is difficult to see how the
imagination could produce them. This may be comparatively
easy in the case of voluntary muscles and voluntary actions,
although, even in these, the mere fact that the imagination is
appealed to is no proof that it is, but only that it may be, the
cause of the phenomena. But when the involuntary muscles
and motions are controlled, when the pulse slackens and


+4


By Professor Gregory. 21


stops, when the iris becomes fixed and ceases to contract on
the approach of a candle, and this, too, when no hint has
been given of the operator’s intention, beyond the fact of his
acting generally on the patient, who moreover may be quite
ignorant of the nature of the pulse, and have never heard of
the iris or its functions; when such facts occur, and we have
often seen them produced by Mr. Lewis, it is difficult to see
how the imagination, which moreover is not apparently ex-
cited at all in many cases, should produce them. In many
cases, besides, where Mr. Lewis’s operations do powerfully
excite the imagination, no results whatever are obtained : and
we have already stated that the most favourable state of mind
is that of quiet passiveness, and that a lively imagination is a
great obstacle to success. But what is to be said when the
same operator, after having succeeded in affecting a patient,
after this patient has left the house and gone home, succeeds
in causing him to return by mere volition, and the patient,
forcing his way back, comes up to the operator and there
stops, being by this time in a mesmeric sleep, or analogous
state, and can only say, when awakened, that he felt he was
wanted? This fact Mr. Lewis has repeatedly exhibited. It
must not be confounded with another experiment, in which
he commands a person in the sleep, or under his control for
for the time, to return at a fixed hour next day: which he
does, although when awake he not only does not know that
he has been commanded to do so, but also when he declares
that he will not obey. He finds himself, however, compelled
to do so, and when the time comes is deaf to all other con-
siderations. Here suggestion is employed, but in the former
case nothing of the kind occurs, and yet the influence of the
operator is felt and obeyed.

We consider this fact, and that of the influencing or con-
trolling the involuntary motions, which no man can control
in himself, however vivid his imagination may be, or however
strongly excited, to warrant us in stating that even Mr.
Lewis’s experiments, which are generally admitted, and have
been seen by many thousands, although chiefly suggestive (so
far as publicly exhibited) do yet include facts in which sug-
gestion, or the imagination, is either excluded or incapable of
producing the result.

Again, while we admit the existence of suggestion in most
of the biological phenomena, and while we do not object to
attributing them to the action of imagination, it must not be
supposed that this supplies a complete explanation of the
facts. What is imagination? How is it affected by the pro-
cess employed ? and how does it produce the results? When


22 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.,


we try to answer these questions, we find that we are not far-
ther advanced in the explanation of the phenomena of sug-
gestion than we were before. It is certain that in many
cases the imagination is not observed to be at all excited, and
the patient reasons calmly and logically on his sensations.
He feels an influence which he does his utmost to resist, and
yet is compelled to yield, as many have told us. Does this
look as if an excited fancy (which is the common notion) were
the cause? And, even if we could shew that an excited fancy
was always present, it would still be necessary to ask how
it is excited, and how, being excited, it produces the results.
In fact, when we analyse the terms we use, we shall find
that when we ascribe an effect to the action of suggestion,
or command, or the imagination, we merely mean that
the effect is the result of an impression on the nervous sys-
tem, conveyed through the mind of the patient. But such
an impression on, or change in, the nervous system implies
something physical, such for example as a local excess or
deficiency of nervous influence, or, if you will, of the nervous
fluid. And,if we suppose, for a moment, that the nervous
influence or fluid is either identical with, or closely allied to,
the magnetic influence or fluid, as some have even tried to
identify it with the electric or galvanic influence or fluid,
then we can see how the suggestive phenomena and such
mesmeric phenomena as are not suggestive may yet depend
essentially on the same cause, namely a change of distribution
in the nervous (or vital) influence (or fluid.) When sugges-
tion acts, this change is altogether internal and subjective ;
and when similar effects are produced by external causes,
without suggestion, then the change of distribution or equili-
brium in the nervous influence depends on an addition or
subtraction of that influence, effected ad extra.

On the whole, we conclude that the theory of imagina-
tion can at most be applied to the suggestive phenomena ;
that, while there is no great objection to its being thus ap-
plied, we gain nothing by doing so, but simply give a new
name to these phenomena, the real cause of which we do not
know, and which may depend on a physical cause, operating
ery: identical with that which is supposed to act exter-
nally.

As we began by stating, a great step has been gained. A
very large number of most wonderful phenomena, many of
which have an obvious and direct bearing on the treatment
of disease, are now fully admitted as facts. Although analo-
gous facts had here and there been recorded by physiologists,
they had been entirely neglected in practice ; and it is to the


By Professor Gregory. 23


cultivators of animal magnetism that we are indebted for this
extension of our knowledge, and for the means of producing
with comparative facility, and on persons in the waking state,
these phenomena of suggestion, which are ascribed to the
imagination. This we have heard repeatedly acknowledged by
physiologists and professors of physiology, although, as usual,
the cry is heard in some quarters of “ We knew all this be-
fore.” But a perusal of the standard works on physiology,
in which these (so-called) effects of imagination are either
entirely omitted, or briefly alluded to in notes, for they
hardly ever occur in the text of such works, will enable any
one to decide this question for himself, even if the opposition
of physiologists and physicians to the facts, down to a very
recent period, with some exceptions of course, were less no-
torious than it is.

We have hardly alluded to the curative agency of mes-
merism, but it is obvious that the influence which is capable
of producing the admitted suggestive phenomena, whether we
call it imagination or not, must be a valuable and powerful
agent in the treatment of disease, more particularly of dis-
eases of the nervous system. If the imagination can do all
this, then every medical man is bound to study the imagina-
tion, and to learn how to use it as a means of cure. No phy-
sician doubts of the importance of, engaging the imagination
of his patients, if possible, in his favour; and here he may
find the means of doing so to an extent formerly little dreamt
of. Surely those teachers who admit the phenomena of sug-
gestion, even if they go no farther, must feel the necessity of
studying and of teaching them to their pupils. If not, their
pupils will do so for themselves, and leave their teachers
behind.

We have endeavoured in the preceding pages to explain
the exact state of the question of mesmerism, as it now stands
in this country, and more especially in relation to the expla-
nation or theory which is at present the fashionable one
among those who formerly denied the whole of the pheno-
mena but now admit a part of them, the only part which
they have duly examined. We have shown that this theory,
even if admitted in regard to the acknowledged suggestive
phenomena, furnishes no satisfactory explanation even of
these, and that there is a still more extensive and more won-
derful class of phenomena to which it cannot in any way be
applied. We might here stop, but we think it desirable to
notice a very widely diffused fallacy, which is continually
flung in the faces of the cultivators of animal magnetism.
We allude to the proposal of money challenges, not bets,


24 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


but challenges, in which a sum of money is offered to any
clairvoyant who shall perform a specified feat of lucidity.


Of all the objections or arguments which are now brought
forward against the truth of animal magnetism, by far the
most frequent at the present time is that derived from the
neglect or non-acceptance of such challenges. This of itself
indicates a material change in public opinion. The cry is
no longer, “ Humbug! Imposture! Delusion!” but “ Why
don’t you gain the £100 bank-note of Sir Samuel Sceptic, or
the £500 of Dr. Settl’em?” Many of those who thus urge
us believe in the existence of lucidity, nay, have themselves
seen or produced it. Many others would, they say, be
entirely satisfied of its truth, were such a challenge accepted
and won; and others again are confident that the result of
the trial would for ever exterminate the pestilent heresy of
mesmerism.

Now all these parties appear to us to be wrong in the
notions they entertain of the value and probable results of
such trials, whether successful or otherwise. And we shall
now endeavour to show why we differ with them on both
points, and why we hold mesmerists to be perfectly right in
declining all such challenges.

In the first place, all the money challenges of which we
have heard apply to the power of reading written or printed
words shut up in a box or envelope. Now this power un-
doubtedly occurs, and has been witnessed by many. But
still it is one of the rarer phenomena. Thus we have seen
several lucid subjects who possessed the power of vision at a
distance, yet who could not read a closed letter, which latter
feat would seem to require, if not a higher, yet a different
state. In some of these cases, the attempt to read a closed
letter caused great fatigue. In the case above alluded to, in
which the clairvoyante accurately described to us the con-
tents of two sealed packets, which in one of them were un-
known to ourselves, these were not written words, but solid
objects ; in one a small flint arrow-head, in the other a bit
of silk. And this patient cannot read anything save perhaps
her letters in large capitals, if so much. When the same
patient told us the substance of a letter, unknown to us, it
was not by reading it, but apparently by sympathy.

Moreover, it would appear that operators vary much in
the kind of lucidity they produce. Some never produce
vision at a distance; others often do so. Some often pro-
duce introvision; others never. And few, comparatively,
produce this particular form of lucidity. Of all known mes-


By Professor Gregory. 25


merists, Major Buckley has the greatest success in this way,
for all his subjects may be said to acquire the power of read-
ing in nuts, boxes, closed letters, &c., and many of them do
so without being themselves mesmerised, as we have already
stated. Thus it happens, in the experience of many, that,
while there is great lucidity, it takes other forms. Major
Buckley’s subjects, on the other hand, being persons of the
higher class of society, will not allow themselves to be pub-
licly exhibited, and in particular will not submit to be treated
as probable impostors. The proposers of money challenges
notoriously regard lucidity as imposture, at least many of
them do so; and we cannot expect persons of honourable
character to submit to a test, the application of which implies
that they are, or may be, guilty of deceit.

Another difficulty is this: that when we meet with a good
case, there is the greatest difficulty in obtaining permission
to investigate it, and still more to exhibit it, even in private.

No one who reads the simple, straight-forward account
given by Major Buckley of the feats performed by his sub-
jects, (see The Zoist, passim, and Professor Gregory’s Letters
on Animal Magnetism) can doubt that these subjects have,
times out of number, done the same thing as is asked by the
challenger, without any pecuniary motive. We cannot doubt
that they would succeed with the bank-note experiment ; but
how are they to be got to try it?

But further, supposing all preliminary difficulties over-
come, and the result to be successful, we would ask, does
this furnish any new evidence in favour of lucidity? It does
not ; it merely corroborates the existing evidence, already a
hundred times established. Does the fact that £100 or £500
is paid to the reader, convey any stronger proof of the fact
according to the known laws of evidence? We answer again,
No! and the challenger would very speedily discover this,
and mark the deficiency in logic of any one who should main-
tain that it does. Indeed, the disagreeable operation of
“forking out,” to use a slang but vigorous expression, espe-
cially when the act implied that he had been mistaken, and
had perhaps rashly accused an honest man of imposture,—all
this would sharpen his perceptions, and he would then see
plainly that success in the trial would only add one to a
thousand similar facts all as well attested as his one could be.
For, after all, what right has he, who rejects the testimony
of Major Buckley, of Earl Stanhope, of Mr. Chandler, and
a hundred other respectable witnesses of Major Buckley’s ex-
periments, to expect that his testimony is to be accepted by
other sceptics, because he pays, perhaps reluctantly, a sum


26 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


of money. The experiment can only be seen by a few, and
the testimony of these is in no way superior to what we al-
ready have of the fact.

But we go further, and maintain that those who, dona
fide, are not convinced by the existing testimony, whether
they attribute the result to imposture and collusion, or to
chance, must, if consistent and logical, and honest, reject
this fact also, unless they have themselves seen it, and this,
of course, only a few can do. The evidence being, in quality,
precisely the same, cannot satisfy them now, if it failed to
do so before; for it was not more, but better, evidence that
they required, and how the money renders it better it is not
easy to see.

Let us only consider how the existing evidence is received
by sceptics, and we shall see that if they are honest sceptics,
they must and will reject the result of the challenge. They
are acute enough to perceive that its logical cogency is not
augmented by the money element, and we are persuaded that,
when the desired feat shall have been performed, and some
greedy mesmerist will one day perform it, the honest sceptic
will shake his head and ascribe it to collusion, or to a chance,
a coincidence, as he has done in regard to the recorded facts.
We do not mean that he who sees this fact may not be con-
vinced by it, but that his testimony will have no more effect
on those who have not seen it than that of others who have
seen the same thing without the money has had on himself.
We predict with confidence, because the money does not
alter the fact, that success in the proposed experiment will
be, and with justice, regarded as not more convincing than
the recorded evidence of the fact.

But what would happen, in the event of failure? We
can hardly doubt that a failure would at once be proclaimed
as for ever settling the question. Indeed it is obvious that
the sceptics who attach so much importance to the challenge
must think so, otherwise the experiment could have no value
for them. Yet there cannot be*a greater fallacy. In the
first place, a failure to obtain an alleged or expected result
can, logically, prove. no more than this, that we have failed ;
but by no means that we might not have succeeded, or may
not succeed the next time.

This is seen every day in chemistry. It is very easy to
fail in the simple experiment of plunging the hand into red
hot melted lead or iron without injury ; but when we know,
and attend to, all the conditions, success is certain. Should
the hand be too dry, or too wet, or be too quickly introduced,
or too slowly, should the lead or iron be not quite hot enough,


By Professor Gregory. 27


(strange to say) the experimenter will fail, and be severely
burned. But what would his failure prove? Nay, what
would it prove, if he should try it a hundred times, and never
succeed, if another were able to do it with success? Simply
that he did not know, or did not attend to, all the conditions
of success. Every chemist knows, that the finely divided
powder of platinum, if a small pinch of it be thrown into a
mixture of oxygen and hydrogen gases, all being at the ordi-
nary temperature, heat, a flash of light and an explosion in-
stantaneously follow the contact of the powder with the gases.
We have performed this experiment at least a hundred times
without a single failure, although it is one of which no satis-
factory explanation has been given. But lately, on repeating
the experiment, with a portion of the same powder, and with
pure gases, it totally failed in our hands. Did we conclude
from this that it had not really occurred before, and that the
apparent success depended on trick or self-deception? No!
We felt sure that some condition had been accidentally neg-
lected. And on farther examination it proved, that the cause
of failure lay in the fact, that on that occasion the powder
happened to be, as well as the gases, colder than usual (in
consequence of a sharp frost), by a few degrees, perhaps not
more than five or ten degrees. As soon as this condition was
attended to, by allowing the powder and the gases to acquire
the average temperature, the experiment succeeded with the
very same materials. Now here failure depended on the
absence of one apparently insignificant condition ; and there
are many others, the absence of which might have equally
caused failure; such, for example, as a trifling impurity of
either gas, or the accidental exposure of the powder to cer-
tain vapours, likely enough to float in the atmosphere of a
laboratory. And we might not, in some cases, be able to
detect any cause of failure ; yet it would still remain certain,
that some such cause must exist; and in strict logic, no
number of failures will suffice to outweigh one unequivocal
instance of success. Failures, at the utmost, can only prove
that we do not know, and therefore have not observed, all the
conditions of success. -

And if this be true in chemistry, how much more must
it hold in such a subject as that of somnambulism and lucid
vision, where nearly all the conditions are unknown, and
where the subject of experiment, the sensitive nervous system,
is exposed to so many causes of disturbance, known and un-
known! Is it not evident that in such experiments failure
and uncertainty must be far more likely to occur than in
those of chemistry? As the best electrical machine, if moist


28 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


and in a moist air, will fail to give a spark, while at another
time it may yield sparks to the distance of several inches, so
the human machine is liable to get for the time out of order,
and to fail to-day in yielding the results which it has yielded
yesterday, and will yield, perhaps, to-morrow ; and this, very
often, without our being able to discover the reason why.

If we enquire what are the known causes of failure or
uncertainty, we shall find the most marked to be variations
in the bodily or mental state of the subject or of the ope-
rator, arising from unknown causes of disturbance to health ;
just as the digestion, the sleep, the artistic or literary powers,
may vary from day to day in all men, to a greater or less
degree. Secondly ; great excitement, ’ whether of hope, fear,
or other emotions in the subject, which will often annihilate
his powers for the time. Thirdly; the presence and prox-
imity of many persons, who, especially if themselves excited,
react powerfully, unknown to themselves, on the sensitive
sleeper. Fourthly ; the presence or proximity of sceptics, and
especially of those who entertain strong prejudices, or of such
as consider the subject an impostor, and perhaps kindly inti-
mate that flattering opinion to him, or in his hearing to
others. Who can doubt that a sensitive subject, and lucid
subjects must be highly sensitive, must be painfully affected
by this very common circumstance? Nay, is it not one of
the alleged facts: of lucidity or sympathy, that the sensitive
often discover, without a word being spoken, the thoughts
and sentiments of those who approach them? And although
this, like the power of reading a closed letter, may be denied
by the sceptic, yet the mesmerist knows better, and is at all
events, on his own shewing, entitled to point to this as a
recorded cause of failure. Some subjects lose all their lu-
cidity if a certain individual be present, even when that
individual is not sceptical ; but the approach of the strongly
prejudiced, and above all of such as express a bad opinion
of the subject’s moral character, will affect almost all lucid
subjects unfavourably, and may cause failure. It has hap-
pened, before now, that a ~aae has had his secret thoughts,
although uttered to no one, minutely read to him by the
patient, whose lucidity has thereby been impaired ; and that
the sceptic, struck by this, which he knew collusion could not
explain, has investigated for himself and become satisfied of
the facts which he had doubted (Deleuze). It has also hap-
pened that a lucid subject has failed to see the contents of a
box held in the hand of one who regarded him as an im-
postor, and has succeeded in doing so, in the presence of the
same parties, when the box was held by a person who believed


By Professor Gregory. 29


him to be honest and lucid. This leads us to observe that it
cannot, in some cases at least, be a matter of indifference by
what hands the letter or bank-note to be read has been folded
up and sealed, or the words to be deciphered written. We
have repeatedly seen subjects so sensitive to handwriting, or
to the traces left by the hands which had handled an object,
as to be much confused in their perceptions thereby. We
have seen some who experienced most powerful effects from
various handwritings, of different dates, and always the same
effect from the same handwriting, if tried at different times
without any indication. We have seen one subject rendered
rigid and deaf, and deprived of all lucidity, every time that
a certain handwriting was tried ; and therefore we think it
probable that, in some cases, failure might be the result, if
the letter, &c., had been made up or written by certain per-
sons, sceptical or not, but more probably if sceptical or pre-
judiced. The last cause of failure we shall notice as known,
is the exhaustion of the subject from previous experiments,
or the confusion caused by several different persons having
recently operated on him. This last source of failure it is
comparatively easy to avoid.

Now every one of the above known causes of failure may
occur in the proposed experiment, and any one might be
sufficient. And if these be the known causes of failure, how
many, in a subject so obscure and so little investigated, may
be the unknown and unsuspected causes likely to have the
same result ! ;

In fact, every experienced mesmerist knows that, in the
higher or lucid stages of the mesmeric state, great variations
constantly occur, and failure to do what has been already
done are very frequent. No such mesmerist, therefore, will
ever do more than undertake to try, and to report faithfully
the result on any given occasion. It is the sceptic alone
who, not taking the trouble to acquaint himself with the
statements of the mesmerist, imagines the clairvoyant to be
at all times and in all circumstances equally lucid.


** Neque semper arcum tendit Apollo.” -


It is the sceptic alone, not the patient observer of nature,
who regards the clairvoyant as making pretensions to omni-
science. If lucidity, in whatever way we suppose it to be
brought about, exist, it amounts to a new sense, or a new
mode of perception. It may be that an obscure and hitherto
neglected influence or fluid, proceeding from all bodies, is
capable of penetrating to the sensorium commune, or head-
quarters of sensation, without passing through the usual


30 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


channels of sense. It may enter through the solar plexus,
through the nerves of the scalp, or those of the hand, or those
of the general cuticular surface, these nervous parts being in
a peculiarly sensitive state. But if we can thus acquire a
new sense, why should this be less liable to error than the
old? Is it not, on the contrary, obvious, that from want of
practice, or from its extreme sensitiveness, it must be more
liable to error and confusion than the ordinary senses?

We maintain, therefore, that in such trials of lucidity as
are proposed by the money challengers, failure is a probable
occurrence ; decidedly more probable than when no money is
concerned. The lucid subject is naturally excited by the
desire of success, by the love of gain, perhaps, (an impure
motive in questions of scientific fact, which we should do our
best to exclude,) and by the fear of failure, that is, of not
gaining the money, and of being, as he probably would be,
however irrationally, denounced as an impostor. For these,
and the other reasons above given, a failure, on any given
occasion, is not only possible, but probable.

We maintain, further, that failure, if it occurred, could
prove nothing but that, from not knowing, or not fulfilling
all the conditions of success, we had failed. It must there-
fore be quite inconclusive ; but it would notwithstanding be
regarded, by all whose prejudices overpower their logic, as
setting the question at rest for ever. And thus although the
question would remain “ in statu quo ante bellum,” prejudice
would be fostered, and fallacy more widely diffused.

We maintain, thirdly, that even success would leave the
question, logically, precisely where it was, and would cer-
tainly not convince those who bona fide reject the recorded
testimony to the fact; nay, could not do so, since it would
add nothing to the cogency, and only an unit to the amount,
of that testimony.

It is true that many persons, not accustomed to strictly
logical reasoning, would be satisfied with the success of the
trial. But this conviction, not being founded on any real
addition to the evidence, would not be lasting, since, if the
mesmerists did not, the sceptics certainly would, point out
the fallacy of attaching any logical cogency to the payment
of a sum of money.

Since, then, failure and success would be, and must be,
alike inconclusive, challenges of the nature alluded to ought
not to be accepted. Were we ever to think of accepting such
a challenge, however, it would only be on the following con-
ditions :— ,

1. The offer of money must be concealed from the lucid


By Professor Gregory. 31


patient, who must only suppose that an ordinary experiment
is intended. It would, we think, be best to arrange that
neither the operator nor the patient should have any interest
in the sum offered, which ought to go, in the event of suc-
cess, to the Mesmeric Infirmary, or to any other charity.
Were the operator personally interested in it, this might
react on the patient.

2. The matter to be read should be printed, taken from a
newspaper or book, and sealed up:by impartial hands. If a
bank-note, the same rule applies.

3. The sealed packet, letter, envelope, or box, must be
presented to the patient by some person who is either quite
impartial, or favourably disposed.

4. No one, except the operator and the person, if a dif-
ferent one, who thus presents the object, is to approach near
to, or to touch the patient.

5. No one who is already convinced, without enquiry, and
therefore with prejudice, that the patient is an impostor,
should either be present or in any way concerned in the ex-
periment.

6. Impartial judges are to be chosen, who shall see that
the above conditions are attended to, and declare the result.

Lastly, failure is not to be held, as it cannot logically be
held, to decide the question of the truth of lucid vision.

It will easily be seen that this last condition, which no
logician can decline, renders the experiment of no more
value (as indeed it can have none) than any other experiment
carefully made and faithfully reported, as hundreds have been.
And consequently the acceptance of such a challenge can
have no good result, either in the case of success or of failure,
save only as regards the conviction produced in those present
in the event of success, in which case it is only one added to
the hundreds of recorded cases. To accept the challenge,
however, on any condition short of that, would be irrational
and absurd.


NOTE BY DR ELLIOTSON.


This very able paper, though instructive to all, is evi-
dently calculated for the inhabitants of Edinburgh and the rest
of Scotland rather than for us southerns. True mesmerism
has very long been steadily making its way all over England.
Demonstrations of it have for years been given in very nu-
merous towns. They have been given among us without end,
from 1837 when M. Dupotet had crowded audiences, and


32 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


1838 when numbers thronged weckly to see the Okeys and
many other exquisite mesmeric patients at University College
Hospital: and for several subsequent years I allowed large
parties to witness mesmerism at my own house from time to
time. The Zoist has been regularly published in London
every quarter for nine years; and a Mesmeric Infirmary has
been in activity for two years in London. England is far in
advance of Scotland in regard to mesmerism: and the con-
viction of the truth is general among us. Since the phe-
nomena under the false and ridiculous title of electro-biology
began to be exhibited here last year, very few among us who
witnessed these exhibitions with the delusive disks and touch-
ings of certain mysterious spots of the head and hands, and
deceptive views, thought, in consequence, of ascribing the
true mesmeric effects to imagination, as so many of the
Scotch have done, who, up to the hour of the American exhi-
bitions, were in sad and, in the case of medical men, dis-
creditable, ignorance of mesmerism. Even after the publi-
cation of Dr. Gregory’s mesmeric work, the Duke of Argyll,
to whom it was dedicated on account of His Grace having been
continually at Dr. Gregory’s house to witness phenomena,
assured me that he had not seen a single phenomenon which
was not referable in his opinion to imagination. The Earl
of Eglinton, who is constantly mentioned as having witnessed
the phenomena shewn by the Americans in Scotland and
become satisfied of their genuineness, has never got any
further than the Duke of Argyll and a host of other Caledo-
nians, noble, gentle, and plebeian, and is not satisfied that
there are any mesmeric phenomena independent of imagination,
as an intimate friend of mine informs me who is well ac-
quainted and on visiting terms with Lord Eglinton. On the
ist of April, 1839, a quarterly mesmeric journal was started
at Edinburgh under the title of The Zoo-Magnetic Journal
(probably by Mr. Colquhoun), but it perished before the end
of the year. Mr. Colquhoun’s Isis Revelata made no im-
pression upon his countrymen. The Phrenological Journal
of Edinburgh admitted a review, by a Dr. Weir of Glasgow,
of a very nice little work upon mesmerism by the estimable
Mr. William Lang, then a bookseller in Glasgow, but now
resident in South America: and Dr. Weir sneered at the idea
of believing the splendid cases of the Okeys to be genuine,
and at myself for suffering in the cause of mesmerism, who
had never heard of Dr. Weir’s name before.*


* See Zoist, No. VI., p. 286. The Edinburgh phrenologists after this con-
duct, so unbefitting a phrenologist or moral philosopher, procured him the ap-


By Professor Gregory. 33


At the end of the ninth chapter of his mesmeric work,
Dr. Gregory says :—


** When such men as Sir David Brewster, Sir W. C. Trevelyan,
Sir W. Hamilton, Dr. Simpson, Professor Forbes, Professor Bennett,
and Professor Goodsir,—when men like these veterans in science,
though some of them are young in years, besides many others, have
not only seen the facts, more or less extensively, but admit their
importance, and have personally investigated into some of them, the
time cannot be distant, when the subject of animal magnetism shall
assume a truly scientific form.” p. 210.


With the exception of Sir W. C. Trevelyan and Sir W.
Hamilton, who have long been convinced of the truth of
mesmerism, I am not aware that any of these gentlemen have
gone a step beyond what they call electro-biology, at least in
public profession, and it would perhaps have been better
had they not got so far, as they assert that there are no other
results than those of imagination, and are thus obstructives
to mesmerism by necessarily denying the mighty and endless
facts which they must acknowledge to be incapable of expla-
nation by imagination. The ways of Dr. Simpson and Dr.
Bennett, and the fine return they have made for Dr. Gregory’s
very amiable language, are known to the readers of Dr. En-
gledue’s article upon them in the last volume of The Zoist ;
and as to considering them or any of the other imagination-
ists philosophers, I should never think of such a thing, for a
philosopher must have enlarged views and possess true wis-
dom and moral dignity. No benefit has accrued to mesmerism
from any of them, nor is likely ever to accrue. They are
doggedly insensible to its splendid facts—their hearts are
hardened and their intellect thereby stupified in regard to
it. We can dispense with their aid: and I lament that Dr.
Gregory has written of them like a polite professor rather
than a blunt plain-speaking Englishman. The steady, honest,
and patient writers in The Zoist, will, I trust, by continuing
to observe facts and make experiments, and to abstain from
supernaturalism, mysticism, and hypothesis, regarding them-
selves as humble interpreters of nature, establish in due time
the scientific bearings of mesmerism and make it “assume
a truly scientific form,” independently of these Edinburgh
professors, who have done nothing for us, but much against
us, and on whom, rather than on the patient, aye, and suc-
cessful, labourers of the last ten years, still humbly labouring,


pointment of Phrenological Lecturer in the Andersonian University of Glasgow.
Such a man could of course turn the appointment to no account. See Zoist,
No. XII., p. 543.


VOL. X. D


34 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


Dr. Gregory places all his hopes that mesmerism will “ assume
a truly scientific form.”

Dr. Gregory is too polite to our opponents at p. 337 :—

‘*It is true that human nature finds it difficult to remain patient
and cool, when not only assailed by bad logic, and met by abuse
instead of argument, but also accused of fraud aud falsehood, though
entirely innocent of such offences. But has not this been the fate
of discoverers and innovators, of the advocates of new truths, in
every age? Do we mend the matter by returning abuse for abuse,
and by retorting on those who accuse us of deceit, with the charge
of want of candour? For my part, I think not. I believe the op-
ponents of new ideas to be sincere, though mistaken ; and I do not
so much object to their caution and incredulity in reference to strange
facts, as I am amazed at their boundless credulity in regard to fraud,
which, without hesitation, and without enquiry, they ascribe to
thousands of respectable men.”

But he condemns this course by very properly following
the very opposite at p. 303 :—

“The most cautious philosopher has no right absolutely to reject
facts thus attested, because he cannot see their explanation ; and,
above all, he has no right to brand the witnesses with the charge of
deceit or imposture, without full and careful enquiry. If he will not,
or cannot, investigate, let him, in decency, be silent. I do not in-
vent; I speak of what happens every day; and I say, that those men
of science who, declining to investigate, have nevertheless fulminated
denial and accusations of falsehood against those who have investi-
gated, have not acted on the golden rule, ‘ Do unto others as ye
would that they should do unto you,’ and their conduct is as il/o-
gical and irrational as it is unjust and impolitic.”*

I cannot refrain, however, at this point, from expressing
my admiration of Dr. Gregory’s conduct in standing boldly
and virtuously forth alone in the University of Edinburgh
for the truth of mesmerism, as well as of phrenology, in
spite of the bitterest and most menacing hostility: and I
must add that, were all Scotland opposed to mesmerism, its
character would be redeemed by the glorious conduct of her
noble, high-minded son in India, who, untaught except by
books, ascertained the truth of mesmerism in that distant
land, proclaimed its truth there unsupported by any one and
amidst the direst and vilest opposition from his medical breth-
ren, sparing none of his mean and miserable foes nor flat-
tering even his friends, applied its powers to the cure of disease
and the prevention of pain in such gigantic surgical operations
as make all other surgical operations dwindle into littleness,
and performed those gigantic operations in such numbers and
with such success as never before fell to the lot of man.

* The italics are mine.—J. E.


By Professor Gregory. 35


I entreat the readers of Dr. Gregory’s paper to refer
to the papers on the same subject in No. XXXIII. by
myself: in No. XXXIV. by myself: in No. XXXV. by Mr.
Sandby, and also by Dr. Engledue: and in No. XXXVI. by
myself.

The power possessed over others by means of the imagi-
nation has never been illustrated better than by Mr. Chandler
in No. XVIII.: and by it he rendered an operation painless,
as is mentioned in No. XXXII.

An illustration of effects without imagination in the case
of a blind (p. 11) gentleman will be found in a paper by
Mr. Chandler in No. XX.? and in the case of an absent
(p. 11) person influenced by Mr. H. 8S. Thompson in No.
XI., and in No. XIL., p. 477-8: and no more beautiful illus-
tration by sympathy (p. 14) of taste, smell and touch can be
given than the case of Mrs. W. Snewing in No. XX.

In regard to a fact adduced at p. 15, I may mention that
Lord Stanhope informs me that George the Fourth had an
intense antipathy to cats and suffered from their proximity :
and that once, on His going to dine with the late Marquis of
Hertford when Lord Yarmouth, His host, knowing His idio-
syncracy, had given strict orders to have all cats removed.
But the Prince soon after His arrival became uneasy and de-
clared there must be a cat in the room. Lord Yarmouth
protested that there could not, and that he had given strict
orders for the removal of every cat. The Prince, however,
continued miserable: and at last a cat was found accidentally
shut up in some press or closet.


Sir Philip Crampton was the first among us who proposed
an enclosed bank-note as a test of clairvoyance.


** His shewy offer runs thus. We copy it from the Examiner, of
January 17th.


*«* Bank, Henry Street, Dublin, Jan. 7, 1846.
“¢In answer to the numerous inquiries which have been made
respecting the lodgment of a hundred pound note in the Bank of
Messrs. Ball and Co., to be paid to any person, who shall, by the
operation of mesmerism, describe the particulars of the note, beg
leave to say that such a lodgment has been made in this bank, an
on the envelope in which it is contained is the following endorse-
ment: ‘ This envelope contains a bank-note for one hundred pounds,
which will immediately become the property of the person who,
without opening the envelope, shall describe, in the presence of
Philip Doyne, Esq., and Sir Philip Crampton, Bart., every particular
of the said note, namely—the oank from which it was issued, the
date, the number, and the signatures attached to it, and who shall
d2


36 On the Theory of Imagination, &c.


read a sentence, consisting of a few English words, plainly written,
and which is contained in the same envelope with the half-note.”
** ¢ (Signed) James Dudgeon.”’*


After all it turns out that Sir Philip Crampton did not
enclose a bank-note but a blank cheque, and they say he
thought it good fun to substitute the one for the other.

Major Buckley, in answer to some enquiries, wrote to me
on the 17th of last December as follows, from Brighton :—


** Observe at the commencement it is a bank-note, at the conclu-
sion a half-note. This was signed, J. Dudgeon, manager. A friend
of mine, Mrs. Bell, the widow of General Bell of the Madras Army,
being an acquaintance of this Mr. Dudgeon, wrote to him on the
subject. His reply (which I hope to shew you when I come to town)
was given to me by Mrs. Bell. He says, after stating that a bank-
note for £100 was announced to be within the envelope, that, the
time having expired, the envelope was opened, and, instead of a bank-
note, a blank cheque appeared, thereby proving, &c., &c. In another
part of the letter he says nobody applied to see the envelope, but
various letters were received containing guesses, &c. The newspaper
accounts stated that a cheque, not a bank-note, was taken from the
envelope, payable to (Edipus, or bearer ; and that the English words
with it were, ‘To CEdipus alone.’ ”


On Major Buckley’s return to town in February, he


found Mr. Doyne’s letter addressed to Mrs. General Bell,
dated Nov. 20, 1847, Dublin, and the following is an extract
from it :—


** I proceed to relate the particulars of the transaction you write
about. Sir Philip Crampton, wishing to prove the vanity and folly
of certain pretenders to a power of divination and clairvoyance called
mesmeric agents, or under its influence, put advertisements in many
newspapers offering the amount of the bank-note enclosed in a sealed
paper left at our bank (which was stated to be one for £100) to any
mesmeriser who would guess its number and date. We had innu-
merable answers, all written with great confidence and assurance of
success, and from all quarters of the globe, &c. When the stipulated
time, six months, arrived, the paper was opened, and in lieu of a
bank-note appeared a blank cheque. Thus realizing the full expecta-
tion of Sir Philip, and disappointing many dreamers: but nothing is
too absurd for this age.”


I may mention that, having heard that Mr. Saunders had
tried the powers of a boy on the occasion of the bank-note
affair, I wrote to him, and received the following reply :-—


“1, Upper Portland Place, Clifton, Bristol,
“ Dec. 19, 1851.
“Dear Sir,—Having occasion to put my boy, John Brooks,


* Zoist, No. XIII., p. 155: see also p. 140.


Mesmerism in Australia. 37


who worked for me in my garden, into the mesmeric state for the
san ger of obtaining some information from him relative to my little
y, who was very ill; and after he had prescribed for him a medi-
cine which restored him, though the medical gentleman who attended
him was unable to do further for him, the subject of Sir Philip
Crampton’s enclosure being mentioned, I was induced to ask Brooks
a few questions relative to it, and the following is verbatim.
** Do you know that some one in Ireland has put some money in
a sealed envelope ?—Yes; I do.


“Can you tell me the number of the note in the envelope ?—
There be’nt no note at all.

“Nonsense; you’er wrong: look again: there is a note—a hun-
dred pound note ‘—I say there a’nt.

“* What is there, then ?—Why, a piece of paper with letters on,
like you sends down to the bank : a cheque, I think you do call it.

** Nonsense; you are a stupid fellow, and so wake up.

“Upon this, thinking he was quite wrong, I woke him up, and
thought no more of the matter.

* I remain, dear Sir, in haste,
** Yours obediently,

** Dr. Elliotson. «§. D. SaunpeErs.


“The above took place when I resided at Ivy Cottage, Syn-
combe, Bath.”


II. Mesmerism in Australia. Benefit in curved Spine, in
Hysteria: Clairvoyance and other phenomena. By Dr.
MorHERWELL. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘« Tt happens that Dr. Davey had written a small work on insanity, before his
election at Colney Hatch, in which he broached some unwise notions respecting
the mesmeric folly : but these were attributed and excused by his friends as the
result of absence from England in a remote part of the world. The unavoidable
inference (from Dr. Davey’s answers to Serjeant Wilkins) is that the entire me-
dical profession, except the few simpletons who follow the ravings of Elliotson,


Ashburner, and we suppose we must add, Dr. Davey, are not right-minded.’’—
Mr. Wag ey, Lancet, Jan. 24, 1852.


‘“* If they were to agree to this, they would then have an application to permit
mesmerism to be performed and all other sorts of nonsense in that room.’’—
Alderman Sir Peter Lavrir’s (the Knight) speech, Jan. 3, 1852, at the Mary-
lebone Vestry in opposition to a request that the Marylebone Financial and Par-
liamentary Reform Association be allowed to meet in the Vestry Room. Daily
News, Jan. 5, 1852.*


* This sagacious and unobtrusive Alderman is the uncle of the sagacious and
unobtrusive Mr. Laurie who figures in the motto to Dr. Gregory’s article: and
reminds me, whenever I see his speeches in the papers, of the sagacious and un-
obtrusive Preetor of Fundos, Aufidius Luscus, whom Horace, Mzecenas, and the
rest of the party langhed at in their trip to Brundusium, as he stepped out to
them with all his trappings of office.

‘*¢ Fundos Aufidio Lusco Preetore libenter
Linquimus, INsANI ridentes premia Scribe,
Preetextam, et latum clavum, pruneeque batillum.”’
Horace, Iter ad Brundusium, Sat. i. v.


38 Mesmerism in Australia.
To Dr. Elliotson.
Collins Street, Melbourne, Sept. 10, 1851.
My dear Sir,—I have been much gratified by the receipt
of your letter acknowledging my communication* containing
the statement of a clairvoyant relative to Sir J. Franklin; I
was pleased to find that the opinions which I had formed
about clairvoyance were similar to those which I imagine you
(having had so much more experience) entertain. That mes-
merism is true there can be no doubt. I have here a boy who
exhibits the most convincing proof of its benefit as a curative
agent, and of some of its truly wondrous phenomena. He
was brought to me more than twelve months ago with spinal
curvature (antero-posterior) about the seventh and adjoining
dorsal vertebra; he was then pale, weak, unable almost to
walk ; his muscles soft, flabby, attenuated ; his stomach scarce
able to retain any food, and his breathing so short and hur-
ried that he could not make the slightest exertion; if he at-
tempted any, he used to be seized with such severe pain round
the margin of his ribs that he fell down under its intensity.
I commenced to mesmerise him, and in about half an hour
induced sleep. I continued to mesmerise him daily, and
upon each occasion the sleep was induced in a shorter time :
he used to sleep for one or two hours, and always awoke much
refreshed. In about a fortnight there was a most perceptible
change for the better, his appetite had much improved, some
colour began to appear in his cheeks, and the expression of
the countenance was more animated. He is now, and has
been for the last nine months, able to run about and exercise
himself ; his appetite is good; the general appearance is that
of a boy in excellent health, except that the muscular deve-
lopment is not robust from its having been so long feeble and
attenuated ; the spinal curvature is less apparent, not that I
think the spine has become more straight, but, because the
curvature has not continued to increase with his growth, and
as he is some inches taller, the deformity is less apparent.
During the progress of the treatment various phenomena
were observed. He could see to read any book or paper,
though the eyelids were closed, except when I held them
open to shew the eyeballs, which were upturned, and the
cornea was directed towards the centre of the forehead. I have
put all kinds of bandages over the eyes; I have strapped
down the eyelids with sticking plaster; I have put a mask
over the face, having all its apertures closed except an open-
ing of about the size of a shilling corresponding to the centre


* No. XXXIII.
+ See Mr. Mott's successful cases, No. ¥X VIII.


a
¥
Ls,
é
eo
me
a.


Mesmerism in Australia. 39


of the forehead, and still he reads whatever is placed before
him. He tells me that that part of his forehead becomes
bright and luminous, and that he sees through it. If I put
a small piece of paper or my finger upon that spot, he can-
not see anything, even though I leave the eyes and the rest
of the face uncovered. I need not say that this is a complete
staggerer to the sceptics in mesmerism. He can select from
any number of others the metals which I handle, or the
glass of water I mesmerise. When thrown into the mes-
meric sleep he tells me that he sees a bright light issuing from
the ends of my fingers, and points to the course of the nerves
as they lie on each side of the fingers. After mesmerising
him for some time he says that the entire of my hands become
quite bright and luminous—that this light passes to him and
floats around him—that it gradually passes into his body, and
when it has all passed in that he wakens up, he cannot re-
main longer asleep; that he has the power of taking in this
light faster or slower into his body as he chooses, and hence
his power of waking up in one minute, or ten, or twenty,
accordingly as I desire him. One evening that I had him with
me at my friend Major Davidson’s, where there were several
guests to witness these wonderful facts, he astonished us by
saying while in the mesmeric sleep, “ Doctor, I can waken
myself, and put myself to sleep again.” I told him to do
so; upon which he made a few upward passes with his hands,
opened his eyes, and appeared in his perfectly natural state.
I told him to put himself to sleep, and by making a few
passes with his hands from the top of his head downwards
over the face he passed into the mesmeric state,—able to
do things which a moment before he could not do in the
natural state. He told me in explanation of this phenomenon
which I had never before heard or read of, that by the up-
ward passes he removed this fluid, atmosphere, influence,
light, or whatever be its proper designation, from before his
face, and that it was accumulated on the top of the head ;
and that when he wanted to go to sleep again he drew it
downwards over the face. Unless I had mesmerised him in
the first instance, he could not do these things: he could
not waken and put himself to sleep, until I had mesmerised
him afresh. This boy’s hand and arm are made cataleptic if
he touches brass or any metal which I have not handled ; he
can latterly make the entire body cataleptic by Ais will, and
it is truly wonderful to see the entire body becoming per-
fectly rigid whenever he chooses, I was surprised at another
phenomenon which I had not heard or read of, viz., his
power of resisting my wish to make any part of him cata-


40 Mesmerism in Australia.


leptic. I had been in the habit of rendering his legs or arms
cataleptic by my downward passes ; but one day he made with
one hand an upward pass along the opposite arm, and then
said, “ Doctor, you cannot now make that arm stiff.” I tried
and tried and tried in vain, until he made a downward pass,
and then I could as before make the arm cataleptic by my
downward passes. If I made the arm cataleptic by my down-
ward passes, and he then made a downward pass, I could
not remove the cataleptic state by upward passes until he first
made an upward pass. Another curious phenomenon that I
have observed is, that if I place one hand on his head and
keep it there for a minute, and I then complete the circuit
by touching any part of his body with my other hand—his
legs, arms, feet, back, or any part, he feels as if an electric
shock had passed through from one of my hands to the other ;
and he cannot prevent himself making an involuntary jerk or
twitch which he makes each time the circuit is completed.
As to clairvoyance, I firmly believe in it. I am perfectly
satisfied that the clairvoyants whom I have seen here, told
most truly what appeared to them; that there was no fraud
or attempt to deceive on their part ; that mixed up with much
that was true and accurate, there were many errors, but that
these errors were caused by their inability to comprehend,
describe, or explain what appeared to them. For instance,
the barque Ne/son was expected to arrive here and was over-
due. I had a chart belonging to the captain of the vessel,
and without telling anything to the clairvoyant, I placed the
chart in her hand, and asked her to tell me where the owner
of it was. She said it (the chart) took her over the sea to a
vessel ; that she saw the owner of it in that vessel; that she
saw the vessel sailing towards this land. Asked in how many
days it would be here; she replied, that she saw the figure 5:
asked upon what day of the week it would arrive ; she said
she saw Sunday. Well, the vessel did arrive here upon the
following Sunday—the fifth day. Upon another occasion, I
' procured a watch belonging to a gentleman who was return-
ing to this colony from England. The ship in which he had
sailed was overdue, and some anxiety was felt about its safety.
I placed the watch in the hands of the same clairvoyant,
and asked her could she see the owner of it. After a short
pause she said, “ yes;” she saw him riding in this country
with another gentleman; and was proceeding to trace him
when I interrupted her, by asking if that was at the present
time. She repeated, “the present time,’ and then after a
pause said, “ Well, doctor, when I look for him at the present
time, this (the watch) takes me to the sea shore and over the


Mesmerism in Australia. 41


sea to a vessel where I see him; he is talking to a lady (he
had his daughter on board with him) : the vessel is sailing
towards this land.” I asked her when would it arrive. She
replied that she saw the figure 4. I asked what that meant ;
‘and she said she did not know, but supposed it meant four
days. I asked upon what day of the week it would arrive,
and she said she saw Saturday. It was on the Tuesday that
this occurred, and I concluded that the vessel would arrive
on the following Saturday—the fourth day; but that day
came, and passed, and no vessel arrived. I mesmerised her
again, and sought an explanation, and she said she still saw
the figure 4, and Saturday as the day on which the vessel
would arrive. Well, in about a fortnight afterwards the
vessel did arrive on a Saturday the 4th day of the month;
this may be considered a coincidence, but I do not think so,
as I attribute the error to her inability to understand what
she saw, and I attach value to her persistance in adhering to
the day and figure that she first saw, though it appeared to
be quite incorrect according to our surmise as to the mean-
ing of that day and date. Upon another occasion I gave her
a letter which had been written to me by some relatives who
were coming to this place by the Harpley. She had traced
them from the time that they left home, and saw them on
board a ship which she saw sailing towards this land. One
evening she told me that she saw the vessel sailing on, and
that they were not far from this land. On the following day,
a vessel arrived from England, which had sailed thence after
the Harpley, and it brought the intelligence that a bottle
had been picked up on the English coast, which contained a
few lines from one of the passengers, stating that the Harpley
had foundered at sea soon after leaving England. I mesmer-
ised her immediately, before she heard of this intelligence,
and asked her about the Harpley. She said she saw it sailing
on, and approaching nearer to this land. I then told her of
the intelligence that had arrived; and she said, “I will look
again.” After a pause she said, “ Doctor, I may be wrong,
and the intelligence correct ; but I see the vessel in which the
persons who wrote this letter are, sailing at the present time,
and not far distant from this land.” In a short time-after-
wards the vessel, the Harpley, in which these persons were,
arrived here in safety. There were many, very many things
told by her which clearly shewed that there was not cerebral
sympathy exercised.
One evening Dr. Howitt brought to my house a small
piece of wood ; no person except he and I knew what it was.
I placed it in her hands and asked, did she know what it was?


42 Mesmerism in Australia.


She replied, “Yes; a piece of wood.” “ Well,” said I,
‘trace that, from the time it was growing as a tree up to the
present time.” She said she was taken by it (the piece of
wood) across the sea to another land where she saw the tree
growing. She described the appearance of the tree, the
leaves, and fruit, which were those of an oak; she saw it
felled, stripped of its bark, and the branches lopped off; she
saw them about to remove its trunk, and she saw persons
having the dress and appearance of sailors amongst them : it
was brought to the sea shore, and she saw a ship at anchor
near it, on board of which this log of timber was brought.
The ship sailed away from that land. After sailing for some
time, she saw some commotion on board—something was
wrong. She saw smoke, afterwards flames, issuing from the
hold ; all the men got into boats, and left the ship. She
remained with the ship: it seemed to sink to a level with
the water, but did not go lower, as she thinks that the men
must have done something to the ship before they left it,
which prevented it: they had let water into the ship in some
way. After a time she saw a large ship approaching, and
she knew it was a man of war, as she saw cannon on board,
and a number of men, some of them dressed in uniform.
They sent a boat to the ship where she was, and after look-
ing about the deserted vessel, they returned to their own
ship; that she saw them looking at this piece of timber, and
that it was afterwards taken on board the man of war: she
went with the timber. The man of war then sailed away,
and she saw it approaching land which she knew was England.
She saw this timber brought on shore ; she saw it cut up into
planks, and the piece which she had in her hand was a por-
tion of one of the planks, which was used in the construction
of a large ship which she saw building. She saw that vessel
completed; she described its launching, the crowds of per-
sons to witness it, the firing of cannon, and the huzzaing and
shouting. She then described its being rigged, masts and
sails put into it, cannon put on board, and this vessel going
to sea. After some time she described seeing a smaller
vessel as appearing in the distance, and its trying to escape
from the vessel which she was in. She saw them firing cannon
at each other ; but at length the smaller vessel was overtaken,
and she saw men from the larger ship going on board of her,
and the crew taken out of it and sent on board the big
vessel ; then they separated. The big ship in which she re-
mained, continued sailing up and down within sight of the
land. She saw vessels between it and the shore. The big
ship seemed to be waiting for them to come out from the


Mesmerism in Australia. 43


’ land; but they seemed afraid to do so. After some time she
saw three or four come out, and fire at the big ship in which
she was; but as it approached them they went in closer to
the land again. Afterwards she saw two vessels sailing away
from the ship she was in, and which was trying to overtake
them—that there was a great deal of firing, but the vessels
got away from her. Afterwards she saw the ship she was in
approaching land, which she knew was England; that she
anchored there; that great crowds of persons came on board,
and were selling things to the men on board. She saw the
vessel leaning very much to one side; she thought that was
caused by all the cannon being put to one side ; she saw men
doing something to the other side of the vessel. After a
moment she said, “ Doctor, do you know that is very dan-
gerous; for I see the ship leaning over more and more, but
they do not seem to be aware of it. Ah! there is one of
them looking over the side, he seems to be aware of the
danger ; I see him going and speaking to another person, but
he appears to have got some answer that does not please him,
for he walks away quite sulky-looking. Oh! the water is
rushing into the vessel, and she is sinking: I am going down
with her. Oh! what a number of fish there are swimming
about and eating the dead bodies: that is dreadful ; there is
nothing left but bones and skeletons. I think they are try-
ing to get the vessel up again, for I see large hook things let
down to try and lay hold of the vessel, but they are not able
to do so. I see them letting down something like a barrel ;
what can that be for? Oh! I see smoke coming out of it,
and it causes such a commotion, throwing up the mud and
sand, and tearing the vessel to pieces. It has something to
do, I know, with gunpowder, but how can that be under
water? I have come up to the surface of the water with this
piece of wood, and it is floated on shore ; I see a sailor pick-
ing it up.” Then and for the first time was she told that that
piece of wood was a portion of the Royal George, which sunk
at Portsmouth many, many years ago.

I have not given this account in the voluminous and de-
scriptive manner that she did. It could not have been cere-
bral sympathy, as neither Dr. Howitt nor I could have
imagined such a detail. If it was a dream, it was one of the
best connected that I ever heard. The clear manner in which
it was detailed bore the impress of truth, as if all the events
were passing in review before her. Some time afterwards I
was mentioning what I have just narrated to my friend,
Major Davidson, who said, “ Well, doctor, I have something
that I should wish to give her to trace, and no person in this


44. Mesmerism in Australia.


colony except myself knows anything about it.” I said,
“ Very well, Major, we’ll try her with it.” He was going to
tell me about it, but I said, “ No, Major, I would rather
know nothing about it: bring it yourself, and we’ll hear what
she says.” That evening the Major came to my house, and,
after I had mesmerised her, he put into her hand a small
box such as is used for holding apothecaries’ weights and
scales. I asked her to trace that wood from the time it was
growing as a tree. She said, “ Well, it (the box) takes me
over the sea to another land, and I see a fine city; but I do
not stop there; I am brought a long way into the country,
and I now see the tree growing before me.” Asked to de-
scribe the place: “ It is growing in an extensive plain, and I
see a large river near it” (most correct). Asked to describe
the tree; its height, leaves, and what kind of seed it bore.
She gave to the Major’s great satisfaction a most perfect de-
scription of the teak tree; its thick large leaves, its remark-
able seed, and their curious envelope. He said that the box
was brought by him from Gualpara, on the bank of the Bur-
hampooler, in the interior of India, and that he had been to
Calcutta in his route to this colony. Major D. then asked
her were there many more trees of the same kind ; and she
replied, “ Well, I have looked for miles around, and though
I see a great many trees, I cannot see another of this kind”
(most correct). ‘ Now,” said the Major, “can you tell me
how did that tree come by its death ; by the saw, or the axe,
or by what means?” She said, “ Well, when you asked me
that question, I saw the tree lying on the ground with its
roots torn up” (most correct, said the Major). The tree was
uprooted by the force of the wind. She saw it cut into
pieces, and a tall black man making this box out of one of
them. Asked how he made it? She said she saw him using
carefully some small instruments which he held in his hand,
and which she could not see plainly ; that she did not under-
stand it; but that she did not see him using any planes or
chisels in making it, and that she did not see any glue about
the place. The box was made out of a solid piece of wood,
having its cavity dug out.

I could tell you many more instances of this most ex-
traordinary power, but I fear I have been already too prolix ;
I have experienced deep regret at being deprived of the means
of further observation, in consequence of her friends wishing
that she should not be mesmerised any more, as she is cured
of the intense headaches for which she was first mesmerised.
They disappeared entirely after the fourth time of being mes-
merised, and I continued to mesmerise her for the sake of


Mesmerism in Australia. 45


further investigation and observation. Being a person of
pure, moral, excellent disposition, in whose truth and integrity
I could rely, I received with implicit confidence and belief
whatever she told me, satisfied that if there were errors and
inaccuracies they did not proceed from any guile or deceit on
her part; and now, after mgre than twelve months acquaint-
ance with her, I am more firmly confirmed in my belief.

Apart from the many cases where mesmerism has cured
the disease for which the person was mesmerised, I have
derived very great assistance from the opinions of a clair-
voyant in pointing out remedies for other patients. Now
this may be deemed unprofessional by a host of foolometers,
(as the Rev. Sydney Smith calls a certain class of men,) but,
though possessing higher testimonials than the generality of
medical men, I do not despise acquiring further information
even though it does not flow through the ordinary channels
of medical literature, and have the sanction of a Brodie, a
Copland, a Clarke, or a Chambers; as long as I possess the
‘* Mens conscia recti,” I shall make use of every information,
no matter from what source it comes, provided it is likely to
prove of benefit to my patient.

For instance, a short time before I came to this city, one
of the children of a clergyman had died after a protracted
illness of an affection of a most obscure character: after
some time another of the children was similarly affected, and
I was called into consultation: in spite of our combined
medical knowledge the disease was baffling our skill, and
making progress: I was induced, from seeing the successful
result of remedies pointed out by a clairvoyant in other cases,
to try her in this. I placed a lock of the child’s hair in her
hands, without telling her whose it was, or anything about
the case, and I was confident that she knew not whose hair
it was. She told me the appearance of the child, pointed
out the seat of his disease, though she could not describe
what it was; but said that she saw that the boy could be
cured if medical galvanism were used. With the consent of
the other medical gentleman in attendance, I used the means
pointed out, and the child soon recovered. After some months,
when the child had a slight return of the complaint, the same
remedy was used with a like successful result. Now this
remedy had never been thought of by us until mentioned by
the clairvoyant. Many, many are the cases where I have
derived benefit from the suggestion of a clairvoyant: and,
where I find the remedies so recommended to be rational and
feasible, I do not hesitate to give them a trial, and I must
candidly confess that I have always found them beneficial.


46 Mesmerism in Australia.


If a clairvoyant were to point out remedies which I thought
would be injurious, I should not use them.

I have already occupied too much of your time, or I could
give you many cases of extraordinary cures by mesmerism
where all other means had failed. Of its curative powers
there can be no doubt, except im the minds of those obsti-
nate sceptics who are determined to live and die in their
ignorance and unbelief, rather than to witness the truth and
be obliged to relinquish their ill-adopted opinions and confess
their errors. But I must detail to you one case, as it appears
to me to bear upon some statements of Dr. Todd’s, respecting
what he calls “ hysterical coma,” which appeared in a lecture
of his, where he made most uncourteous allusion to you, and
strove with a puny effort to cast a stigma on your honest
exertions to elucidate animal magnetism, of which so little is
yet known,—to support its truths despite the foul aspersions
and calumny of a tribe of egotistic or malignant scribblers.
And to make known to the world the great curative agency of
mesmerism, by which so much relief can be afforded to your
suffering fellow-creatures.

I was called upon one evening, in the absence of Dr.
Howitt: to see one of his patients, she was suffering from
hysterical fits with convulsions of an epileptic character.
She was about 18 years of age. Uterine functions were
deranged, and had been for more than two years. She was
subject to these periodical attacks. I prescribed the usual
means adopted by medical men, and after some time the fits,
&c., subsided with a copious discharge of the renal secretion
and profound sleep. I prescribed, in the intervals, tonic and
mild aperient medicines, under which the general health
appeared to improve, though she was still affected with
these periodic fits: but, as her friends were accustomed to
them, I did not hear about her for some months, until, from
the omission of these medicines, she was attacked with fits
which assumed the rigid form. When the fit seized her,
she became quite insensible, rigid, and cataleptic; in this
state she would remain from twenty to thirty minutes ;
then, with a heavy sigh, the spasmodic state would change
into an apparently comatose condition ; and, after an interval
of ten or twelve minutes, a tremor would pass through her
frame, and another fit of catalepsy would succeed. She con-
tinued thus from eight o’clock, p.m., until two o’clock, a.m.,
when her parents, being alarmed at the continuance of this
state and its appearance being so unlike what they had
hitherto seen, sent into town for me. When I arrived, she
was apparently in the comatose state, but soon became cata-


Mesmerism in Australia. 47


leptic. I commenced to mesmerise her by long passes from
the head downwards, and it was most gratifying to observe in
about three minutes that the cataleptic state was passing off ;
soon the limbs became quite pliant, and the expression of the
features changed to those of a person in a calm and tran-
quil slumber. As I thought that this was natural sleep,
I continued to make the passes to try and induce the mes-
meric sleep. After about twenty minutes, I tried if I could
produce rigidity of one of the arms by making passes along
it, and found that I could make it quite rigid, and then by
some reverse passes that I could remove this rigidity. This
phenomenon made me conclude that she was under the in-
fluence of mesmerism ; and the fact of my being able to re-
move the rigidity by some reverse passes, marks, I think,
the distinction between the natural rigidity with which she
was first affected, and the mesmeric rigidity which I could
produce and remove at pleasure. I then spoke to her, and
was pleased to find that she replied. She said she was very
comfortable ; that she was asleep; and quite free from pain
which had been most acute in her head. Her mother and
sisters spoke to her, but she heard them not; they were not
placed en rapport with her. As she said it did not annoy her,
I continued to converse with her; and, amongst other things,
I asked her, could she see any means or suggest any medi-
cines that would cure her, she said, “Oh! yes; if this
(mesmerism) was done often enough it would quite cure me.”
I asked what she meant by often enough. She said, “If it
was done twice in the week for one month I would be quite
well.”

Oh! that the members of the medical profession would
only see with their own eyes, and judge for themselves of the
great truths of mesmerism, and not allow their minds to be
influenced, and their judgment perverted by the malevolent
and mendacious assertions of a Wakley, a Bushnan, a Dilke,
or a Martin, and such like bold daring propagators of false-
hood, to conceal their own ignorance, or prop up their ex-
pressed and preconceived opinions, from which, for the sake
of maintaining an ill-judged consistency, they dare not re-
cant. How dastardly and contemptible does the conduct of
Dr. M. Hall appear, in making a false statement about a
poor, but honest, man (Wombell;) and, when detected and
contradicted in the clearest manner, not possessing the manly
candour and honesty of admitting his error, but striving to
palm off the invention by various reflex movements on some
nameless unknown originator.

How much more successful would have been Dr. Bush-


48 The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled.


nan’s efforts to write himself into notoriety if he had kept
his appointment with you, and witnessed some of the phe-
nomena of mesmerism, instead of wielding his pen in so bad
a cause, and declaiming with bitter and senseless invective
against a subject of which he was so profoundly ignorant.
If a trivial operation at the Free Hospital, however ill-advised
and tediously performed, were to be recorded, in order to
drag before public notice the assumed merits and skill of the
operator, because he was a scion of the house of Wakley,
with what fulsome panegyric would it be blazoned forth in
the venal pages of the Lancet, stripped of the purity of truth,
and veiled in the garb of mendacity and delusion, “ad cap-
tandum vulgus.” What cheering consolation that charitable
benevolent Hakim, Dr. Copland, gives to his sick patients,
who, in dread of a surgeon’s knife, wearied out with wake-
fulness, or suffering acute bodily pain, hear him pronounce
in his blandest and most soothing tones, “ That pain is a wise
provision of nature, that they ought to suffer pain while the
surgeon is operating, that they are all the better for it, and
recover better.” Verily, such opinions uttered by one of the
Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, and listened to, and
countenanced by others of its members, including the great
Cesar himself, will doubtless cause the name of the society
to be handed down to posterity, not as having conferred great
benefits to science or society, but as a beacon to warn others
against the dangers of arrogance, intolerance, and blinded
scepticism.

Of course you may make whatever use you choose of
anything I write to you. Of the cases which I have written,
they are facts: “vera esse affirmo.”* Should you wish it
I shall send for The Zoist some remarkable cases of paralysis
and chronic rheumatism which have been cured by me; and
which I can get testified to by the patients themselves and
their friends.

Believe me, my dear Sir, to remain,
Yours very truly,


J. B. MorHerweE Lt.
To Dr. Elliotson, Conduit Street.


III. The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled. Communicated by
Mr. Actanp.


“ «T have remarked certain laws, which God has so established in nature and
of which he has impressed such notions on our souls, that, after having sufficiently
reflected on them, we shall no longer doubt that they have been exactly observed
in all which exists, or has been created in the world.’—Descartes, Method, p. 5.


* Dr. Elliotson’s Harveian Oration, p. 34.


The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled. 49


‘* The sublime audacity of the attempt almost makes us forget, for a moment,
its presumption; but, as we reflect on the immense accumulations of a score of
sciences (half of them born since Descartes’ day), and still how imperfectly,—
separately or conjointly,—they unlock the mysteries of nature; how little man
yet knows, compared with what remains to be known by patient interpretation,—
we are soon recalled to amazement rather at the temerity than the courage of the
philosopher. How little, we are ready to exclaim, can even the mind of a
Descartes’ anticipate, of the profundities of the universe ; and how worthy is that
cardinal maxim of Bacon, of being deeply engraven on man’s memory, as a
lesson of humility as well as truth in philosophy, ‘ that the subtlety of nature
Sar transcends the subtlety of either sense or intellect.’ Viewed, in comparison
with the actual accumulations of modern science, the rude mechanical, and
still ruder chemical hypotheses, by which Descartes explains so many cosmical


and physiological mysteries, appear even ludicrous” —Edinburgh Review, January,
1852; p. 21.


A Lecture was delivered, on the 5th of Feb., 1852, at the
City of London Institution, Aldersgate Street, by Mr. George
Swan Nottage, a member, for the purpose of demonstrating
that the metallic discs as electrical agents in what is termed
electro-biology are needless and delusive, and that all results
attributed to them can as successfully be produced without
them. George Smith, Esq., of Regent Street, one of the
managers of the institution, presided. The following lecture
will shew the circumstances in which it was delivered.


** Ladies and Gentlemen,—

“I have a very plain, simple, and straightforward course of action
before me this evening; so simple, that the merest child can com-
prehend it, while the subject upon which it will be brought to bear
is one of the most profound which can occupy the attention of the
philosopher. A subject so subtle and occult, that men of the most
gifted intellect who have studied it laboriously for years, and whose
collection of facts for induction is most extensive, are the first to
acknowledge their own comparative ignorance. Like Sir Isaac
Newton, when speaking of his astronomical discoveries, they feel, as
if they had merely picked up a few shells and pebbles upon the shore
of truth, while the vast ocean before them lies still unexplored.

“I might fairly be accused of presumption if I had put myself
forward to occupy this prominent position, to prove in public that
which could as satisfactorily have been proved in private. It will,
however, be in the recollection of the audience, or rather of those
who were present at Mr. Fiske’s lecture, on the last Monday but one
in January, that I expressed a decided opinion that the zinc and
copper discs, used in what is termed electro-biology, had no such
power .as had been ascribed to them, and the remarkable results
could, as successfully, be produced without them. This conclusion
was formed by a little reasoning on the matter, and subsequently
confirmed by actual experiment. I thought it only due to the
audience who were so much interested in this subject, to make known
to them this result, and also to ask for Mr. Fiske’s explanation.
The reply I got was: ‘that those whom I had influenced without the

VOL. xX. E


50 The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled.


zine and copper were naturally in a “biological” condition.’ The
obvious enquiry after so singular a solution of the difficulty was, what
accounted for all my patients being naturally biological while his
(Mr. Fiske’s) were not assumed or held to be so? To this rejoinder
I only got the reply: ‘that it was very strange, but so it was.’ Of
course I was not satisfied with this solution, and further investiga-
tion and experiments only made me less so. On the following
Monday, I informed Mr. Fiske, in the presence of the audience after
the lecture was concluded, that I had overwhelming evidence that
the dises as electrical agents were delusive; and for the purpose of
investigating the matter fully, I proposed to invite a// the gentlemen
that were under the alleged disc influence that evening, to meet me
for the purpose of ascertaining whether I could not in every respect,
in principle and in detail, produce the same results without these
galvanic influences. I further proposed that two well known impar-
tial members of the institution should be appointed to fill the office
of arbitrators, for the purpose of severely investigating and testing
this matter, and that they should be requested to report the result of
their examination on the following Monday. Presuming of course
that all parties were eager to find the truth of the matter, I thought
this an unexceptionable arrangement. It was however declined, and
instead of an answer, the lecturer replied, by stating he would give
me £100 if I could perform a biological experiment by mesmerism.
Of course such an offer was very tempting, and I asked for a defini-
tion of terms. I was told that the lecturer was not there to define
terms. Of course my prospects of the £100 were blighted. I then
put the home question, ‘Can you, Mr. Fiske, perform any experi-
ments with these discs which I cannot perform without them.’ The
reply I got was: ‘I had better Aire the hall, and pay for it as he had
done!’ This pseudo challenge which was intended as an ‘extin

guisher’ had precisely the contrary effect, and satisfied of the justice
of my cause, and the reality of my facts, and anxious to substantiate
the assertions I had made to my brother members, I instantly closed
with the proposition, and I now have the honour to appear before
you to fulfil my engagement.

“To commence ; the proposition that I have to submit and prove
to you is this, that the zinc and copper dises employed as electrical
agents in what is termed electro-biology are needless and delusive,
and that all results which have been attributed to them can as effi-
ciently be produced without them. Many are now present who will
recollect that when this subject was first introduced to this institu-
tion, a great and mysterious agency was attributed to these united
metallic substances : we were told of circles of electricity passing from
the brain to the disc and from the disc to the brain, and that all
electric power originated in the dise; in other words, the lecturer
said, ‘I rely for everything upon the dises’—these, as Shylock says,
are the very words.*

* The metallic discs, consisting of zinc with a centre of copper, used by the


professors of electro-biology (?), cannot exercise any influence on the nerves and
brain, as alleged by them, inasmuch as even if we allow that zine and copper in


‘|


‘|


The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled. 51


** Of course after this, every one looked with great reverence, not to
say fear, upon these wonderful substances, and, every body having
invested a shilling in one, every body felt as if it were the most
mysterious shilling’s worth he had ever purchased, and seriously
debated in his own mind whether it was quite safe to carry it home
in his pocket, or trust himself alone with it; wondered at his
temerity ; felt as if by a rash act he had suddenly become possessed
of a small electrical Frankenstein, which was to haunt him for the
remainder of his days. Familiarity, however, very much lessens
fear : and, when the ‘father of a family’ found to his astonishment
that even ‘baby’ could play with it, and no evil consequences fol-
lowed, he, like young Oliver, plucked up a spirit and took courage.
Simultaneously with this, doubts began to prevail amongst the single
men, and experiments were performed to test their power. Un-
fortunately for the electrical dise theory, walking sticks, thumb nails,
gun wadding, and even vacancy answered the purpose quite as well ;
and the result was, to use a commercial expression, the discs were
freely offered at a considerable discount, but there were few pur-
chasers. I shall then for the present assume, as proved, that the
metallic discs are in no way the powerful agents they are repre-
sented to be. The satisfactory demonstration of this can only be
shewn by actual experiment; but, when this is proved, some people
will still ask what is electro-biology? Is it a new power, or is it a
well known one with new developments? This is a very reasonable
enquiry, and as such should be fairly and honestly met. I will en-
deavour to do so to the best of my ability. Most of those now pre-
sent have seen what are termed ‘ electro-biological experiments
performed; but, as I understand there are several here to-night who
have not seen anything of the kind, perhaps those of my friends who
have, will bear with me a few moments while I describe them.

“The modus operandi is this. The operator invites a number of


contact with moist skin may create a voltaic circuit, still as electricity always
travels by the best conductors and the shortest road, it would only pass over the
minute portion of skin forming the connexion between the two metals (probably
not the one-eighth of an inch in extent), and having thus got over the interval
would pass round in an unceasing current without having the slightest tendency
to penetrate deeper into the system, or extend itself over the surface; and even
should it be contended that some diffusion of the influence must take place, as it
happens-that the nerves are far worse conductors of electricity than the muscles,
it is absolutely impossible that they or the brain can be at all influenced. It is
very doubtful whether under the circumstances of the contact of dissimilar metals
and the skin in its ordinary dry state, any current would be set up; but allowing
its existence, its path would be as above stated, and the quantity and intensity
would be so small that no physiological effect could be produced by it ; every elec-
trician knowing that hundreds of series of a water battery are required to produce
any perceptible effects, and that in all electrical experiments, the extent of the
influence, whether it be chemical decomposition, shocks, or otherwise, is entirely
under control, and is always exactly limited by the distance of the electrodes or
poles. Were the theory of these professors, viz., that the substance surrounding
a voltaic battery is affected by the current, correct, then we should obtain all the
effects of a battery by touching the liquid in the cells; whereas every one knows
that in order to obtain evidence of electrical action, it is necessary to place the
substance to be operated on in the circuit between the metals.


E 2


52 The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled.


gentlemen from the audience to be operated upon. Having taken
their seats, he places in each of their hands one of the zine and
copper discs, with instructions to look at it for a few minutes, keep-
ing the mind at the same time perfectly calm and tranquil. The
audience are likewise requested to be quite silent. In the meanwhile
the operator begins his round, and, passing the back of his hand
(which is stated to be negative) over the forehead of the patient, he
spans his frontal bone, pinches his thumb, and walks on. After
going through these manipulations three times, the discs are taken
away and each gentleman is gently requested to close his eyes. We
have now then our 20 or 30 friends in a most enviable state of calm-
ness and tranquillity. The operator now goes his final round, be-

inning at the first gentleman, tells him to open his eyes, which he
ne without any difficulty; he is then told to close them, and then
downward passes are made from the forehead to the cheeks; he is
then again told to open his eyes, and if the patient is susceptible to
the influence,—strain, wriggle, and twist as he may, his eyes he can-
not open. The magic words, ‘all right, Sir, all right, restores to
him his valued sense; and as he opens his eyes upon the world again,
his astonishment affords additional mirth to his friends. This goes
on through the whole series, the monotony of which is quite removed
by the varied manifestations of the patients, their expressions rang-
ing from the smile of incredulity to that of the most abject wonder.
The susceptible are then drafted upon the platform, and those sin-
gular experiments are performed which many have seen and all
have heard of. And this is termed ‘ e/ectro-biology,—a name of
American origin ; or in other words, the ‘ electrical science of life.’
And persons who take lessons from its professors, are charged £3 : 3s.
for the same, and are bound on their ‘ sacred honour’ not to teach it
under three months, and then are compelled to exact the same terms
to which they have submitted. Should they ever become public
lecturers, a further amount is demanded, and thus a partial ‘bio-
logical’ monopoly is secured.

“Now I contend that there is nothing really new in all this, but
merely another development of a power with which we have been
acquainted for years. Bacon says, in his Zssay on Vain Glory, ‘It
was prettily devised by sop, the fly sat upon the axle-tree, and
exclaimed, ‘‘See what a dust I raise;”’ so there are some persons
that, whatsoever moveth upon greater means, if they have ever so
little hand in it, they think they carry it. You have nearly all of
you, 1 presume, seen experiments in mesmerism, or what is by some
termed animal magnetism. The operator steadily fixing his gaze on
the patient with or without the downward passes. If the patient be
very susceptible, in a few minutes his eyes begin to blink, they then
close, and he is then in a state or condition which soon resolves
itself into what is termed ‘ sleep-waking.’ In this state the patient
converses with you quite rationally. His imagination is then
generally in that peculiar condition, that you can influence it as you
please; and his limbs are in many cases entirely under your control.
Shortly after the Fretich revolution of February, 1848 (for it is quite


The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled. 53


necessary now they are so numerous to give the precise date), I had
a young friend at my house for the purpose of shewing some sceptical
friends some genuine mesmeric phenomena. The sleep being* in-
duced, I made him believe that he was at the head of a body of
fighting men in France. The military waive of the hand, and the
advancing step, soon shewed that his martial spirit was fired. Sud-
denly making his men fall back, he loaded a cannon in a most
energetic style, fired it, and then gazed with the most intense eager-
ness to see the effect produced. Seizing the advantage of the con-
fusion he had made, he rallied his men,, rushed forward, obtained the
victory, and waived his sword in triumph. It was now suggested to
him that he should go to Notre Dame, and return thanks for his
victory. He instantly obeyed, and superintended the piling of the
muskets of his men outside the church; he then entered, and fell
down upon his knees with an expression of the deepest gratitude. A
friend, who had been chanting a low dirge to assist the illusion, now
suddenly, at our request, burst into a lively merry tune. The boy
started from his knees with the fiercest expression of anger, rushed
at him with his fists clenched, and in another moment, if the gentle-
man had not ceased, he would have smashed his face in. Now this
is precisely the kind of experiment which is shewn in the highest
classes of the new biological phenomena, with this difference, that
the patient in the latter case is awake, and in the former he is in sleep-
waking.

‘* It was discovered by a gentleman in America, who renounces
and repudiates all connection with ‘ biologists,’ that under certain
tranquilizing influences the imagination could be worked upon at a
much earlier stage than was generally known ; and you will find in
the Boston Morning Post, of Dec. 4th, 1843, several years before
Mr. Fiske was Dods’s pupil, this gentleman, Mr. La Roy Sunderland,
performed these experiments publicly in Boston. Mr. Fiske, how-
ever, asserts that no person was ever mesmerised without having
first been sent to sleep, and thereby tries to make a further distinc-
tion. This I am in a position to deny, and one case is as good as a
thousand. A well known member of the committee of this institu-
tion was mesmerised by me some years since, in the library of this
institution, without ever having been sent to sleep. His arms were
made perfectly rigid, and I placed a large and heavy pile of books
upon them, which he sustained for a long period and felt no incon-
venience therefrom. For the benefit of some of the sceptics on the
committee I left his arm in that state, so that when we sat down to
business his arm was extended over the table, and he had no power
to remove it. Mr. Fiske may reply with a peculiarly vague mean-
ing, that I ‘ biologized’ him; but this will not do. I made precisely
those passes which I made here the other evening, and which he
declared were mesmeric. So the fact remains impregnable. 1 con-
sider therefore Mr. Fiske’s oLjection disposed of.

“T have strong confirmatory proofs of, the identity of mes-


* By Mr. William Cattell.


54 The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled.


merism and electro-biology from all parts of the country. Dr.
Elliotson, Dr. Gregory, Professor of Chemistry in the Edinburgh
University,* Dr. Ashburner, and Dr. Engledue, all unite in ascribing
it to the same power, and even Mr. Stone, one of their own lectur-
ing fraternity, has sent in his adhesion. While the biologists have
not, as I am aware, one single name in Hngland of any eminence to
support their theory. It is true that Mr. Fiske mentions the names
of Sir Benjamin Brodie,t Lord Eglinton, and Sir David Brewster,
as believers in electro-biology. But this is not the case. Sir Ben-
jamin Brodie has written to the papers repudiating any connection
with it whatever. Lord Eglinton in his letter calls the facts mes-
meric. Sir David says it is only the facts he believes ; but speaks,
as becomes a great man, with much caution in respect of the
cause, and he believes it has yet to be discovered. This is one of
the cases in which half truth is no truth. I have therefore yet to
learn the name of any man of scientific acquirements who has taken
up the theory of electro-biology. All the Americans have discovered
is, thatt the imagination placed under the influence of a little mesmerism
is extremely susceptible to impressions, and that impressions then made
have all the reality of facts. They have also economized time very
much in arrangement, by having all patients tranquillized at one time ;
which is of great advantage. It is like marrying 50 couple at one
time, as they do in the populous districts, —a system which, although
now and then the couple get wrongly matched, yet on the whole
may be said to work well.
‘*Certain Welshmen, you know, claim the honour of the discovery
of America as belonging to their country, and, as a proof of their
claim, say that, some hundreds of years since, a certain prince left
their shores in a sailing vessel and was never heard of afterwards ;
and if he did not go to America, where did he goto? Now, I think
you will agree with me, it is for honest Taffy to prove that the
‘nay did go to America, not for you to go all over the world to
earn tidings of him. So it is for the electro-biologists to prove that
electricity accounts for all the results produced, and not for you to
have the trouble to disprove it.
** And now, in conclusion, one word with respect to mesmerism.


* It is very much to be regretted that one who has done such good service in
advancing the cause of mesmerism in Scotland, should in his work on this subject
have introduced so much loose matter in reference to the exhibitions and opinions
of certain itinerant lecturers on “ electro-biology.” An adventitious importance
has thus been given to these ‘‘ small game” of which they are wholly innocent,
and the Doctor’s name is moreover publicly cited by them as one of the cham-
pions of electro-biology, zinc and copper delusion included! It is earnestly to
be hoped that, should another edition of this work be published, such very ques-
tionable matter will be excladed, and many other loosely written passages be con-
densed or altogether omitted. The work would then become a valuable addition
to mesmeric literature, and be worthy of its subject and its author.

+ Sir Benjamin’s theory is that the effects produced must be the result of a
strong mind over a weak one. Sir Benjamin had better not theorize before he
has examined the facts.

t See Dr. Elliotson’s, Dr. Engledue’s, and Dr. Ashburner’s articles in The
Zoist.


mane


The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled. 55


Some people say, ‘ Oh, we hear nothing of mesmerism now; where
is it?’ I answer, out of the hands of the itinerant quacks, and in
the hands of those who are using it for high and beneficent pur-
poses. If any one wishes for confirmation of this, let him institute
a few enquiries, and I will be bold to affirm that any man who will
— examine the alleged facts with a cool judgment and an
honest heart cannot but be convinced of their genuineness and truth.
Those who are acquainted with the literature of this question, who
daily read the accounts of its high curative agency coming thick and
fast as they do from all parts of the world, cannot but feel their
hearts moved as they read the soul-deep effusions of gratitude to God
for the inestimable boon that it has conferred in removing or allaying
human suffering. Let the enquirer for truth in this matter go to
the Mesmeric Infirmary,—a society which numbers amongst its
officers (amidst a host of others) the greatest logician, and one of
the greatest mathematicians of the age. I refer to Dr. Whately of
Dublin, and Mr. De Morgan the celebrated author of the work on
Probabilities and professor of mathematics at the University Col-
lege. With these you will find associated the practical Earl Ducie,
and the most esteemed and beloved nobleman in England, the Earl
of Carlisle, who I may mention is a good mesmerist. These are
names which should make puny dogmatism modest, and pause be-
fore it condemns. Go there, and you will find that hundreds of cures
have been effected; go to Dr. Esdaile, and you will find that in
a report to the Medical Gazette, he relates 161 cases of tumors,
some being more than 100 lbs. in weight, removed by him without
the slightest pain, and in cases where chloroform would have been
fearfully perilous. Visit Mr. Parker, of Exeter, and he will tell you
of 200 operations he has performed without the slightest pain to the
patient. Hundreds of additional cases could be cited if time per-
mitted; and I can fearlessly declare that those who believe all these
collateral evidences and or *whelming facts to be FALSE, are more cre-
dulous than those who believe them to be TRUE.

*« And now a parting word as to the conduct of the medical pro-
fession generally in relation to this great question. I wish to be
understood, in the one or two remarks I am about to make, to refer
only to these gentlemen as a profession. There are amongst them
names worthy of the highest esteem; but as a profession, the course
of conduct which they have pursued upon this subject reflects eternal
disgrace. Would it be believed in this age of scientific advance-
ment, that the committee of a medical college should stipulate and
require that every student entering it, should sign a declaration that
he would never practise this science or investigate its phenomena.”

‘Bigotry is not confined to religion: it invades the walks of
science. As it expands, reason contracts; and the one stands in
inverse ratio to the other. As a foul tumor preys upon the vitality
of the body and transmutes health into disease, so bigotry preys upon
the reason and transforms light into darkness, and blinds the eye to


* Stated on the authority of a surgeon in Dublin.


56 The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled.


the proofs of demonstration. Persecution as a natural consequence
follows in its train, and the result has been that men of the most
profound medical attainments and the highest moral worth, have had
their characters held up to execration as quacks and impostors, and
have been hunted down in their professions with a malevolence al-
together unparalleled. And for what? for daring to be honest to
their own convictions. And foremost amongst these stands the
honoured name of Eiliotson. This name has stood, and still stands,
as the target for the shafts of calumny that are weekly sent forth
from the medical press of this country by writers who know that what
they write is false, or else, which is scarcely less culpable, might know
it to be false. These men, if their might had been as powerful as
their malice was implacable, would long since have accomplished and
triumphed over his destruction. To conclude in the language of one
of the most eloquent of men :—

***To the eyes of posterity it will appear an indelible disgrace,
that in the nineteenth century, an age which boasts its science and
improvement, one of the first physicians in Europe, of a character
unblemished, and of manners the most mild and gentle, should have
been held up by his profession to the ridicule and contempt of his
countrymen. From him, however, these poisoned arrows will fall
pointless. His enlightened mind, his unwearied assiduity, the
extent of his researches in this department of science, will be the
admiration of the period when those who have maligned him will be
all forgotten. Distinguished merit will ever rise superior to oppres-
sion, and will draw lustre from reproach. The vapours which gather
round the rising sun and follow it in its course seldom fail at the
close of it to form a magnificent temple for its reception, and to
invest with variegated tints and with a softened effulgence the Lumi-
nary which they cannot hide.’ ”


Mr. Nottage then proceeded to the experiments. There
were from twenty to twenty-five gentlemen who came down
to be operated upon, and in each of their hands the lecturer
placed a small paper pellet, which he informed them was
merely for the purpose of concentrating their attention and
tranquilizing their minds, so that they might be more passive
to receive a slight mesmeric influence, which he would pre-
sently endeavour to impart. After the sitting of ten minutes
was concluded, during which time Mr. Nottage placed the
front of his hands once or twice upon the forehead of each
subject, he found that he had eight or nine under his con-
trol; and upon these he performed a series of experiments
which rivetted the attention of the audience to a late hour.

At the conclusion of the lecture, Mr. Nottage said that
he wished then to refer to an incident which had taken place
at one of Mr. Fiske’s lectures. He continued:—‘“Sir, it will
be remembered by many present that Mr. Fiske, on a late
oceasion when I mentioned to him the number I had in-


i
i


tec: pill


——


The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled. 57


fluenced in private, said, ‘Sir, here are four gentlemen
(pointing to those whom he had brought under his “ bio-
logical” control), upon whom I will defy you to exercise any
similar influence.’ I ascended the platform, little suspecting
any manceuvres on the part of the ‘reverend gentleman;’ and
found, to my astonishment, that I had no influence whatever
over them. On returning home, I looked at a book written
by an American on this subject, and found it distinctly laid
down, that, when the operator told another person that he
could not influence his subjects, it would be impossible for
him to do so; but if he granted permission, then the third
person could operate as well as the first. With this fact be-
fore you, ladies and gentlemen, I will leave you to form your
own conclusions as to the candour of this reverend gentle-
man.”

Mr. Slade (Mr. Fiske’s assistant)—“ Sir, I deny before
this audience that Mr. Fiske used any ‘ influence’ over those
gentlemen.”

Mr. Nottage—* Let’s have no equivocation here. I
stated, Sir, that Mr. Fiske defied me in the presence and
hearing of these gentlemen to operate upon them. I never
said he used any ‘influence,’ meaning as you do a mental or
physical influence; but that the word of defiance was all
powerful to produce the ‘ biological’ impression on the minds
of his subjects.”

Mr. Slade—“ I am here to deny that Mr. Fiske used any
influence whatever.”

Mr. Nottage—‘ Well then, Sir, to put this matter beyond
further cavil, I will ask Mr. Slade how it was that, on that
same evening, on Mr. Fiske’s retiring during the proceedings,
you at his request continued the operations upon those very
gentlemen which I, as against his defiance, could not? Have
you a ‘ gift,’ which I have not? Cannot I raise a spirit as
well as you?” (Mr. Slade was silent. Loud and long con-
tinued cheering from the audience.)

Some discussion here arose whether Mr. Fiske learnt his
science from the Muftis, or whether he was a pupil of Mr.
Dods of America. Mr. Slade disavowed his asserted decla-
ration that Mr. Fiske had derived what he knew from the
Muftis, observing that he must have said in reply to any
enquiry on the subject that Mr. Fiske was Dods’s pupil. The
lecturer, however, distinctly declared that Mr. Slade informed
him, in the ante-room of that Institution, that Mr. Fiske, in
reply to a member at the institution in Leicester Square,
stated that he derived it from the Muftis, who had the power
of influencing numbers at once. This circumstance he (Mr.


58 The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled.


Nottage) communicated to some friends immediately after-
wards, and it had become a standing joke with them ever
since.

Mr. Howard Kennard—“ Sir, what Mr. Nottage has now
stated, he repeated to me immediately after the conversation
had taken place.”

It was then moved and seconded,—“ That this meeting,
whilst tendering its thanks to George Swan Nottage, Esq.,
for his able and eloquent lecture, desires to record its opinion
that he has thereby satisfactorily disproved the alleged neces-
sity of metallic discs in inducing the “ so-called electro-bio-
logical” condition ; such result having been this evening pro-
duced by the use of ordinary paper pellets, or gun wadding.”

Before the sense of the meeting was taken upon this reso-
lution, Mr. Slade said that several of those who had been ope-
rated upon that evening were under the influence of the disc :
upon which some stepped forward and stated that they had
never had one in their hands, and yet they had been quite as
much affected as those upon whom Mr. Fiske had experi-
mented with his discs. A gentleman observed that if the
lecturer had used the discs, more might have been affected.

The motion being then put, and only three hands being
held up against it, the chairman declared it to have been all
but unanimously carried.

Mr. Nottage in rising to return thanks, said—*“ Sir, I am
aware it is very unusual to enter into arguments on acknow-
ledging a vote of thanks; but in discussing this vote, argu-
ments having been advanced which I think unsound, I must
be allowed to notice them. The might-have-been argument
which has been advanced with respect to the discs acting as
electrical forces on the ulnar and median nerves, is untenable
in a philosophical discussion. Certain obese animals possess-
ing bristles instead of wings ‘ might’ fly, we are told; but
the old proverb reminds us that they are very unlikely birds
(laughter). However, for the gentleman’s satisfaction, I may
mention that some, whom Mr. Fiske on a previous evening sent
away unaffected by his electrical discs, had previously yielded
to my non-electrical pellets. By parity of reasoning then,
and with this fact in my favour, I ask, if Mr. Fiske had
used paper instead of zinc and copper, might not he have
affected greater numbers? To rest the argument on these
non-essentials, the gentleman himself must see to be absurd.”

Mr. Nottage, having disposed of some other objections
which had been raised, concluded amidst much cheering, by
declaring that his only object in taking so prominent a part
in this matter was to strip science of.the filthy rags of de-


The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled. 59


ception and quackery by which she had been obscured, and

to invest her with the pure and spotless robes of innocence

and truth.

= + eae proceeds of the lecture were presented to the Amazon
nd.


On Friday, the 13th July, Mr. Nottage gave another
lecture at the same institution, in reply to a grossly personal
attack made upon him by Mr. Fiske, in reference to this
lecture. On this occasion the identity of mesmerism and
electro-biology was again pointed out, and the usual routine
experiments were successfully performed by Mr. Nottage,
after the subjects had merely gazed at their ruumss. The
results were exceedingly striking. The proceeds upon this
occasion were presented to the lron, Hardware, and Metal
Trades’ Pension Society.

In the course of the second lecture, Mr. Nottage called
on Mr. T. W. Burr, the Secretary of the Philosophical Class
of the institution, to express his opinion on the work of the
great master (!) of the new science (?). Mr. Burr thereupon
reviewed Electro-Psychology by Dods, in a very clever speech,
in which he most happily exposed the absurdities of that ad
captandum author, from whom the biologists derive all their
ideas, and from whom many of them pilfer entire pages with-
out acknowledgment.

The following is a brief abstract of Mr. Burr’s review.

“The work called Electro-Psychology, edited by Darling,
from the writings of Dods and Grimes, is almost entirely
composed of absurdities ; but they are generally so connected
together as to prevent extract. The following are, however,
specimens of assertions that can be detached, from which the
ignorance of electricity and every other science displayed by
the writers may be somewhat estimated.

“ Speaking of the creation. ‘It is therefore contended
that all things were made out of electricity, which is not only
an invisible and imponderable substance, but is primeval and
eternal matter.’ How can a substance be both invisible and
imponderable? Such things as heat, light, and electricity,
are forces, not substances.—‘ Hence electricity contains the
elementary principles of all things in being, and contains
them in their original, invisible, and imponderable state.’
‘Suppose that there are one hundred elements belonging to
this globe: then there are one hundred elements in electricity
out of which this globe was created. We will step back in
our imaginations to that period when this globe, as such, had
no existence. For the sake of perspicuity we will suppose


60 The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled.


one hundred cords to be fastened on these one hundred ele-
ments in electricity. Now as the Eternal Mind can come in
direct contact with electricity only, so he exerted his volun-
tary powers that constitute his creative energy, and con-
densed those one hundred elements that constitute electricity
down to a more gross and dense state, each element sliding
down its own cord in its progress towards creation.’ ‘The
Creator again acts through another volume of electricity upon
those one hundred partially condensed elements, and moves
them down a grade further onward toward their ultimate or
created state. And thus the work progresses ; wave succes-
sively following wave down its own cords till they all become
air. Hence air contains the one hundred elements; and all
the chemical properties of all things in being are involved in
it.’ ‘ Hence water contains all the chemical properties of all
things in being.’ ‘It will be clearly perceived that all the
substances existing on the globe as so many ultimates exist
in electricity as so many primates. For instance; if there is
gold in the globe, then there is gold in electricity, out of
which it was made: if there is phosphate of lime in the
globe, then there is phosphate of lime in electricity.’

“ Comment upon such absurdity is unnecessary. Having
shewn their knowledge of chemistry, let us turn to astronomy
and physics.

«The sun being pure electricity, is of course a cold, in-
visible body.’—Here follows a long theory of light, asserting
that the electricity of the sun rubs the atmosphere, and by
the friction sets it on fire. We did not before know it was at
all combustible, and where a fresh supply comes from we are
not informed.—The globe is then described as still imperfect,
and receiving electricity from the sun ‘to bring it to its full
growth and perfection as a meet habitation for man.’ ‘It
continues to increase in bulk, and hence its entire creation as
to its size, vegetables, and animals, is not yet perfected, but
will be in future ages.’ ‘ Hence the cause of the variation of
the compass, which in philosophy yet remains inscrutable.’—
‘Comets move in very elliptical orbits.” There are but four
known to move in such orbits, while there are hundreds or
even thousands which describe parabolas.—‘ The cause of this
is that, while they are chained by the attractive and repulsive
forces to keep a circle, yet as they are propelled in a straight
line sky-rocket like by their own internal gaseous flames that
stream in their course, so their orbits are elliptical.’ Comets
are not turning bodies at all, and are only hot when near the
sun. Bodies acted on by two forces, such as the centripetal
and centrifugal, need not necessarily move in ellipses, but


The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled. 61


may describe any conic section.—‘ Immensity of space is not
square, for then worlds would move in a square, but it is
round.’ The idea of giving a definite form to boundless
space, and the logic by which that space is arrived at, are
equally wonderful.

“<«The globe yet moves in an elliptical orbit, because its
bowels are melted lava.’ Since the days of Newton it has
been supposed that gravitation was the cause of the shape of
the earth’s orbit, but he was not an electro-biologist, and
consequently knew nothing about it.—‘ As it cools it conti-
nually approximates in its orbit nearer to a circle.’ There is
no connection whatever between the decrease in eccentricity
of the earth’s orbit and the cooling of its crust, and after a
certain point it (the orbit) will become elliptical again.—‘ This
will cause the variation of the compass to continue till it (the
earth) moves in a perfect circle round the sun. Then it will
be perfectly finished as to its size. Then the variation of the
compass will cease, inasmuch as the cause that produces it
will be removed. That cause is the elliptical orbit in which
our globe moves, and its continual approach to a circle. And
when that circle shall be obtained, the globe will be finished,
and the variation of the compass will disappear.’


“The impudence and ignorance of all this is disgusting.
Were it necessary to give a serious answer, it would be suffi-
cient to point out that 200 years ago there was no variation
of the compass, and that it periodically fluctuates about 25
degrees east and west of the true north.”


NOTE BY THE ZOIST.


The more we look at the practices of these electro-biolo-
gists or electro-psychologists, as they call themselves, the more
are we disgusted.

We have just seen one of the bills which Mr Fiske circu-
lates amongst his audiences, and therefore virtually adopts.
In the midst of many other testimonials from newspapers is
the following :— :


‘Mr. Fiske is by far the most interesting biologist that we have
ever had the pleasure of hearing. He has moreover the advantage
and merit of being the discoverer of this science, which may have the
most important results in medicine. He speaks well, shews exten-
sive knowledge, solid judgment, and a contempt of quackery.”


When we heard Mr. Fiske for the first time, we thought
we had heard or read something like his lecture before.


62 The Galvanic Dise Delusion dispelled.


Harvey, Galileo, Newton, Fulton, were all paraded before us
in a familiar drapery, and yet we could not for the moment
recollect where we had met with them. The next day we
dipped into a work on Electro-Biology, or, the Electrical
Science of Life, by G. W. Stone, when lo! and behold, there
started up our great geniuses as we had seen them the night
before. Well, thought we, we have got at the bottom of the
matter now—Fiske has learnt from Stone! Most impotent
conclusion! Immediately afterwards we procured Dods’s Lec-
tures on Electro-Psychology ; when, judge our surprise to find
that Fiske had not only read large portions of these, but that
Stone had actually printed entire lectures, and passed them
off as his own !

Dr. Darling, in a recent book, appends the following sen-
tences from a newspaper, thus virtually adopting them :—


** The following letters, one to and one from the Earl of Eglinton,
refer to the very peculiar power possessed by Dr. Darling, and which
it appears he can communicate to others,” &c.


Lord Eglinton writes thus :—


‘* Sir,—Having perfectly satisfied myself of the truthfulness of
your performances, and of the existence of the mesmeric power dis-
covered by you to exist, &c.

“‘Eeuinton and Winton.”


Dr. Darling has just published under a new title a book
which is the very same as one which he published last year:
and has copied Dods with the omission of the chapter in which
Dods professes to reveal the mighty secret, which was to press
certain parts of the head and hand. The second edition of
Dods’s, containing the secret, was published six months before
Darling’s book.

We do not know that the fourth American, Dr. Warren,
Warner, or Warne, or whatever his name is, has written any
thing : but, like the rest, he has pretended that there is a secret
in this simple matter, and pretended that certain parts must
be touched ; even if he have not, like the rest, professed the
mystery of electrical discs.

Like the rest he sold the secret for some pounds to the
credulous; and on the understanding that it should not be
divulged for three months, and then to persons only who
would make the same promise, and so on ad infinitum. It
appears (No XXXII.) that he once called on Dr. Elliotson,
and promised to call again, but has never ventured upon a
second visit, though still in London.

An Englishman, named Hicks, who seems anxious to
expose what imposture there exists, sells dises for sixpence at


The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled. 63


his lecture-room door, but allows that their influence is en-
tirely upon the imagination.

As to Dods himself, the progenitor of this American
swarm, we extract the following from the Boston Daily Mail
of Feb. 7, 1850. The article is vulgarly headed, “ The cat
let out of the bag—Mr. Fiske’s Biology exposed, and the whole
science of zinc and copper blown sky high !

At a meeting held in the Tremont Temple Lower Hall, a
Mr. G. P. Kettell arose and said that he had been one of a
class, each of whom paid Mr. Fiske 10 dollars for the secret
and solemnly promised not to divulge it for three months, nor
even then to instruct another person for less than 10 dollars,
and to forfeit 10 dollars if at. the end of three months he
became a public lecturer. Finding that the science was with-
out the least foundation, and that he could produce the effects
without the mysterious operations which constituted the
secret, he demanded the return of his money; and, finding
himself baffled in all his attempts, he threatened to “ expose
the humbug,” and prove publicly, or forfeit 500 dollars, that
the experiments were performed by no other agency than
mesmerism or pathetism. In the speech made by Mr. Kettell
are the following passages :—


“Mr. Fiske goes on to say that if he can control the electricity
in the system, he can control the functions of the system themselves.
He told a great many stories about the third finger, and among other
things that sempstresses considered it very dangerous to wound the
third finger; that it was a remarkable digital ; that the great spinal
column which extends through the system connects with the hand ;
and in its ramifications the third finger receives a greater portion of
the ulnar nerve, which accounts for that finger being more sensitive.
Mr. K. denied this position about the ulnar nerve, and he believed it
to be a foolish fable, though he did not profess to be an anatomist.
He explained the fallacy of the notion, and cited the best of authori-
ties to prove his statements, among whom was Dr. Winslow. Lewis.
He called upon some gentleman to step upon the stage, and he would
give him the ‘secret grip.’ A young man obeyed the summons,
and received the regular ‘ Fiske grip.’ Mr. F., said Mr. K., went
on to state to his class, that, by pressing between the second
and third fingers, you press upon this ulnar nerve, by which you
affect the great sympathetic, (what he meant by that, said Mr. K.,
he did’nt pretend to know,) and by this means control the electricity
and perform experiments on persons, provided they be in the nega-
tive state. A person in a beastly state of intoxication could be
restored simply through the magical power of this ulnar nerve.

“Here the lecturer gave a graphic illustration of Fiske’s mode
of operating. He first gave the grip, then pressed downwards,
talked loud and vehemently, and striking the patient a heavy blow on


64 The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled.


the back, exclaimed, ‘all right,’—the charming words that denoted
that the cure was performed. He also further stated that he had
tried Fiske’s plan upon a drunken woman whom he accidentally met
in Washington Street ; that she was in a negative state, as he sup-
posed, and he gave her the ‘Fiske grip,’ accompanied it with the
passes, and slapped her on the back, exclaiming, ‘all right ;’ but
instead of bringing her back to consciousness, down she went again,
as drunk as ever.”

** Mr. Fiske was not present to defend himself, and Mr. Sun-
derland was called upon to address the audience. He thanked them
for their kindness and apparent good feeling. He said if such charges
had been made against him as had been against the Rev. Theo-
philus Fiske, he would, had the breath of God been in him, have
made every sacrifice to have been present to defend himself. Our
limits will not permit us to report Mr. Sunderland at length. He
claimed that whatever was new in biology was taken from his works
on pathetism, and he cited several in proof that the experiments now
performed under the electro-biological head were done by him in
1843. He brought forward several extracts from newspapers, among
which was the Boston Morning Post, that spoke at length of experi-
ments he had performed while the patient was either awake or asleep.
He also read from the Magnet of January, 1843. He further offered
té forfeit 5,000 dollars, if, before a respectable and disinterested com-
mittee, it could be proved that these self-same experiments were not
performed by him at that time.”


The Rev. La Roy Sunderland began in June, 1842, a
journal, which we now possess, called the Magnet, in which
he broaches a number of electro-magnetic opinions respecting
the nervous system and the mind, as Dods did afterwards.
He also influenced in public some persons by their imagina-
tion, and some by his mere will or by sympathy with him,
some by both, without any passes, contact, or staring at
them ; just as any mesmeric effect—those of the metals,
mesmerised water, excitement of cerebral organs by the fin-
gers, rigidity, &c., and actions and thoughts by the operator’s
will, even though he be absent and distant—may be produced
in some persons at some times without their being previously
mesmerised.* We copy the following passages from the
Magnet, vol. ii., No. vi., November, 1843 :—


** From the Lowell Washingtonian, Sept. 15, 1843.


** WONDERS OF PATHETISM.


“ Agreeably to the announcement in the last number, the Rev.
La Roy Sunderland gave his second lecture in this city.”

“ The experiments were more interesting than is in the power of
language to describe; and, they were unlike anything of the kind


* See Dr. Elliotson’s article in No. XXXVI, p. 427.


The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled. 65


which have ever been produced in this or any other place, as far as
we know. For instance; on commencing, he informed the audience,
that he would induce a state of catalepsy or somnambulism, (Mr.
Sunderland calls it a state of Aypnopathy, or sympathetic sleep,) in
a number of the audience, while he was actually delivering his
lecture! And as marvellous as it may seem, and in direct opposi-
tion to the assumptions of the neurologists, and the believers in
Mesmer’s theory, on concluding his lecture, four persons were found
to be in a state of profound sleep!!—each of whom were uéter
strangers to the lecturer; and it was abundantly testified by their
friends, that Mr. Sunderland had never seen or spoken to any of
them before they were found in that mysterious sleep! ! And, what
was still more remarkable, none of the subjects would speak a
word, or seem to hear anything, from any other person but the lec-
turer! And we saw one of them, before Mr. Sunderland had left
the desk, or spoken to her at all, stretch out her hand towards him,
as if she wished his presence or assistance! Collusion here, was
absolutely impossible. Here was no previous acquaintance or arrange-
ment, no staring in the face, no manipulating, as in the usual pro-
cesses, under the names of mesmerism and neurology; and yet, the
results were as real, and a thousand times more satisfactory to the
intelligent assembly who witnessed them.

** We cannot, of course, give all the details, but we must state
the following: the lecturer called a lady, well known in this city, of
deep piety, —_ the platform, and after seating her for the purpose
of inducing sleep, he went into the congregation to take care of his
other subjects. On returning to the platform, the lady was sound
asleep! He now informed us that he would put her into a state
called trance, in which she would have perceptions of things invi-
sible. He gave it as his opinion, that the mind in this state did not,
actually, leave the body, as had been supposed, but these states de-
pended on the influences exerted over the cerebral system. On giv-
ing her some directions as to where she should go, she gradually
raised her hand, with a most heavenly smile, and commenced a most
interesting description of what she saw. She addressed the spirit of
a deceased brother, and broke out into raptures of praise to the
Saviour. And though she never sings when in the normal state, she
now sung in most heavenly strains, so much so that many were
affected to tears. And while all this was going on upon the platform,
one of the other subjects who had gone to sleep in the extreme part
of the hall, was observed to be describing some of the same things
which the other saw! ! Thus demonstrating the truth of Mr. Sun-
derland’s theory as to the laws of pathetism, or physical and mental
sympathy.”


“* From the Lowell Patriot, Sept. 13, 1843.
** PATHETISM.


** An astonishing instance of the effects of nervous susceptibilit
was exhibited at the Rev. Mr. Sunderland’s lecture, at the City Hall,
VOL, X. ”


F


66 The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled.


last Monday evening.” ‘‘As he had brought with him no subject
upon whom to operate, he wished to select some one from the audi-
ence; and if there were any present who were willing to submit
themselves for that purpose, they might fix their eyes upon the head
of his cane, which he placed across the table before him, and he
doubted not but in a few minutes they would be affected by the mag-
netic sleep—while he would continue his lecture.

“This he did, for the space of ten or fifteen minutes, and in
such a manner as to render it perfectly evident to all who heard him,
that he could not at the same time be concentrating his mental
powers upon any individual for the purpose of producing sleep.
And on pausing to inquire if any had experienced the magnetic in-
fluence, it was discovered, to the astonishment of the audience, that
no less than five persons, in different parts of the hall, were in a sound
mesmeric sleep! The lecturer, on visiting these persons, found them
all to be in communication with himself, as he shewed by conversing
with them. He declared that he was an utter stranger to all except-
ing one of the five, and that he had exercised no influence over them
save such as he had exercised over all who were present ;—not being
able even to distinguish them from others while in the desk, on ac-
count of the partial loss of his vision ; and he furthermore stated
that this was the first experiment he had ever tried in this manner,
and probably the first performed by any one.”

“Mr. 8. conducted one of the young ladies, after waking her,
to the platform, where she was again put in a state of somnolency,
by simply fixing her eyes, according to his direction, upon a hand-
kerchief placed upon the railing of the platform, while he was
engaged in conversation in other parts of the hall. He then pro-
ceeded to throw her into a state of trance, in which she imagined
herself in heaven, described scenes and persons there, sang most me-
lodiously, and exhibited other usual mesmeric phenomena. This
was accomplished by merely placing his finger upon the different
phrenological developments of the lady’s head, without any apparent
mental effort on his part. Her situation was evidently precisely like
that of a person dreaming—a portion of the organs of the brain
being in an excited state, while others were under the influence of
sleep; and this excitement being the effect of physical sympathy, or
pathetism.”


** From the Morning Herald, Sept. 23, 1843.
‘*MOST EXTRAORDINARY PHENOMENA!


** Unlike all other operators, Mr. S. instead of selecting one sub-
ject, brings his process to bear upon his entire audience! And, con-
sequently, the results of his experiments, performed in this way,
have astonished and generally satisfied all who have witnessed them.
His audience last Monday evening, at the City Hall, were about a
thousand, and all of them strangers to him. In commencing, he
informed us, that during his lecture he designed to induce a number
of cases of real somnambulism: that is, he would cause those in the


The Galvanic Disc Delusion dispelled. 67


assembly who were susceptible, to fall into a state of sympathetic
sleep, and in that state, to rise from their seats and come to him on
the platform! And after fixing the attention of the audience for
this purpose a few minutes, some fifteen persons (including both
sexes) were found to be sound asleep. And now occurred a most extra-
ordinary sight ; it was to see one and another rise from their seats with
eyes fast closed, and slowly approach the platform on which the ope-
rator was standing! Some of them seeming unable or unwilling to
rise up and walk, Mr. S. went to them, and they then followed him
to his place, and one of them went up from the extreme part of the
hall. Room could not be found for them all upon the platform, and
they were falling to sleep in such numbers, that he could not take
care of them! Hence, the process was suspended, and Mr. S. went
round through the assembly and restored those to wakefulness who
had not taken seats upon the platform; and we have been credibly
informed, that some 20 or 30 other gentlemen and ladies were deci-
dedly affected and disposed to somnolence, rigidity of limbs, &c., by
Mr. S.’s method of operating on that occasion.

‘* Numerous and interesting phenomena were induced by the ope-
rator upon the somnambulists around him upon the platform. One
was thrown into a state of trance, or ecstacy, and was enraptured
with views of the Saviour, and her deceased friends. She sang in
tones, and in a manner which convinced, many at least, that the
phenomena were real.”


These scenes remind us of those witnessed by the French
Commission of 1784, and prevent us from wondering that
the phenomena were then ascribed to imitation and imagi-
nation as well as contact; for they were partly so to be ac-
counted for. But that there is an influence independent of
imagination is evident to all but the uninformed, because
experiments may be devised and phenomena constantly occur
when imagination can have no share. Vomiting may be ex-
cited by an emetic or substance having a specific power of
causing vomiting. But vomiting may arise from sympathy,
as when we see another vomit—from imagination, as when
we are told that we have swallowed something filthy—from
turning round, from sailing, or swinging—from severe pain,
as in spraining one’s ankle—from a bad smell or taste—from
sympathy with a diseased brain, kidneys, or obstructed bowels
—from pregnancy, inflammation of the stomach, &c., &c.
Yet no body on these accounts denies that tartar emetic has
peculiar powers of exciting vomiting independent of imagina-
tion, sympathy, or external impression.


=
~)


( 68 )


IV. Cures of, or benefit in, Inflammations of the Face ; Enlarge-
ment of the Joints, with great debility, in a child, indeed,
Rickets ; Erysipelas ; Amaurosis ; Extreme weakness of the
Ankles in an adult, at one mesmerisation ; Irritability of
Temper ; Spasmodic Cough ; Stiffness and weakness of the
Knees; Squinting. By Mr. Mayuew, of New Jersey,
United States.* Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘The next fashionable fallacy is mesmerism.’’ ‘‘ This fallacy, like homeo-
pathy, was also denounced by a French Commission.” ‘‘ The Commission came to
the conclusion that ‘compression, imagination, and imitation are the sources of
the effects attributed to the new agent.”” ‘I shall, however, draw your attention
to some points, as it is necessary that you should be induced to examine further,
to convince yourselves of the weakness of the whole system, and be able to shew
to your friends and the public that your opposition is neither from intolerance or
ignorance.” ‘It is notorious—we have only to recall the ample exposé made
some years ago by Mr. Wakley—that the proofs have signally failed when tested
properly : and none but the most unimpeachable evidence should be allowed.”’
‘It is remarkable that none of the phenomena were witnessed till the last cen-
tury. Moreover all men, and animals also, ought to be equally susceptible, for
we cannot suppose a difference to exist in the conducting power of bones, muscles,
nerves, &c, in different individuals (unless there be special organs, which may vary
in power, as in the torpedo), whereas it is known that none shew any of the effects
until they have been educated in the effects. This inevitable conclusion forces
mesmerists to explain why so few persons indicate the possession of the power,
by presuming that the mesmeriser and the mesmerised must have full belief in the
existence of the power and have a desire either to mesmerise or be mesmerised :
and therefore if a failure arises, it is from ‘ /’atmosphére d’incrédulité’ Now if
this be not a subterfuge, I know not what is.’’"—Jntroductory Lecture delivered
at the London Hospital on the opening of the Medical Session, on Oct. 1, 1851.
By Dr. Fraser, Assistant-Physician to the Hospital. London Medical Gazette,
Nov. 7, 1851.


Newark, State of New Jersey,
Oct. 30th, 1851.

My dear Dr. Elliotson,—I forward you a few cases for
insertion in The Zoist, arranged as they occurred during the
last three months of my stay in England; and shall feel a
pleasure in communicating with you from time to time through
the medium of Bailliére’s New York agency. I have three
cases on hand which I purpose sending you a statement of
when complete.

With ardent wishes for the success of our righteous cause,
and with expressions of the warmest respect and esteem for
yourself,

I am, my dear Doctor,
Yours very sincerely,
Joun Mayuew.


* Mr, Mayhew’s former valuable communications to The Zoist are dated from
Farnham, Surrey, and will be found in No. XXIX. (cure of a case of pulmonary
consumption, with clairvoyance as to disease in herself and others) ; No. XXXI.


Great benefit of Mesmerism in various Diseases. 69


I. Inflammation of the Face.

Mrs. W., Glastonbury, Somersetshire. This person, about
40 years of age, had for several weeks been afflicted with in-
flammation in the face, and had for several weeks been under
the care of my brother, who resides in that town. The case
was obstinate, and the disease still unalleviated. At his
request I mesmerised her locally, but did not endeavour to
produce the sleep. When she sat down she was in very great
agony, but in less than ten minutes all pain had ceased, and
all swelling and inflammation had disappeared.


II. Inflammation of the Face.

Miss H., of the same place, had a carious tooth extracted ;
in about three hours afterwards her face swelled to nearly
twice its usual size, and the pain she suffered was very intense.
At my brother’s request I mesmerised her locally by the usual
passes, and in about seven minutes the swelling was down,
and the pain was gofie.


III. Enlargement of several joints.

Eleanor Mayhew, aged 4 years. This is a daughter of
my brother, to whom reference is made in the two previous
cases. Enlargement of the knee, ankle, elbow, and wrist
joints, accompanied with such extreme weakness as to require
constant nursing. When she walked her feet spread out-
ward, so that the ankle-joints nearly touched the ground.
Mesmerised for twenty minutes each day during two weeks ;
at the end of which time she could walk with greater ease,
the ankles maintaining nearly an upright position, and the
size of the joints had very much decreased. My brother
continues the treatment.


IV. Erysipelas.

Mrs. W., residing in the neighbourhood of Hoddesdon,
Herts, was introduced to me by Mr. Edward Lock, draper, of
that town, while she was suffering severely with erysipelas in
the head and face, with the request that I would endeavour
to relieve her. I mesmerised her locally for about seven
minutes, at the end of which time all pain had ceased, and
all swelling and inflammation had disappeared. She had no
subsequent return. Mrs. Ellis, the authoress of Mothers and
Daughters of England, was present after the sitting, and was


(cures of erysipelas, pulmonary consumption, neuralgia, and rheumatism, all but
one in America) ; and No. XX XV. (a remarkable instance of clairvoyance of the
patient mentioned in No. XXIX.)


70 Great benefit of Mesmerism in various Diseases.


much interested in questioning the woman cured relative to
the fact.*


V. Amaurosis.

Miss Prior, of Hoddesdon, aged 27 years, has been blind
through opacity of the cornea for nearly that period, not
being able to discern more than a slight difference between
light and darkness. I brought her partially under the mes-
meric influence, and instructed her brother how to proceed
with the case. About three months afterwards I saw her,
and found that she had so far recovered as to be able to dis-
cern some difference between one colour and another. They
feel encouraged to persevere. I much regret not being able
to follow out this case myself, and I have no doubt by per-
severance of the ultimate result.


VI. Weakness of the Legs and Ankles.

Mrs. Trigg, of Hoddesdon, about 30 years of age, had
been for four years afflicted with extreme weakness in the legs
and ankles, which latter had been so much swelled for nearly
that space of time that no ankle-bone could be seen or felt.
A few minutes walking would be more than she could bear ;
indeed she could not walk across the room without great in-
convenience. She had had medical advisers, but to no pur-
pose. I called on her in company with Mr. Lock, and in the
course of conversation it was suggested that I should try to
relieve her by mesmerism. I mesmerised her locally, and on
the first pass being made, she was quite terrified at the strange-
ness of the sensation she experienced ; it was, she said, lke
having lumps of ice drawn from her ankles, out at her toes.
Her improvement was immediate, so that she felt utterly
astonished at the effect produced.t After the fifth sitting her
cure was completed, her ankles had received the required
strength, she could walk about with ease and comfort, and
the swelling had entirely disappeared. This lady and her
excellent husband are now engaged in dispensing the blessings
of mesmerism amongst the poor of the neighbourhood ; and
I think it likely that you will have the pleasure of inserting
some of their cases in The Zoist.


VIL. Irritability of temper.
Miss Trigg, daughter of the above, aged 10 years, suffer-
ing with nervous debility, very much affecting her temper,


* See similar rapid cures of inflammation by an Archbishop and by Mr. D.
Hands, No. XII., pp. 514, 515.—Zoist.

+ This is just such a rapid cure as that by Mrs, D M., recorded in No. XXX.,
p. 414,


ad


By Mr. Mayhew. 71


and causing her to be irritable and peevish, was put into the
mesmeric sleep, and mesmerised generally. The effect was
very marked, her irritability ceased, and instead of her cus-
tomary peevishness, she evinced the greatest anxiety to shew
her affection, and desire to please in every possible way: in-
deed she appeared to be quite another child.


VIII. Spasmodic Cough.

E., a young girl living in the family of Mrs. Trigg, about
18 years of age, for four months had been afflicted with a
very violent cough, for which she had been under treatment
of a medical man, who was esteemed skilful, but without
benefit. She was moreover very hysterical, and during a
long period several times a day would have frightful fits of
laughing hysterics. I put her into the mesmeric sleep in
about five minutes; she became almost instantly clairvoyant
with regard to her own disease, and declared that mesmerism
would cure her. When she awoke her cough and hysterics
had both disappeared, and I have not since heard of the
slightest return.

IX. Stiff Knees.

Mrs. Chambers, of Beccles, for more than three years had
been lame in one knee and very weak in the other. She had
worn knee-caps for a long time, and feared the result would
be a stiff joint. Latterly she could not walk without great
danger of falling, and not at all without support on both
sides. If she wished to go up or down stairs, she was obliged
to do it in a sitting position, pushing herself up, or letting
herself down, one step at atime. I have no doubt that all
that medical skill could devise had been done for her relief
by her physician, who stands deservedly high in his profes-
sion ; but to no purpose whatever ; she believed herself to be
a hopeless cripple for life. I mesmerised her once a day for
three weeks, devoting about thirty minutes at each sitting.
Her recovery was gradual during this period; but at the end
of that time her cure was complete, excepting a little weak-
ness remaining in that knee which in the beginning of her
treatment she had called her “well knee.” She can now
walk or run up or down stairs or anywhere else with ease and
comfort.


X. Squinting.

Mr. O., of Sleaford, Lincolnshire, had his right eye in-
jured so as to cause obliquity and imperfection of vision ;
restored in two sittings, each sitting occupying about thirty
minutes.


Remarks on Dr. Fraser’s inconsistency.


NOTE BY DR ELLIOTSON.


Doctor Fraser, the assistant-physician to the London
Hospital, should remember that nothing sits so well upon a
young man as modesty: and should train himself to speak
and write soberly and soundly, and be silent till he has made
himself thoroughly acquainted with his subject and feels that
he is anxious for truth and human welfare, not for the
trumpery applause of the ignorant or for mere worldly profit,
and is able to disdain the vulgarity that characterizes too
many writers in the medical journals and too many lecturers
in medical schools. He should remember that, when a
medical teacher addresses pupils, his duties are most solemn,
and he is bound to assert nothing but what he has ascer-
tained to be true, and nothing which can mislead them or
impair their utility to their fellow-creatures in after life.

As to the denunciations of academies, colleges, and socie-
ties, this teacher of youth ought to know that the French
Parliament denounced antimony at the request of the faculty
of medicine at Paris that antimony should not be used, and
an eminent physician, named Paumier, was deprived of his
degree for prescribing it: and that some years afterwards the
same Parliament at the request of the same faculty replaced
antimony in the Materia Medica because Louis XIV. had
been cured with it. I recollect that many years ago an old
fellow of the College of Physicians, Dr. Budd, physician to
St. Bartholomew’s Hospital, told me, that, when a young
man, on his mentioning to an old physician that he was giving
antimony to a patient, the old physician started back with
horror, advised him never to do so again, as he would kill
some one and repent of it as long as he lived.

The same French Parliament denounced and forbade in-
oculation, and, fourteen years afterwards, the two young
princes, who became Louis XVIII. and Charles X., were
inoculated not far from the parliament house. In England
we are indebted for the practice of inoculation not to the
faculty, but to a strong-minded woman, Lady Mary Wortley
Montague.

For many years after I had employed prussic acid success-
fully in private and also in public at St. Thomas’s Hospital,
the Pharmacopeeia Committee of the London College of Phy-
sicians shrunk from recommending to the College its insertion
into their Pharmacopeia because so many of the fellows had
denounced it in letters to them: and so late as 1836 an
argument used by certain fashionable medical men to prevent
patients from consulting me was that I prescribed prussic


.


By Dr. Elliotson. 73


acid. A little before that year, an attempt was made to in-
validate my medical judgment in a cause before Lord Abinger
by the present Attorney-General suggesting to his brother
counsel to ask me whether I did not employ the stethoscope :
and I replied, yes, just as Dr. Davey did when asked lately
by another counsel whether he believed in mesmerism : and
I have heard it contemptuously denounced in lectures before
the assembled College of Physicians. When Ambrose Paré
substituted with perfect success mild applications to gun-shot
wounds for the tortures of boiling oil, his brethren so vio-
lently denounced mild applications that he had to defend his
wholesome innovation long afterwards before Charles XI. in
person: and, after he had proved the success of tying arteries
after amputation, as is the present mode of preventing he-
morrhage, his cotemporaries assailed him, denounced liga-
tures, and persevered in the dreadful practice of applying
boiling pitch or red hot irons to the stump. When Aselli
demonstrated the lacteal vessels, not a single doctor of the
University of Montpellier would allow the evidence of his
eyes and acknowledge their existence, but denounced them.
After the sexual system of plants had been demonstrated by
Alpini, and Millington urged it upon the Oxonians, and Grew
had proved it, Tournefort, the celebrated botanist, refused it
a place in his work: and Dr. Alston, the Professor of Botany
in the University of Edinburgh, violently denounced and op-
posed it in the Jas¢t century. Such was once the prejudice
of the court physicians against Peruvian bark, they so de-
nounced it, that Cromwell was allowed to die of ague rather
than they would allow him to take it: and a man named
Talber, who taught the regular faculty the proper mode of
administering it, was vilified all over England as an impostor.
How the whole profession violently declared the circulation
of the blood to be a false fabrication by Harvey, and how
they denounced and stigmatized him and ruined his practice,
is known to all the world: and now his name is reverenced,
and the profession are all proud of him. When Jenner proved
the efficacy of vaccination and was about to send a communi-
cation on his discovery to the Royal Society, those fellows
who were his friends begged in kindness to him that he would
do no such thing, for all the profession denounced it and the
fellows of the Society followed them. When Franklin’s papers
containing his discoveries in electricity were read to the
Royal Society, they were thought wild and absurd and re-
ceived with shouts of laughter, denounced, and pronounced
by the council to be unworthy of a place in the Philosophical
Transactions, and were therefore printed by a kind-hearted


74 Remarks on Dr. Fraser’s inconsistency.


and virtuous quaker, Dr. Fothergill, at his own expense, and
went through five editions: and now the Society glories in
the name of Franklin, and has his portrait on its walls. The
College of Physicians denounced and imprisoned one physi-
cian for using internally a medicine (cantharides) now in com-
mon use, for dropsy, palsy, and some vesical and kindred
affections, &c.: and another for daring to differ from some
medical dogma of Galen, who lived less than a century and
a half after Christ, and was himself so prejudiced as to deny
that the heart was muscular and maintain that it only
seemed so. If any candidate at our medical examinations
were not now to declare every one of these denounced facts to
be true, he would be sent back to his studies by the succes-
sors of those who formerly so nobly denounced.
As to the French Commission, it was—


‘* Most superficial and incomplete, conducted in the most random
way; the Commission allowed that the effects were not impos-
ture, and only ascribed them to imagination, imitation, and touch;
the results were varied, and the report says, ‘Nothing can be
more astonishing than the convulsions;’ ‘he who has not beheld
them can have no idea of them; and even, in beholding them, one
is equally surprised at the profound repose in which some of the
patients are placed, and at the agitation which animates others. It
is impossible not to recognize in these effects, which are constant, a
great power which agitates the patients, which ever masters them,
and of which the person who magnetizes them seems to be the
depository ;;—one of the French Commissioners, truly virtuous,
highly distinguished in science, and well accustomed to investigate
nature,—the celebrated Jussieu, who had pursued the investigation
with the greatest attention, firmly refused to sign the report of the
rest, though threatened by the minister, Baron Breteuil, and made
one separately, favourable to mesmerism, and setting forth the solid
reasons of his convictions, after having made separate experiments.”


Dr. Fraser ought to know, morever,—


“That, in 1825, on a suggestion that the Royal French Aca-
demy of Medicine should investigate the subject anew, a powerful
report in favour of the investigation was made by the Commissioners,
Drs. Adelon, Pariset, Marc, Burdin, senior, and Husson; that nearly
one-half of its members confessed that they had seen, and that they
believed, mesmeric phenomena most marvellous and important: that,
after the investigation, a powerful, and in every respect admirable,
report in favour of the truth of mesmerism was made in 1831, by
the Commissioners, Drs. Bourdois De La Motte, Fouquier, Guéneau
de Mussy, Guersent, Itard, J. J. Le Roux, Marc, Thillaye, and
Husson, and received by the Academy with the liveliest interest;
that some of the adversaries of mesmerism in vain attempted to dis-
turb the religious silence of the assembly by murmurs of disapproba-


By Dr. Elliotson. 75


tion, but that the immense majority instantly repressed their at-
tempt, and testified by loud applause to the honourable reporter,
M. Husson, how highly they appreciated his zeal, talents, and
courage.”


Before Dr. Fraser delivered this address he should have
remembered that nine years ago I published the following
statement :—


“In an evil hour, I consented to shew some experiments to the
Editor of the Lancet, after repeated entreaties conveyed by his
assistant, Mr. Mills, who had witnessed the phenomena at the hos-
pital, reported many in the Lancet, been enraptured with them, and
declared them over and over again to be so satisfactory that to doubt
or to suspect the two Okeys of imposition would be the height of
absurdity. I exhibited to the Editor the production of the singular
delirium, and a variety of the most beautiful and satisfactory experi-
ments which he has entirely suppressed. But I presently feared what
would be the result. He said he was pestered with letters upon the
subject; but that nineteen out of twenty were unfavourable. Nine-
teen persons, of course, purchase more Lancets than one; and I fan-
cied [I already saw his rejection of the evidence. The mental phe-
nomena were such as no person capable of sound and refined observa-
tion, and fitted for philosophical investigation, could for an instant
have imagined to be feigned. The physical phenomena with the
hand, the eye, metals, and water, were as striking and conclusive,
with the exception of some with lead and nickel ; and those I have
since proved to large numbers of able judges to be equally conclusive.
Mesmerised nickel produces upon the elder sister the most violent
effects, which none but a very ignorant person could consider pre-
tended. Now, when this, or gold or silver, has been rubbed upon a
part, and the friction has been desisted from before the effects come,
or the effects have come and have ceased, they may be at once ex-
cited in the former case, or re-excited in the latter, by friction of the
part with anything—a piece of wood or a piece of lead; and this
excitement may be produced again and again. Friction was per-
formed with lead upon parts to which the nickel had been applied
either with or without effect as it might be, and the effects took
place violently. This explanation I gave to the Editor, but he was
either too dull to understand, or had his reasons for not understand-
ing. In another set of experiments lead produced effects, though
nickel had not been applied to the parts; and yet I had never been
able to mesmerise lead by holding it in my hand and to produce
effects by then applying it. Those effects I candidly said I could
not explain, since I had not commenced experiments with lead or
nickel for more than two or three days; but, as there was no more
deception in the cases, nor less certainty of the various facts which
I had observed, than in chemistry or any other natural science, I
added that these results shewed only that they required farther inves-
tigation, and that I had no doubt I should, by perseverance, discover
their cause. The Editor knew that I was about to leave London


76 Remarks on Dr. Fraser’s inconsistency.


that same day for an absence of six weeks on the continent, and yet
he could not wait for my return and give me an opportunity of
farther research, but, with that gentlemanly delicacy for which he
and his friends are so remarkable, published, almost immediately,
what professed to be an account of what he had seen,—a most im-
perfect and worthless account, however ; in his plenitude of scientific
importance, he declared that not one more experiment on magnetism
would ever be required ; and answers which were sent he never pub-
lished. He omitted to state a circumstance in his experiments with
lead, which had never been allowed to happen in mine, but which,
when reflecting upon them on my tour, I thought might have influ-
enced the results. In employing the lead, I had noticed that he ap-
plied it against a piece of nickel held in his other hand, before he
applied it to the patient. On my return, I applied lead to her as
before, and, indeed, copper also; yet never obtained an effect. I
then applied the lead or the copper, as it might be, against a piece
of mesmerised nickel or gold, before applying it to her; and its ap-
plication to her was then always productive of effects. I discovered
that the surface of the lead or copper had become nickelized or auri-
fied by the contact; and thus the difficulty was solved. These ex-
periments I have repeated again and again before numbers of gen-
tlemen, taking the test care that the patient should not know
when I applied lead or copper which had not been in contact with
nickel or gold, and when I applied lead or copper which had been in
contact with either of them ; and the results have been uniform. I
was obliged to leave the poor little girl in an intense coma, with oc-
casional violent tetanic spasms, at the Editor’s house, little imagin-
ing that any farther experiments would be attempted, especially in
my absence, by a person ignorant of the subject and altogether in-
capable of do eh experiments. I had seen sufficient of the ex-
treme carelessness, and want of information and philosophic power,
of the Editor, during the experiments conducted by myself, and
which he frequently altogether deranged, not to be convinced that in
my absence no experiment could be made in a manner to justify
conclusions. In his ignorance, he acted as though mesmeric suscep-
tibility is always present and always the same: whereas the reverse
is the fact; and experiments with water and metals frequently re-
org so derange the susceptibility that we are often obliged to
esist.

** During the five months which have elapsed since my return, I
have repeated all my experiments and continued my observations,
not only on the two Okeys, but on other patients; and all the
results of my former enquiries have been confirmed and all difficul-
ties solved.”


Nine years ago I published the following :—


** Who, possessed of common sense, that saw the Okeys, will not
honestly declare that nothing was more wonderful than the fixing of
the Okeys? They, in their ecstatic delirium, could be instantly


* Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations without Pain, &c., pp. 81—86.


+


Q
5
'
é


By Dr. Elliotson. 77


fixed by a single pass of the hand, or a single finger, at a distance,
even behind them; while dancing, jumping, grimacing, stooping,
whatever they were doing, they were in a moment petrified in their
position, as the inhabitants of a city were said to be instantly _——
to marble in the Arabian tale. The younger often danced ‘Jim
Crow;’ and to see her or her sister fixed in any attitude, their faces
suddenly fixed also, while in the midst of a sentence, or of a word,
their eyes to close and them to stand insensible to all around them,
and at last either drop down from the torpor increasing, or suddenly
come to consciousness from the effect having been slighter and going
off; to witness their surprise on coming to, and their anger on having
been arrested in what they were about, and to see them again sud-
denly made insensible and rigid while venting their displeasure, —was
one of the things which no one can forget who witnessed them.
“These phenomena were shewn by me again and again, with
very many others of the most exquisite kind,—all which he sup-
pressed,—to Mr. Wakley, in that evil moment in which I—good-
natured and confiding fool—fancied he was, if not a lover of truth,
at least too sagacious not to see that such facts were unquestionabl
real, and that to attempt to bully and write them down, however it
might succeed for a moment, would be the height of madness, and
that they must eventually be admitted by all men, in spite of the
selfish and coarse opposition of the whole profession. It was plain
that a medical case which had occurred once would occur again ; that,
as mesmerism produced such wonderful effects upon them, it would
also upon others; and that as doctors and surgeons—the consulting
and medical men in general, the authoritative great and the imitating
little—had never made any mesmeric trials, they could not expect to
have met with such cases, and not only were not justified in suppos-
ing such cases impossible, but had every reason to sup , from the
cases of the Okeys, that they had only to take the trouble to examine


for themselves, however beneath their dignity and the importance of
their daily routine.”*


Eight years ago I published the following :—


‘**Mesmerised gold or silver or other metals, mesmerised water,
or other substances mesmerised by being breathed upon, will often
stiffen parts, and violently too, to which they are applied. The
most commonly efficient is mesmerised gold; and, when placed on
the hand of this patient a few evenings ago, it caused a most violent
and continued flexure of the arm, and the rigidity of the whole body
was such that I could relax no part by a continuance of the means
which at all other times relaxed any parts in a few seconds, and the
sleep grew so deep that I could not wake her or rouse her in any
degree for a long while. At length she fetched a deep sigh, and
was accessible to my measures of relaxing and rousing. is was
Sper | a repetition of the phenomena of the Okeys from gold.

ut with the elder Okey, and her only, mesmerised water had this
power. Mr. Wakley himself made, by my instruction, most deci-


* Zoist, No. I1., p. 176.


78 Remarks on Dr. Fraser’s inconsistency.


sive experiments of this kind, and without a single failure: and these
very experiments were once made by the present Attorney-General
Sir F. Pollock, at my house, and by very many others, and almost
always with success so perfect as to convince the most sceptical.
Two glasses of water were placed behind a screen, behind her. One
was mesmerised ; the other not. A brush was put into each ; which-
ever finger was touched with the mesmerissd water, stiffened ; and
whichever finger was touched with the plain water, remained as it
was. Of course care was required not to let the mesmerised water
touch the fingers which were to be subjected to the plain water.
Time was often required for the effect, and sometimes a good deal of
water. But these experiments were made carefully and repeatedly
by Mr. Wakley himself; and I boldly appealed to him for their truth
and decisiveness, and he ventured to make no objection, nor any
remark, but bit his nails and passed on to something else, and
omitted all allusion to them in his most.anfair, most imperfect, most
misrepresenting report, in which a complete mess is obvious to every
one acquainted with the subject, from his having, in his inordinate
vanity, presumed to make experiments behind my back, undirected,
on a subject of which he was as ignorant as a maid of all work.”*


In truth similar phenomena to those of the Okeys have
now been seen by thousands in this country upon very nu-
merous patients, and the days of Mr. Wakley’s triumph are
passed. Let those who have thought right to believe him
rather than myself, and believe the experiments which he
says he made behind my back, remember that he lately ven-
tured upon the assertion that I was at the head of a band of
homeeopathists.t His object in saying this was undoubtedly
the same as in recounting experiments said to have been
made upon the Okeys behind my back.

In my farewell letter to the students of University College,
printed in January, 1839, all this was set forth. But neither
Mr. Wakley nor any of his sub-editors and other scribes have
ventured to reply or notice my statements, and I still defy
him and dare him to reply.

The Rev. Mr. Sandby truly says :—


** Those who have read Mr. Wakley’s strictures should know that
every charge has been again and again successfully answered. Dr.
Elliotson in his letter to his pupils has entered fully into every part
of the subject.”


This letter has never been noticed by any of the medical
journals, as far as I know.

As to the phenomena not having been witnessed till the
last century, very little reading shews that they have been

* Zoist, No. V., pp. 65, 66.


t+ See Zoist, No. XXXV., p. 263.
} Mesmerism and its Opponents, p. 193.


By Dr. Elliotson. 79


known and mesmerism practised from the remotest periods
in the East.* The Bible is replete with indications of mes-
merism. And as to the susceptibility of animals, by which word
I suppose he means brutes, for man is an animal as much as
a mouse, the most ignorant mesmeriser knows that they are
affected. Read the account of the mesmerisation of two
fierce dogs by the Duke of Marlborough, and of a savage
bull by the Rev. Mr. Bartlett. Read the very abundant in-
stances given in Dr. John Wilson’s Trials of Animal Mag-
netism on the Brute Creation: and remember the effects of
breathing into the ears of unmanageable horses.

As to education or training being necessary to the effects,
the idea is as unfounded as that of training being necessary
to the effects of mercury or quinine.

Belief is not necessary: many sceptics have produced all
the effects : and the most sceptical are often strongly affected.
When Mr. H. S. Thompson was a sceptic, he and an equally
sceptical lady agreed that he should mesmerise her before a
large party staying at a house in the country, and that, ata
certain signal from him, she should pretend to go to sleep and
exhibit certain phenomena. Long before he gave the signal,
she was thoroughly mesmerised and in a deep sleep, to his
astonishment and dismay.t

A more ignorant and silly address to unfortunate students
was never delivered than by this instructor in the east of
London. Would that he were a wise man of the East. He
reminds me of an old monk at the top of Mount St. Bernard,
who knew nothing of England since the days of the wars of
York and Lancaster, and asked me before I went to bed if
the civil wars still raged in England. The medical are the
only portion of society now in darkness, and the world around
is beginning to wonder seriously at them: and poor Mr.
Wakley feels the terrible awkwardness of his situation, and
that his pranks and misrepresentations are at an end and
cover him with ridicule. What will he do? I foresaw all
this fourteen years ago, because I knew that all I asserted was
true, and that he was playing a very shallow game. My
words in 1843 were :—


“His day of triumph has passed, and his chief business now
must be to consider how he can best extricate himself from the sad
position into which he has fallen from having so overcunningly,
hastily, and violently committed himself. Some say he is ready to
hang himself. But I implore him for the sake of science and hu-


* See abundant proofs of this in various numbers of The Zoist.
Bs I have related this anecdote from Mr. Thompson’s own mouth in No. I.,
p- 72.


80 Cure of very long and agonizing pains.


manity not to think of such a folly, nor to imitate the dignified exit

of the Tartar General, who, according to the dispatch of Sir Henry

Pottinger, ‘retired to his house when he saw that all was lost, made

= servants set it on fire, and sat in his chair till he was burnt to
eath.’”’*


V. Cure of very long and agonizing pains and other distress-
ing symptoms in a lady. By Mr. H. S. THompson,
Fairfield, near York. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘* Dr. Elliotson has perhaps sacrificed with this generation his well-won fame.
All honour to him for this!! Yet his noble stand for the yet dawning truth
shews him to be a man of much courage, talent, and self-denial. He may de-
scend to the grave without his fame, but let him not repine. Posterity will yet
repay him for all.”—The Dublin University Magazine on Animal Magnetism,
Oct., 1851.

Fairfield, 31st January, 1851.
My dear Elliotson,—I transmit enclosed the lady’s case
sent to me on Saturday last by her. Her name you know
she wished to be suppressed, but I am sure she would be
very happy to be referred to if any one wanted more informa-
tion in regard to the facts. I do not know that I can add
any remarks that would add further interest to her case, but
it may be as well to state that on the first trial I found her a
very sensitive subject to the mesmeric treatment: pain was
quickly removed, and spasmodic rigidity of the muscles of
the neck, back, face, and limbs induced, though not sleep.
The cure has been gradual, and has required constant recourse
to mesmerism. As I lived at a considerable distance from
the patient, I could only see her occasionally, but the action
of mesmerism was very efficiently kept up by her brother,
or her own maid. Latterly she became so sensitive that I
have every reason to believe that I have been able to affect
her at a distance. Without her knowledge the usual effects
have been induced at precisely the time I have tried the ex-
periment, when I have been at home, forty miles distant, or
when in London, upwards of two hundred miles. At the
same time I must add, that, subsequently to the period when
I commenced these distant experiments, the patient has fre-
quently experienced all the sensations and exhibited the same
phenomena of muscular rigidity, &c., when I have not at-
tempted to exert an influence by will at a distance. I hope
this will be in time for you if you require it. I think I sent
you amongst my last cases a corroborationt of all that the lady
has related.
Ever yours,
H. 8. Tuompson.


* Numerous Cases, &c., p. 86. + This will appear in our next.—Zoist.


a anal


——


ne


By Mr. H. 8S. Thompson. 81


“ Having been requested to give an outline of my case
and the effect of mesmerism upon it, I feel it due, in grati-
tude to the unwearied kindness and exertions of my mes-
meriser, to describe with truth and to the best of my recol-
lection the prominent features of my long illness and sub-
sequent gradual restoration to health through that benevolent
agency.
eer rough a fall from the carriage in May, 1846, my
shoulder was dislocated, and, from the delay of two or three
hours in setting it, the muscles had contracted so much that
it required the force of seven people to pull it into its place.
The overstrain of the muscles and nerves produced the great-
est derangement of the nervous system, and a recurrence of
some chronic irritation or spinal mischief which had confined
me to the sofa for two years about 20 years ago.

“ Previously to being mesmerised I was unable to sit up
for two minutes, or to leave the sofa, during two years, nor
could I bear to jerk or use my arms; and for two or three
years there was great tenderness in the muscles, extending
from the arm to the hip. For many months I rarely slept
more than two or three hours during the night, and fre-
quently not even that. In November, 1846, and again in the
winter of 1847, I had the influenza, which completely pros-
trated my strength, and for three months I could not read a
few sentences without feeling a sensation of sickness, from
the weakness of the nerves. At that time I required for
many weeks stimulants of meat, porter, sago, and brandy,
or strong soup, every two hours, day and night: and, if they
were not given the moment required, the exhaustion of the
nerves was so great that I could not hold a glass, nor could I
swallow the meat, till revived by the stimulant. The same
sort of syncope and exhaustion of nervous power would
be produced by the least attempt to sit up. I frequently
had sciatic pain, and pain in different parts of the spine, and
in the back of the head and behind the ears. During this
state of exhaustion of the system, the heart scarcely seemed
at times to have strength to propel the blood, which indeed
appeared to me rather to glide than to flow with a beat. At
other times I was peculiarly sensible of every pulsation in the
heart, as well as in the extremities: and there was at that
period so much sensitiveness in the nerves that I could feel a
sort of vibration, or pulsation, all over me, which appeared
like a second pulse beating twice as fast as that from the cir-
culation of the blood. When these symptoms subsided I
still could not bear to sit up even for one minute at a time.
In the similar illness in the year 1828, which arose, I believe,

VOL. Xx. G


82 Cure of very long and agonizing pains.


from the state of the spinal chord, or a complete exhaustion
of nervous power, and in which I experienced a death-like
syncope, and I could not be raised two inches without a sort
of fainting, I took an immense quantity of tonics and stimu-
lants, and could bear external applications to the spine. But
in this last attack I could scarcely bear medicine of any de-
scription ; lowering ones instantly increasing the prostration
of strength, and tonics of the mildest decription, even sarsa-
parilla, invariably producing after two or three days trial
heat and restlessness; and even salt and water, iodine, or
other external remedies, were so quickly absorbed into the
system, that they very soon produced the same general effect
of heat and restlessness as the internal tonics. In the former
illness of the kind, I had derived benefit from topical reme-
dies, such as veratria, croton oil, and mustard plasters: but
in the latter illness it was impossible to persevere long enough
in the use of any of these things, as they increased the irri-
tation and made the nights worse. Opiates and anodynes
were also quite inadmissible.

“Tn May, 1848, when I had made no progress whatever
in sitting up, mesmerism was suggested by a friend. I had
not seen or known anything of it, and merely considered it
worth a trial, just as other remedies which were prescribed.
The first visit of my kind mesmeriser, Mr. Henry Thompson,
of Fairfield, however, enabled me to sit up for a few minutes.
I then perceived, for the first time, a high degree of stiffness
in the upper joints of the neck, and an inability to turn m
head to the right or left: and I believe the neck was swelled.
The symptoms gradually yielded to the mesmeric passes, but
were not entirely removed for many months. Before I began
with mesmerism I had frequently pains in the spine and
limbs and sciatic pain, as well as occasionally a pain in the
back of the head, quite circumscribed to the size of about a
half a crown. I improved so rapidly under my new remedy,
that, after a confinement for more than two years entirely to
one room and the sofa, at the end of six weeks I was able to
bear being carried down stairs and to sit up two or three
hours during the day, and get out ina garden chair. In
Mr. Thompson’s absence my brother mesmerised me with the
utmost regularity three or four times each day, and as the
pains decreased, and the system was stimulated and quieted
by the most kind exertions of my mesmerisers, I was able to
sit up a few minutes longer each time.

“ One remarkable feature or peculiarity in my case I must
not omit to mention,—that, if I in the least exceeded my
powers and tried by perseverance to overcome the difficulty,


By Mr. H. S. Thompson. 83


I was sure to go further and further back each time, till, I
believe, I might have lost all I had gained: and the only way
to restore me to the position I had lost, was by instantly
keeping within my power, and more vigorously plying the
mesmeric force. The winter again retarded my progress, and
frequent were the visits and efforts of the ‘ master-hand,’ al-
ways most strikingly beneficial; and, had I been a nearer
patient, my recovery would doubtless have advanced more
quickly and regularly. I had occasional drawbacks from try-
ing to do a little more than I was able, and then all had to
be repeated. '

“In the summer of 1849, I was able to walk across the
room and to sit up six hours in the day: but, though i was
most anxious to get off the sofa altogether, there was still so
much irritation in the system that I could not advance beyond
a certain point, and felt distressed all over, and burst into a
heat, when I attempted to do so; and, the consequence was a
bad night. In the autumn I was well enough to drive out,
but I again experienced a drawback in the winter. The fol-
lowing spring and summer I advanced more steadily, and
attempted to walk up stairs; and in the autumn of 1850 I
went to Scarborough, but did not return the better for it,
the shower-baths having been rather too strong a shock: and,
had I not been renovated by the stimulating passes both in
going and returning, I should probably have lost more than
I gained by the change. In February, 1851, I had a more
decided drawback from the exertion of walking twice up
stairs for two or three days, that brought on pain in the
back ; and I could not drive a quarter of a mile without being
the worse for it and having a bad night. In fact, there was
more of the chronic irritation in the system, and I also felt
a return of the vibration or pulsation of the nerves.

“This was the state of the case, when it was accidentally
discovéred by my kind friend, then in London, that I could
be more strongly affected by distant mesmerism : or rather,
that my mesmeriser, not knowing at a distance the discom-
fort produced by muscular agitation, did not stop mesmerising,
as he would have done had he been present, on the first mo-
ment that such an effect was produced. Of this I was first
made aware by pain and clenching of the muscles of the
mouth ; and, on two or three occasions, the muscular frame
was violently agitated, and as little under my control as if
galvanized or electrified, till I felt much exhausted and the
breathing was much affected. This seemed a sort of crisis,
and occurred shortly after a long mesmeric sleep of four
hours. When I awoke from this sleep, I felt as if an op-

Ga 2


84 Report of cases treated with Mesmerism.


pressive weight was taken from me, and had a degree of elas-
ticity which I had not experienced since my illness of nearly
five years, and it occurred, I believe, from the relief and com-
posure given to the nervous system: and I have been able to
sit up the whole day without once having recourse to the sofa
for several weeks, and have in short lost the various pains in
the nerves. I now feel quite well, though of course I have
to take care not to overdo myself, and I have borne a journey
of 200 miles without being in the least the worse for it.

“There has been throughout my long trial of mesmerism
no one unpleasant occurrence with regard to it: and I trust
in my own heart that the prevailing feeling has been, and
ever will be, deep and sincere gratitude to the Almighty
Hand that ever guides us, and to the kindest and most un-
ceasing efforts of my friendly mesmeriser, to whom I shall
always subscribe myself his most grateful patient, P

«“C. W.

“ Yorkshire, January, 1852.”


*,* This lady did me the favor of calling upon me to
gratify me with a sight of her astonishing cure when in town
last season: and I afterwards met her walking about in the
Great Exhibition.—J. E.


VI. Report of cases treated with Mesmerism, and in connexion
with the Exeter Mesmeric Institution. Painless extraction
of Five Teeth ; complete relief of Stricture with severe suf-
fering ; cure of severe Head-ache with threatened Insanity ;
of Loss of Voice; of four cases of severe Head-ache; of
Uterine Disease ; of Tic Douloureux ; of severe suffering
during Pregnancy ; of Stiff Knee of seven years’ duration,
and of relapse of Loss of Voice; of Chronic Rheumatism.
By Mr. Joun B. Parker, Surgeon, Exeter.


‘*MESMER AND MARTINEAU.


**To the Editor of the Norfolk Chronicle.

‘* My dear Sir,—Miss Martineau has published her cure; but she has not
specified the disease ; and it does not seem very logical, in this interesting lady,
to claim our faith in mesmerism, unless we are told what disorder the practice
has removed. Ever since the days of the French commission at Paris, with the
sober philosophy of Benjamin Franklin* to conduct the inquiries, the world, at
large, and the medical section, in particular, have agreed to consider mesmerism
as a form of charlatanerie. All its advocates impostors or dupes. To set up
again a claim of substantial science for this art is offensive to the vast majority of
physicians and natural philosophers: and displicent to the moralist and divine,
who remember the abuses of the practice, on the continent and even in this
country. If it were a ¢rue therapeutic science, it must and it should prevail ; but,
like machinery, railways, and Warner’s shells, it must be even then most sensi-
tively watched. Is it wonderful, when the operator and the patient are of different


see No. I., p. 62.—Zoist.


* Franklin gave himself no trouble about the matter :


By Mr. Parker. 85


sexes, that the scattered instances of seduction, that the wholesale enormities
under Cagliostro, should occur and alarm society? Elderly ladies may be shielded
by their virtues, their dignity, their religion, their age; but, if mesmerism is to
be perpetrated on mobile, amorous, unsuspecting girls, by boys and by men,
the consequences are manifest. Not long since, in a German city, a young lady
of condition was ruined by her mesmerising physician. The case excited great
disgust in the town: but in what breast of common sense, could it excite wonder?
The medical profession cannot allow the magic name of Harriet Martineau to be
paraded among the disciples of Mesmer, without inquiry into details, which alone
can render her case of any real weight. If delicacy prompted to concealment,
should not fairness have indicated silence? This admired writer has, however,
thought right to announce her case publicly, as one of successful mesmerism—and
the interests of truth and society compel the antagonists of this medical heresy to
analyze, so far as possible, the history, and falsify the conclusion that, because
the patient is well, the mesmeric aura hath effected her cure. Now, although the
laudable delicacy of this extraordinary lady hath suppressed the details of her
malady, yet I have aright to assume that the circulated whispers were well founded ;
and the malady was abdominal tumor. Here this celebrated authoress is too well
known that her age can be any secret: and her amiable and simple character
would render her careless to conceal. And she will not be surprized, therefore,
nor angry, if she is told, that she has been labouring under the climacteric dis-
order of her sex. That this often produces a physcony of the abdomen, with
oppression and universal langour. That in such circumstances the single woman
is terrified with ideas of cancer, dropsy, and organic diseases ; the married lady
fancies she is about to multiply the species, and her fond husband provides a
doctor and the nurse. A case of this kind is reported in the person of a Mrs.
Trunnion by Dr. Smollett: and instances of the first-named deception in spinsters
are daily occurring. But nature goes through her proceedings ; the abdominal
tumefactions subside ; and, when the climacteric period has passed, women often
enjoy better health and longer life than the other sex.*

‘* In this particular case of our popular townswoman let not the mesmeriser
triumph! The success was due to the natural process, aided by the vigour
obtained from faith and hope. Hence energy, exercise, air, omission of opiates ;
and it seems to me that this delightful result would have been earlier effected, I
mean the natural cure, had not the patient become from her own confession, a com-
plete opium eater. She had poisoned herself for years with this fascinating drug.

‘To conclude: my firm persuasion is that this vaunted case is one of thou-
sands, in which the mind has relieved the body from functional not organic dis-
orders. That ladies of a particular age will do well not to appeal to Mesmer for
the cure of their peculiar symptoms, which time and the physician will generally
cure, unless baffled by pernicious treatment. And that young ladies should be
specially careful to eschew this revived foolery, which in many instances hath
created, instead of relieving, tumors of the abdomen.

‘“«T remain, my dear Sir, yours truly,
** Dec. 7, 1844.” “RT. HULL, M.D.t


‘If after the manner of men I have fought with deasts at Ephesus,” &c.—
1 Cor. xv. 32.


Painless Extraction of Four Teeth.
THERE is but small occasion to inform the friends of mes-
merism, that many of its greatest foes are those who will not
think or judge for themselves, but are willing to abuse it both
in obedience to their own ignorance on the subject, and to


* For the greatness of this misrepresentation, see No. IX.—Zoist.

T Indelicate as is this letter of Dr. Hull, it is not so indelicate as an antimes-
meric passage by Dr. James Johnson, published in his Med.-Chir. Review for Oct.
1838, which is alluded toin No. XV., p. 380, but could not be quoted.—Zoist.


%


86 Report of cases treated with Mesmerism.


that of their equally wise friends and neighbours. To con-
quer such prejudice by a simple exercise of “‘mesmeric power,”
is to our minds no small triumph: and the only reason why it
has not been more frequently resorted to, must be that foes
are not always as honest as the gentleman whose late convic-
tion I will now relate.

Lieut. Corneck, R.N., residing near Star Cross, a most
decided and uncompromising abuser of mesmerism, being a
little discomposed by all that he heard from a favourite niece
on the diabolical subject, one day wrote to her, saying—“ If
you will receive my servant, Eliza Powlesiand, give her a
dinner and bed, have her mesmerised, (which, as she is so
delicate, can of course be done directly) then should your
husband be able to take out three or four teeth (now causing
her much pain) without the slightest consciousness on her
part, why, I will give in, and believe there is something in
mesmerism after all.” The challenge was accepted, Eliza
came to Exeter, and all attempts to put her to sleep the first
day were nearly vain. However, those who had taken up the
gage were not to be defeated so easily, and it was determined
that she should remain at Mr. Parker’s till success had
crowned their efforts. The following day she was put into a
profound mesmeric sleep by one of Mr. Parker’s mesmerisers
at 12 or 1 o’clock ; in the evening she was again rendered
unconscious by the same means, and Mr. Parker then ex-
tracted two teeth for her, in the presence of his wife, without
the slightest movement or appearance of pain on her part;
she then washed her mouth by imitation,* and talked exactly
like a person in ordinary sleep, making excuses to her master
and mistress for her non-appearance in the morning according
to her promise, asserting that Mrs. Parker had insisted on
her remaining, and complaining to her fellow-servant that
she should not grumble at her delay, if her master had over-
looked it. She was soon aroused, and was very much sur-
prized to find that two teeth were out ; she said she had not
the slighest remembrance of their being extracted, but that
she had certainly been dreaming. The next morning she
was again mesmerised, and two other teeth were taken out ;
one of them was much decayed, and Mr. Parker was com-
pelled to use several instruments for its extraction. The
same placid statue-like appearance was preserved throughout,
and not one sigh escaped her lips; she again washed her
mouth by imitation, and, before she was aroused, every thing
was cleared away. When consciousness was restored, Mr.
Read (the mesmeriser) asked her why she had not allowed


* Compare the Swiss case, No. XX1X., p. 22.—Zoist.


By Mr. Parker. 87


him to put her to sleep, and thus enabled Mr. Parker to take
out her teeth? She replied, “that she was very sorry for it ;
but that at least she should go home with two less, for which
she felt very grateful.” After a little conversation, in which she
said, “she was sure she might not come again to Exeter, that
she could not be spared,” &c. Mr. Read asked her to rinse
her mouth; she did so, and the water was slightly tinged
with blood. “Ah!” she said, “that comes from those I had
taken out yesterday, I remember they bled a little before
breakfast.” In a second or two she felt that two more were
missing, and started up, exclaiming, “ why they are out !”
They were shewn to her, and she repeated with a curiously
puzzled look, “and to think that I knew nothing of it: how
thankful I am, and how much obliged.” She went home
that afternoon, and quite converted Lieut. Corneck, who now
often mentions the fact, and adds, “that it is certainly very
strange, not only has Eliza lost her aching teeth, but her whole
constitution is improved by mesmerism she says, and also that
she has not slept so well for years, as she has since her stay
at Mr. Parker’s.”

Mr. Parker will be most happy to give Lieut. Corneck’s
address to any one who may wish to satisfy himself of this
fact through him.


Another Painless Extraction of One Tooth.

One evening, about two months since, there was a large
meeting at the Exeter Mesmeric Institution, when a re-
markably sceptical lady was present. She doubted every
thing, but said at last that if she could see an operation per-
formed during mesmeric sleep, she might agree that it was
not all humbug. I quietly told her that I was sorry I could
not take off an arm or a leg, or even extract a tooth in order
to satisfy her: she was silenced for a time, and the business
of the séance was continued. At length the lady said ina
complaining tone, that it was very odd that out of so many
persons (60 or 70 were assembled) no one should want to
have a tooth out. To the surprize of every one, a particularl
modest girl who sat behind her, said that she had one whic
troubled her, and that if I had no objections, she should like
to have it taken out. She had been put into mesmeric sleep
some months before, and once this very evening. She was
soon rendered unconscious, and I successfully extracted a
large tooth, which the lady was convinced pained her much,
as she slightly raised her hands at the moment. However,
after washing her mouth by imitation, she was aroused, and
consented to come the next day to my house to have the


so a EI NN A A A A


88 Report of cases treated with Mesmerism.


offending tooth taken out. In afew moments she discovered
that it was already gone: her naive surprize, and her answers
to the sceptical lady’s questions, convinced the latter that
there really was a power of which she had not dreamt in her
philosophy, and I believe she has ceased from that time to
enlarge on “ mesmeric humbug.”


Stricture of Urethra with intense Suffering.

Mr. —————, had been subject to stricture of urethra
for many years, which had produced considerable contraction
of the vesica; consequently, there was a very frequent neces-
sity of emptying it, occurring six or eight times during the
night. This frequent interruption of sleep began to impair
his otherwise vigorous constitution: he now sought my
assistance. The first attempt to explore the state of the
urethra produced such intense pain, that the patient was
faint, and, although not the least violence was used, there
was considerable hemorrhage. Suitable remedies were given
previously to the use of the catheter; but the nervous system
was so much disturbed by the frequent effort made to overcome
the obstacle, that the patient began to feel alarmed at his posi-
tion ; and a melancholy one it has often proved, as all must
know who have had any experience of such cases, and as the
advertisements in the daily papers too clearly testify. My
patient was now mesmerised twice daily, and, although he
followed his daily active occupation, the result of one week’s
mesmerising was such as to exceed my most sanguine expec-
tations. At the end of six weeks, he was restored to such a
state of health by combining mesmerism with catheterism
that he was quite delighted, and I as much surprized; and
most strongly would I recommend every surgeon and every
patient to have recourse to mesmerism, for the relief of one
of the most troublesome maladies that afflict the human race.


Severe Head-ache with threatened Insanity.

Mrs. P. had suffered for several weeks from intense head-
ache, which impaired her memory; and, knowing insanity to
be hereditary in her family, she was strongly impressed
with the idea that she was threatened with derangement of
intellect. At my first interview I recommended mesmerism,
to which she and her husband had some aversion: but, find-
ing other remedial agents ineffectual in relieving her, she at
last consented to be mesmerised. She soon experienced
relief. At the end of a few weeks she was quite restored,
and has remained quite well ever since.


—_


———


—-


—


ee PS


By Mr. Parker. 89


? Loss of Voice.

Robert Haydon, whose case I reported in The Zoist, two
years since, caught cold in the month of Nov. 1851, and
again lost his voice. He applied to the surgeon of his club,
and, not finding his voice at all improved at the end of a
month, he again requested to be mesmerised. My mes-
meriser soon produced mesmeric sleep, during which, R. H.
predicated that his voice at a certain séance, in the presence
of sixty persons, would be restored, and permanently after he
awoke. On several former occasions he could sing with his
usual voice during the mesmeric sleep, but lost it as soon as
he awoke: but on the occasion specified he recovered his
voice, and it has remained quite audible ever since in accord-
ance with his prediction.


Tic Douloureuz.

Mrs. C. upwards of 60, had suffered much from severe
head-ache, accompanied with violent pains in the face. One
of her teeth was loose, which I extracted. There was a short
cessation from pain in the face, but the head-ache was most
intense, and the other pain soon returned. She had been
under medical treatment previously to consulting me, and all
remedies had failed. She was mesmerised daily; and, in the
course of a few weeks, the head-ache and face-ache were quite
removed, and her health was quite restored.


Tic Douloureuz.

Mrs. ————— had been suffering from tic douloureux,
with ulceration of the gums. Her face and head were much
swollen, and when I arrived the pain had almost produced
delirium. She was mesmerised, and relief soon procured.
At the end of a few days, she was restored to her usual
health.

Tic Douloureux.

—— Skinner had suffered from severe tic douloureux of
the face and head for four years, during which time she had
been submitted to various kinds of treatment, without any
very marked or permanent benefit. During the eighteen
months preceding her application to me, she had been under
homeeopathic treatment, which proving equally ineffectual in
her case, she asked her medical attendant if he thought mes-
merism would be likely to be beneficial to her, to which he


_replied most positively that it was all humbug. With this
‘ conviction she was treated homeopathically three months


more, when her sufferings nearly drove her mad. She then
applied to me, and, after a fortnight’s mesmerising, she re-


90 Report of Cases treated with Mesmerism.


turned to her friends quite cured, and has remained well ever
since.
Tic Douloureuz.

A poor woman from Halberton had suffered from tic
douloureux for two years and half, and was almost mad from
the pain; during this time she had tried various remedies
prescribed by several medical men, but without any decided
benefit. She came to me and was mesmerised for ten days,
when she was able to return to her friends quite free from
pain.


Severe Head-ache with general Constitutional Disturbance.

Mr. C————— had been suffering from severe head-ache,
with pains in almost every part of the body; the digestive
organs were very much disturbed, with considerable conges-
tion of all the abdominal organs. I believe the whole ori-
ginated from an attack of ague, which he had two years
before, and since which he had scarcely enjoyed a day’s health.
His rest was frequently disturbed, sometimes from head-ache,
and at other times from an indescribable nervousness and
wretchedness, which obliged him to pace his room all night,
as the recumbent position was positive torture. He was mes-
merised daily for three months; at the end of which time he
was so much restored as to be able to resume the active duties
of life. I received a letter from him a few weeks since, in
which he rejoiced to tell me of his perfect recovery.


Severe Uterine Disorder.

Mrs. C————— who had miscarried two years previously
to applying to me in Jan., 1851, had been suffering ever
since that event. In addition to constant uneasiness, with
discharge of coagula, her general health was much impaired,
to such an extent indeed as to produce considerable edema
of the lower extremities. During the whole of this time she
had been under medical treatment conducted by several sur-
geons, and, finding no relief, naturally became alarmed at the
prospect of the disease terminating in cancer, which too fre-
quently is a melancholy fact. She asked me if I thought
mesmerism likely to be beneficial, and in compliance with
my advice was mesmerised by a female twice daily for two
months ; at the end of which she was perfectly restored, and
she has remained quite free from every symptom of her trouble-
some malady.


Severe Suffering during Pregnancy.
Mrs. D————— in her first pregnancy was threatened


By Mr. Parker. 91


with miscarriage about the fourth month, from very severe
uterine pains, accompanied by intense head-ache and faint-
ness. On several occasions she found her intellect so much
disturbed, as to make her tell her husband and mother that
she thought she should go mad. To relieve the pains occa-
sioned by the unyielding state of the womb, warm baths were
tried, with other suitable remedies; but, as she appeared to be
very little if at all relieved by the treatment, I advised her to
be mesmerised, to which she as well as her husband objected.
As I was frequently summoned to attend her during some
severe attacks of one or more of the above-mentioned symp-
toms, and as I feared she would have convulsions, probably
followed by puerperal mania, I at length so far convinced her
as well as her husband of the absolute necessity of having
recourse to mesmerism, if she wished to prevent insanity
either during her pregnancy or after her delivery, that I
obtained their consent to try it. My mesmeriser soon pro-
duced relief, and in the course of a few weeks she was able to
exert herself in her shop, and even to make journies into the
country. She continued well up to the day of her delivery,
although troubled at times with uterine pains, as might na-
turally be expected. At 8 in the evening, labour had evidently
begun, but progressed slowly. About midnight she began to
despond, and her anxiety of mind increased to such a degree
as to produce most intense head-ache, to such an extent that
I dreaded every uterine contraction would produce convul-
sions. There was now that peculiar wildness of countenance,
which often precedes such attacks: and, with such a prospect
before me, I placed my hand on her forehead, and in less
than five minutes she was in mesmeric sleep. The tone
of mind then completely changed, she could tell me by intro-
vision the position of the child, and during the uterine con-
tractions she could describe the progress of the labour. In
the midst of her pains she laughed most heartily, and in the


interval drank some brandy and water, and was a op happy


and pleased at the prospect of an early and safe delivery.
She could also predict that her labour would be over in the
course of a few hours; and only regretted that I had never
mesmerised her before, as I should then have been able to have
kept her in a mesmeric sleep during the whole of her labour,
but that now such would not be the case. Having kept her
under my mesmeric influence for nearly two hours, she broke
from it, when the previous state of despondency returned.
This retarded the labour, which was not completed till four in
the morning. Her convalescence was as rapid as under the
most favourable circumstances.


ee


92 Cure of a diseased Knee.


Stiff Knee of Seven Years, and relapse of Loss of Voice.

E. Steer, whose case is reported in The Zoist of July,
1851, at the time she consulted me for the loss of her voice
was suffering from a stiff knee of seven years’ duration. She
never expected to bend it again, but, after being mesmerised
for a few weeks, she was most agreeably surprised to find she
could do so without pain. This tempted her to kneel to scrub
the floor, by which such violence was done to the joint that
it required several months to restore it. At the end of this
time she recovered such perfect use of the limb as to be able
to walk six or eight miles a day, bending her knee at every
step. In November, 1851, she caught cold, and again lost
her voice. As those she lived with were much prejudiced
against mesmerism, she was anxious, if possible, that her
voice should be restored without it. I tried various remedies
for several weeks, without any benefit. She was then again
mesmerised, and in a few weeks her voice was quite restored,
and she has remained well through the winter.


Chronic Rheumatism.

Stamp, a mason, had been suffering from chronic rheu-
matism for many months, so as to be scarcely able to move
his limbs. He was mesmerised for a fortnight, and freedom
from pain, with the perfect use of his limbs, was his reward,
so that he was enabled to return to his work.

J. B. Parker.
Exeter, March 9, 1852.


*,* We trust that poor Dr. Elliot, of Exeter, continues
to enjoy The Zoist as much as he did when he ventured to
scribble so wisely in the local newspapers.—Zoist.


VII. Cure of a diseased Knee. By Mr. Ciement, Surgeon,
Pocklington, Yorkshire.


** Is clairvoyance a natural power? Physiology says no—clairvoyance is not
‘a power which belongs naturally to man, or to one man in a given number.’

*« Its marvellous stories are not founded on physical truth. Many have been
shewn to be the fabrications of wilful liars; and as they are all tales of the same
silly character, are we called upon to ferret out every fresh delinquent ?’’

‘The wretched stuff which is contained in the pages of The Zoist, as quoted
by Dr. Maitland, I should feel degraded to pick to pieces. I am sure that the
tales are not worthy of refutation, scarcely a sneer.’’ ‘It is no light crime to
pretend to miraculous power.’’ ‘‘ We, physiologists, can render no assistance to
the dubitant or distressed divine. We deny the facts.’’ “Miracles to astonish
the minds of imbecile men and silly girls ; miracles performed by hysterical young
women and pubescent lads.’’

“If physiologists could once believe that clairvoyance really existed, they—
the Christian portion at least—must also believe in diabolic, not celestial agency,
in the matter.”’ -


By Mr. Clement. 93


‘* Mesmerism is chargeable with many bad results, as its history, especially
on the Continent, has shewn—lasciviousness, seduction, infidelity.” ‘If Dr.
Maitland has not seen this, the probability is that he has only perused The Zoist,
and such partisan works, and that he does not even know that Messieurs Alexis


and Marcillet fled from London, and the cross-examination, that is, crucial expe-
riments of Dr. Forbes.”


‘* Mesmer himself began with the voluptuous and carnal.” ‘‘ Persons of both
sexes flocked to Mesmer, to feel or witness the strongest emotions.”’ ‘‘ Youths,
remarkable for manly symmetry, were the chosen assistants. They were em-
ployed in making tractions on the body, and for hours together, in compressing


and kneading the hypogastre ’’ (the lowest part of the stomach) ‘‘ with the open
hand.


“* Magnetists operate most forcibly and certainly on women ; and of these on
the most sensitive and impressible in their youngest years. Women between the
ages of fifteen and forty-five are readily excited by magnetism. Old ladies and
robust gentlemen are non-conductors.’’ ‘‘ Mesmerism is sensual.’


“In Norwich—a city ever ready to welcome anomalies and fooleries—A. B.
attempted,’’ &c.


“If we Christian physiologists* are free to interpret the Bible, the rites of
the Egyptian magi were diabolical, and those of all magicians down to the era of
Christ; and if the present performers of clairvoyance speak to realities seen by
them in boxes, shells, closets, wrappers—if so, we are sure that the evil one of
past sorceries,’’ &c.—Clairvoyance and the Clergy. By Rospert Huut, M.D.,t


Senior Physician of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital. London Medical Gagette,
Nov. 21, 1851.


‘‘Tf after the manner of men I have fought with deasts at Ephesus,”’ &c.—
1 Cor. xv., 32.


TO THE ANTIMESMERISTS,


GENTLEMEN,—It was once my vain boast to rank myself
amongst the firmest of your adherents, to ridicule or pooh
down “ mesmerism,” and to deny in toto its claims as a cura-
tive agent. It were needless to detail the extraordinary ef-
fects which I have repeatedly witnessed of its power of arrest-
ing and finally curing diseases which had previously resisted
alike the skill of the physician and the dexterity of the sur-
geon, and which first staggered my unbelief and finally con-
verted me into a disciple of “Mesmer.” The following case
I respectfully submit to your judgment: and, if desired, to
your personal investigation. Observe, I have allowed ample
time to elapse in order to remove any objection that might be
urged as to the incompleteness of the cure.

Elizabeth Bourkes, aged three years, the infant daughter
of Jane Bourkes, the wife of John Bourkes, labourer, residing
at Huggate in this county, was first brought under my care
in April, 1849, for an enlargement of the knee-joint, attended
with loss of the power of motion. The mother’s statement to


* The capitals and italics are ours. ‘‘ Whoso seemeth to be religious, and
bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man’s religion is vain.”’
—VJames i. 26.—Zoist.

t+ This man afforded a motto to No. XXVIII., Art. 3, in his dedication of
a book to Dr. F. Hawkins, whose discreditable doings may be found in No.
XXIII. and XX1IV.—Zoist.


a iat


94 Cure of a diseased Knee.


me was as follows :—“ Wherever the limb be laid at night,
it will be found exactly in the same position in the morning.
She has not the slightest use of the limb at any time. It is
particularly painful when bent or brought over the opposite
limb, and she screams loudly until the limb is brought back
to its proper position. She has no desire to move. If the
foot is struck, this occasions her considerable pain. Her ap-
petite is very irregular; she takes scarcely anything for days,
then eats voraciously. Has constant thirst. The bowels are
relaxed; the urine is abundant.” Her pulse, I find, when
she is still, ranges from 112 to 115: when she is excited, it
is greatly accelerated. The tongue slightly furred. The heat
of her surface is 92°: the degree of heat is not sensibly in-
creased in the affected knee. I find on admeasurement the
sound knee 8} inches; and the diseased knee 103 inches
in circumference. I ordered the child three grains of calomel
and five grains of rhubarb every third night, with a little
infusion of senna on the following morning, and three leeches
to be applied to the inner side of the knee, followed by
warm fomentations. I saw nothing further of my young
patient for some weeks ; when, as I was accidentally passing,
the mother called me in to see the child, whom I found much
worse than on my first visit. The knee was now enormously
enlarged and acutely sensitive: it measured 13 inches in cir-
cumference. I ordered the leeches, which had been neglected,
to be instantly applied, and followed by hot bran poultices to
encourage the bleeding. Hyd. ci creta was given at night,
followed in the morning by rhubarb and carbonate of soda.
Three weeks afterwards the mother brought the child down
to my house, a distance of eight miles. On examination I
found extensive suppuration surrounding the knee-joint, and
the skin so thin and bright that globules of matter could be
distinctly seen as through a transparent envelope. The ad-
measurement of the knee shewed it to be 153 inches in cir-
cumference. The appearance of the child at this time was
most unfavourable. She was a perfect skeleton. The eyes
were preternaturally bright ; the skin hot ; the pulse flutter-
ing; the bowels almost passive ; no appetite: the child was
extremely irritable, and rarely slept above a few minutes at a
time. In fact, it was evidently fast sinking, unless some
prompt and efficacious means of relief were instantly adopted.
I found the medicines had been neglected, as also the warm
fomentations which I had ordered, composed of bruised poppy
heads and chamomile flowers. I found little had been done
to subdue the complaint, which had gone on unchecked until
extensive suppuration ensued.


By Mr. Clement. 95


In those unfavourable circumstances I determined to try
mesmerism without any other remedial agent whatever. Two
hours a day were devoted to mesmerising the diseased joint ;
with the most salutary and unexpected results. On the third
day a manifest decrease of the swelling was apparent: the
child had slept soundly during the night previous, and, added
the mother, “ Lizzie’s appetite is wonderfully improved.” I
will not tire the reader’s patience by detailing the daily and
unchecked progress made by my little patient towards reco-
very, so rapid and complete. No outward escape of matter
took place during the process of cure. The skin continued
throughout bright and unbroken. The knee-joint gradually
diminished in size, and fourteen days after the first applica-
tion of mesmerism the circumference of the joint had so far
diminished, as well as the sensibility, as to render a success-
ful issue to this interesting case no longer doubtful. The
knee-joint now measured no more than 104 inches in circum-
ference, and the child could bear to use it for support. Her
continued progress towards recovery was most rapid. In
three months from the first mesmeric sitting, the whole limb
had regained its original size and strength : whilst the favour-
able alteration in my little patient’s health and appearance
was most gratifying. Upwards of two years have elapsed
since I first saw this child, and the cure of that diseased
knee-joint is as perfect as it is surprising.

You gentlemen of the antimesmeric school must allow
that no possible collusion existed between my little cross-
grained patient and myself. Was the cure one of those spon-
taneous efforts of nature which accidentally took place at that
particular point of time? or was it due to mesmeric influence
alone? Without vainly attempting to offer any explanation
of the modus operandi by which this important cure was
speedily, safely, and effectually performed, it is sufficient for
my purpose that I state for your information facts which I
challenge the unbeliever to controvert if he can: and for this
purpose I shall be happy to offer any member of either branch
of the profession every facility for a full and impartial inves-
tigation into all the circumstances attending the case of Eli-
zabeth Bourkes. I have given no notice to the family of my
intention to publish their daughter’s case, so that they may
be unconscious evidence, if needed, of the truth of my state-
ments. I ask from you, gentlemen, the favour of a reply.
If the cure I have narrated was not effected by mesmerism,
by what other process was it accomplished ?

I have the honour to be, gentlemen,
Yours, &c.
J. W. Crement, M.R.C.S.L.


( 96 )


VIII. Cure of severe Cutaneous Disease of the whole Scalp in
a young lady. By Dr. Ex.iotson.


“DR. M‘NEILE AND MESMERISM.
“ To the Editor of the Liverpool Courier.


‘* Sir,—On Friday evening last, in a lecture delivered in the Collegiate Insti-
tution, the gentleman above mentioned repeated an opinion which he has pre-
viously expressed with reference to mesmerism ; namely, that it is a manifestation
of satanic agency.

‘* It is not my present purpose to explain or dilate upon the phenomena which
are exhibited under various degrees of mesmeric development. Some persons
have the hardihood to denounce the entire of these as a delusion and a cheat.
Men who pride themselves in the soundness of their faith exhibit, in this respect,
the most vulgar infidelity, in refusing to believe attested facts simply because
they cannot understand them

“Dr. M‘Neile is not one ‘of these. He knows enough of the laws of evidence
to feel assured of the reality of that which, for many years, has been a matter of
conversation and discussion on the continent of Europe and in America, even
more generally than in our own country.

** Most men of ordinary prudence and intelligence are satisfied with collecting
and examining the facts satisfactorily ascertained with reference to this subject,
patiently awaiting the induction of those principles which further experience may
show them to involve. In such processes of thought there is abundant scope for
sober argument. We are not precipitated on any immediate and compulsory
conclusion. We do not live in an age of oracles, whose words of fearful import
have but to be heard and believed. Nor do we succumb to the dicta of a Romish
priest, whose laudations and denunciations are alike impotent, as the outbreaks
of an unreasoning superstition. Why, therefore, should a Protestant clergyman
pronounce so solemn a censure on a subject of interesting inquiry, without one
word of argument or justification ? ?

“Is there anything in the phenomena popularly designated as mesmeric,

which bears evidence of a diabolical origin, or of a necessarily evil result? To
say that it has been, or may be, abused for evil purposes, is only to state a
characteristic of the best gifts of divine benevolence. In contending that the
presumed communications are miraculous, the lecturer by no means justifies his
assumption as to their satanic source : beside which, he has to prove what appears
beyond the reach of human intelligence, namely, that a fallen spirit possesses
those powers which are needful, according to his own views of the constitution
of nature, to effect the presumptively supernatural intercourse. We have yet to
learn, however, that anything miraculous—that is to say, out of the ordinary
course of the divinely appointed constitution of nature—resides in mesmerism.
The entire system of nervous impressions and sensations is as great a mystery to
us as the nature of the union between the soul and the body. Dr. M‘Neile him-
self well observes, in one of his sermons, that nothing is to be esteemed mira-
culous because man cannot account for it when it is done: and that a miracle is
some special act, opposed to the habitual mode of the divine procedure.

*«If, a few years since, a telegraphic message could have been conveyed from
London to the Prince’s-park here, announcing some event which had transpired
just before, the intelligence could only have been received, in ignorance of the
mode of its transmission, with absolute ridicule. Supposing, however, that next
day’s post brought a letter confirming the date and the circumstances of the
occurrence previously icated—what then? Nothing being known of the
electric medium, a most undoubted miracle must be recognized, either divine or
diabolical. Mesmeric phenomena afford us some partial idea of the nature and
distribution of that plexus of sentient communication which appears to be con-
nected with all vital organization, whether of mind or matter; although, for the
most part, it is as profound a mystery to us as is the working of the electric

telegraph to an untutored savage.

“*T might refer to numerous works, some of them the production of truly


Cure of severe Cutaneous Disease. 97


devout and intelligent Christians, in illustration of the curative influence of mes-
merism. Dr. M‘N. needs not to be reminded that it is no new thing in the
world’s history for a non-professional cure of disease to be denounced as a work
of the devil. Ignorance and fanaticism naturally seek to destroy all that rises
above their own level. When Faustus commenced printing, his books were
seized and destroyed by those who, unacquainted with the mystery of the printing
press, deemed the exact correspondence of the copies with each other an indubit-
able result of satanic agency. More recent illustrations, connected with the
practice of physic, will occur to the mind of a professional man.

‘« Tt must be regarded as truly unfortunate that, in the opening lecture of the
course which is expected to present a popular development of some of the pro-
minent themes of instruction in our excellent Collegiate Institution, statements
should have been introduced which are as much at variance with sound science as
with scriptural religion. It can scarcely be disrespectful to the lecturer to suggest,
that his acquisitions lie anywhere rather than in the field of natural philosophy.
Were I to use that license in the application of scripture which is assumed by
some clerical authorities, I would remind him that ‘those who speak evil of the
things which they know not’ are the objects of special warning by an inspired
apostle. I earnestly wish to be ‘persuaded better things’ as regards himself ;
and should the observations referred to be explained or retracted, it will not be
the first time that the doctor has been congratulated on his recantation of some
erroneous opinions on the subject of miracles.

**IT have only to say, in conclusion, that I am no sceptic as to the personality
or the active influence of fallen angels—but

“ An EvanGeticat CuurcHMan.”’*


Near the end of October, 1850, I was consulted by a lady
from a provincial city respecting her daughter, nineteen years
of age, who was exceedingly pretty, fine and healthy look-
ing, but who had been shockingly afflicted for very nearly
two years with a severe disease of the scalp, that I should
designate eczema impetiginodes. The whole scalp and much
of the ears were covered with crusts of hardened discharge
that were constantly coming off, and was in a state of high
irritation. The disease had evidently arisen from a violent
cold caught by getting wet in the feet, and had commenced
in the forehead.

After this had existed for two months, a physician of the
city was called in. His treatment began in January, 1849,
but was perfectly unavailing: and the disease increased in
intensity and gradually spread from the forehead all over the
head, affecting the ears, eyes, and neck: and in July, 1850,
the irritation was such that the head swelled greatly, the ears
had pustules within -and were raw without, and the agony
was so intense that opiates entirely failed to produce sleep.
For six weeks she could not leave her room. After this very

* Can it be wondered that so many shake their heads at the Established
English Church, when any of its doctors of divinity, its honorary canons, and
denouncing preachers, may be so ignorant of natural knowledge—“ of God’s works,’’
so badly educated, and so mischievous, as to utter the antimesmeric rubbish which
proceeds from Dr. M‘Neile’s mouth, uncastigated by his bishop? How can
such a man be qualified to judge of the evidences of Christianity? How can
such a man taunt the Roman Catholics with ignorance and superstition ?

VOL. xX. H


98 Cure of severe Cutaneous Disease.


severe aggravation of the disease, her head was shaved nine-
teen times—a practice, in my opinion, as useless, nay as in-
jurious, as it is cruel. After a certain degree of remittance,
the disease, to her dismay, broke forth again: and, after the
physician’s treatment by endless quantities of drugs, hot
baths every night for a period, and dietetic rules, had been
persevered in for a year and ten months, her state was mate-
rially worse than when he began his attendance.

He is a violent opponent of mesmerism, writing in the
local newspapers and the Medical Gazette ignorantly and dis-
gustingly against it. At his express desire, her mother brought
her to London to consult two professedly skin-curing sur-
geons, equally antimesmerists with himself. One prescribed
two glasses of port wine daily : the other abstinence from all
fermented drinks. One strictly forbade any meats but
boiled, and strictly forbade sugar: the other was indifferent
to such ludicrous injunctions. Each prescribed a different
drug. Each said the disease was very difficult to cure. But
one professed that he would cure it in six weeks if she were
regularly under his treatment: the other was honest enough
to say that the period of cure, and indeed the cure at all,
was very uncertain.

This specimen of London advice was not very satisfactory,
and the lady brought her daughter to me before she left town.
I recommended abstinence from all stimulants, a very mild
ointment to the head, gentle aperients for the regulation of
the digestive organs, and the hydriodate of potass, which
one of the surgeons had prescribed, and which she had taken
for some time in the country by the advice of her physician :
and, as mesmerism was mentioned, I earnestly recommended
its employment in addition. They were-staying at the house
of some friends whom I was attending daily, and the follow-
ing morning I mesmerised her there, not without reluctance
on her part, while she was in great pain from the inflamma-
tion of her ears both inside and outside. She went off to
sleep in three minutes, slept soundly for two hours, and awoke
free from pain: nor did she ever have any pain from that
moment, except a little for a short time the same evening. I
mesmerised her the two following days: and she returned to
the country and was mesmerised by her maid daily for a few
weeks, but afterwards by a very enlightened and gentlemanlike
surgeon of the neighbourhood, who has been penetrating
enough to perceive the truth and excellence of mesmerism,
and honest enough to avow his convictions and give his pa-
tients the benefit of them. The improvement was so rapid
and decisive that she soon left off her medicine and trusted


By Dr. Elliotson. 99


solely to mesmerism, satisfied that it was curing her, because
she had long been taking the same medicine without benefit,
and experienced a change so soon after mesmerism was
begun. She continued to improve as rapidly as before, and
was soon perfectly well; and has remained so up to this hour,
now above a twelvemonth, and has a beautiful head of hair
instead of a head too shocking to look at.

I may mention a little circumstance for the benefit of the
imaginationists. One day the surgeon had been chatting
with the lady’s father in the dining room during luncheon,
and, at his request, shewn him by mesmerising a jug of water
how water is mesmerised. No one else was in the room.
The jug and a glass were always left in the room that she
might take her medicine in the water when she chose: and,
after the gentlemen were gone, she went into the room,
and, as she was accustomed, poured herself out a glass of
water, took her medicine in it, but instantly sank back sup-
ported by her mother into a chair in a profound sleep, which
lasted some hours. Neither she nor her mother knew any
thing about mesmerised water, and the explanation was not
conceivable, till the father and surgeon mentioned what
had occurred between them. As mesmerised water had this
powerful effect upon her, she afterwards resolved to take some
every night on going to bed: but was obliged to take it on
stepping into bed, and to put the glass down as quickly as pos-
sible, for she not only instantly fell asleep, but her hands vio-
lently adhered to the glass. Without the mesmerised water
she had little sleep, as she slept mesmerically so much in the
day. If persons are ill, the more they sleep mesmerically in
the day, the better generally do they sleep at night, because
they go to bed less tired: and we may be too tired to sleep—
we may become restless. But when persons are in perfect
health, as this lady was except locally, and have no debility
and restlessness, the more they sleep mesmerically in the day
the less they are generally disposed to sleep at night.

I may mention that it is a mistake to suppose that cohe-
sion exists between mesmerised objects and the living body.
The inanimate object is passive ; but the hand adheres to it,
and adheres not by anything like physical attraction, but by
an irresistible inclination of the patient to keep the hand,
&c., &c., in contact with the object. Hence the tales of a
mesmerised chair adhering to a person who is violently pulled
from it, or of a mesmerised glass not dropping from a hand
which is forced open from it, are nonsense.

I am happy to forward this case, because so many persons
suppose that mesmerism has power over nervous affections

H 2


100 Use of Mesmerism in severe pains after parturition.


only : whereas it possesses a general power of assisting the body
to right itself in whatever way wrong. The Zoist abounds in
cases of the cure of inflammations and ulcers, some of which
had resisted all ordinary means. A case of inveterate skin
disease called psoriasis, which had resisted the medical men of
many hospitals in London for many years, was lately so
ameloriated at the Mesmeric Infirmary that the cure was
nearly effected, when the poor girl was obliged to leave in
order to go into a situation.


IX. Remarkable power of Mesmerism over dreadfully severe
pains after parturition. By a Clergyman of the Church
of England. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


“To * * *


‘* Spanish Place, Sunday evening.
‘* Dear Madam,—I have made enquiry respecting the lawfulness of the use of
magnetism by way of medical treatment, and can furnish no other reply than that
according to the decision of the sacred college at Rome in July, 1841, its use is
under all circumstances illicit, and contrary to the spirit of the church.
** I remain, Madam, yours most sincere,
“Francis Raine.”


“ To Dr. Elliotson.
‘* Dear Sir,—The enclosed note will shew you that after all I am unable to
follow your advice about magnetism. I was deceived when I submitted to it
before ; and so kindly did Mr. Rhing wish to oblige me now that he even saw Dr,
Wiseman, but in vain. I am, however, equally obliged by your advice. I am
still in bed much the same: if not better soon, perhaps change of air or Tun-
bridge Wells will do me good : it is the vomiting that keeps me so weak.
** 1 am, dear Sir, yours truly and obliged,
“ *


**35, W—— Street, Monday evening.” *


* The Roman Catholic wife of a Protestant physician had long suffered from
very severe disease, which no medical means relieved. Soon after I was con-
sulted, she earnestly entreated to be mesmerised. Her husband was quite agree-
able and began to mesmerise her: but it was arranged that a female mesmeriser
should continue the process. Like a weak woman, she began to think that she
must consult her spiritual adviser about her body and a matter of science; and
she received from Mr. Rhing the absurd and cruel answer which excluded her
from one of the greatest blessings: and thus she remained in torment which
neither the priest nor the cardinal fett. Dr. W. was then not a cardinal ; and I
trust for his character that the priest was wrong and had really not conferred with
him. Of course the priest was wrong as a Christian ; for such views have no Chris-
tianity in them. But he was wrong as regards his own particular church, That
mesmerism has not been forbidden at Rome, when enquiries have been made from
different countries, is shewn in a work called Le Magnétisme et le Somnambulisme
devant les corps savants, la Cour de Rome, et les Theologiens. Par M. Y Abbé J.
B. L. Paris, 1844.* In 1841, in consequence of the application of a young
Swiss priest fancying magic or satanic agency in mesmerism, the Bishop of Lau-
sanne and Geneva wrote to Rome, ignorantly declaring, from the insensibility to


* See also Mr. Sandby’s Mesmerism anid its Opponents, p. 79, &c.


a
———————————


By a Clergyman of the Church of England. 101


E Rectory, Norfolk, March 17th, 1852.
Srr,—At the suggestion of my friend, Mrs. Wm. Herring,
of Norwich, I send you for insertion in the April number of
The Zoist the following case; i. e., if you think it worthy of
it. You are quite at liberty to alter or shorten it as you
like. Although I do not particularly like my name being
mentioned, you are quite at liberty to say that I have given
it to you, and that I shall be glad to answer any enquiries,
and you may give any one my address. I am quite satisfied
that my wife was saved a vast deal of agony at the time
of her confinement. I certainly thought she was dying,
and she thought so too; and she believes I saved her life.
I was staggered at the sudden change of her countenance
after the first pass or so: she sank quietly back in bed and
fell asleep.


I am, Sir, yours truly,
J.


pain in patients, that he thought the process could not be natural : and the answer
he received was that mesmerism, thus characterized, “ prout exponitur,” was not
permissible. In 1842, the Archbishop of Rheims made a similar application to
Rome; and in 1844, not earlier, received an official answer from Cardinal
Castracane, that ‘‘the proper employment of mesmerism is not, and never has
been, forbidden,””—* that the Court of Rome will not engage in a controversy
which has existed amongst physicians for above sixty years ; but allows physio-
logy free scope in all questions which do not touch upon faith or morality ; and
above all, must never pronounce, without competent knowledge, upon any
subject,’’ &c., p.591. Several ladies and gentlemen who have published the cures
of their own diseases in The Zoist are sincere Roman Catholics. Mr. Majendie,
of Headingham Castle, writes to me thus :—‘‘ I am well acquainted with a lady
at Caen, La Marquise de B » who wrote to a friend at Rome, a secretary of
legation, who at her request made enquiries, and learnt there was no general edict
against magnetism in the archives. This gentleman is intimate with the Cardinal
Bernelli (or Bernetti), the supreme judge of the inquisition, and with the Padre
Degola, the secretary of the Index and ordinary judge of the inquisition. The
matter was discussed by Mr. K. with these two ecclesiastics at the house of the
Cardinal : and it was admitted that it is not a mortal sin to use magnetism for the
purpose of doing good, and one of those priests said he would not scruple to use
it himself. I magnetized a poor woman at Malvern last autumn, in presence of
her confessor, without any objection on his part, and he admitted the benefit
derived.”’

Mr. Majendie also tells me that one day M. Gauthier, while going off to the
scientific congress, at which the Archbishop of Rheims was to take the chair, in-
formed him that the vicar-general of that province practised mesmerism exten-
sively. A Roman Catholic priest at this moment does the same in England, and
effects great good. Some of my Roman Catholic patients consulted their spiritual
advisers before being mesmerised, and were readily permitted to employ it. One
of the most zealous publications in the great cause of mesmerism is the Roman
Catholic Dublin Evening Post. Dr. Wiseman could not have said only three years
ago that the Court of Rome forbade mesmerism in all circumstances : he would as
soon have asserted that the sun is a yard and a half in diameter and rolls round
the earth. At this very moment I hear that His Eminence’s secretary, Mon-
signore Searle, is anxiously exerting himself to have a patient, with a disease of
the hip, mesmerised. The Abbé Lacordaire, the popular Dominican preacher at
Notre Dame in Paris, speaks in one of his sermons of the advantages and bless-
ings of mesm@tism.


102 Use of Mesmerism.in severe pains after parturition.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


E Rectory, Norfolk.

Sir,—I am not aware of mesmerism having ever been
tried in a case similar to the following; I am therefore in-
duced to send you the detail of it, thinking it may be suffi-
ciently interesting to warrant a place in the next number of
The Zoist.

My wife was confined of twin daughters on the 2nd of
November last, at 9 o’clocka.m. The labour was natural,
and she did not suffer so much in actual labour pains as she
had done in her four previous confinements ; but immediately
after the birth of the infants she experienced the most violent
pains in the womb, which continued unabated so long that
the patient began to be impressed with the certainty that she
would not pass safely through.

For two or three months previously I had been making a
series of experiments to discover whether there was any truth
or not in animal magnetism, and I had been (as many per-
sons of undoubted veracity in the neighbourhood could tes-
tify) most successful in eliciting a great many of the pheno-
mena as described in Dr. Gregory’s Letters and other works
on the subject: but I cannot say that I had any very san-
guine hope that I should be able to relieve my wife, almost
instantaneously, from such sufferings as she was then un-
dergoing.

I ought to mention that at this time my wife was a perfect
unbeliever in mesmerism.

In the afternoon of the 2nd, in the midst of her agonies
and cries, which were most distressing, I begged her to allow
me to try if mesmerism would alleviate her suffering. To
this she consented, and I began by making long passes with
both hands from the head to the lower part of the abdomen,
outside the bedclothes, &c. I had not made more than three
or four passes before she exclaimed, “Oh, I am so much
easier now ; the pain is going away!” In less than five mi-
nutes she was in a quiet sleep, which lasted about twenty
minutes, and from which she then awoke entirely free from
pain. Whether the pain arose from the contraction of the
womb, or what other cause, I know not: that she obtained
immediate and permanent relief by means of mesmerism,
both of us are quite certain : and, although these violent pains
never returned, still there was once or twice apparently a
commencement of them, when from a pass or two it instantly
ceased. During the month following all her other confine-
ments my wife had suffered most dreadful headaches, which I

.


Review of two works on Insanity. 103


believe are very usual at such times with many women: but
I was able to relieve her of these also. One day she com-
plained that she was suffering from one of her usual head-
aches. I said I thought I could remove it soon. She was
sitting in a common bed-room chair. I went behind her and
made some passes from the forehead backwards: I had not
done this many times before she exclaimed, “ Well! this is
very curious; I feel exactly as though a heavy weight was
being lifted from my head!” In a short time the aching had
vanished; and since that time, as is well known to our
servants and friends, my wife never suffers long from those
old companions. She never recovered so speedily and well
from her confinements before, as our medical man, who is not
a mesmerist, will testify; and I shall ever be thankful that a
desire to elicit truth mduced me to turn my attention to
animal magnetism. I have no purpose to serve in giving my
testimony to the power of mesmerism to remove pain, beyond
that of a wish to induce others to investigate the science for
themselves, and to withhold their belief or unbelief of it until
they have so investigated it.
I am, Sir, yours, &c.,
J. D. S——.*


X. Insanity.—Reviews of Remarks on the Plea of Insanity,
and on the management of Criminal Lunatics. By Wm.
Woop, M.D., &c.

Crime and Insanity ; their causes, connexion, and-consequences,
&c. By C. M. Burnert, M.D., &c.


In the former of the two publications here named we recog-
nize a laudable attempt to advance the present limits of


* Instances of the power of mesmerism over after-pains, even when violent,
will be found in No. XV., by Dr. Esdaile, in India; XV., XVilII., by Mr.
Parker of Exeter; XV., XXI., XXII., by Mr. Chandler of Rotherhithe (in the
last case the after-pains, extraordinarily enough, occurred in the left shoulder !) and
in XXXV., by Mr. Saunders of Bristol.

I received a letter from a friend some time ago, from which the following is
an extract :—‘‘ My cow was to calve, probably before my return. She was so
large that people thought there would be two; and my man was so far anxious
that he bespoke the help of an accoucheur. I advised -him to mesmerise her if
there was any difficulty at the time. There was difficulty; and the assistant sent
for him from his work, and told him that it was ‘‘ a bad job ;’’ and that, suffering
as she was, it would be many hours before she would be relieved. My man went
quietly into the cow-house, and began to mesmerise her, the assistant peeping in
to see what he was about. She immediately became easy, and, within ten minutes,
she had calved,—to the amazement of the other man. She was immediately well.
It was a very large calf.”’

Three other intances of mesmeric benefit in the sufferings of our brute fellow-
creatures will be found in No. XXXI., p. 300; one in No. XXXII., p. 335; and
one in No. XXXIIL., p. 49, by Mr. H. S. Thompson, Miss Martineau, Mrs. Von
der Heyde, and Mr. South.


104 Review of two works on Insanity


psychological science, and thus to promote the recognition
of those principles of human legislation, that profess, and
rightly so, to prevent rather than to punish either the extra-
vagancies or vices of our fellow-man. The matter discussed
by Dr. Wood is one of immense importance, and claims
therefore the first and best attention of the scientific world,
and of the legislator.

It cannot be doubted that if we would preserve the mental
or rather the cerebral nature of man in harmony with the
external world, it is of all things necessary that we should
cultivate the study of the brain—its uses, adaptations, and
disordered conditions. To comprehend either sanity or in-
sanity—virtue or vice—responsibility or irresponsibility, the
student of psychology must be prepared with a knowledge of
Gall’s great and imperishable discoveries; and we should
have been much better pleased with the production of Dr.
Wood if it had contained some kind of notice of those phy-
siological data on which, it is to be presumed, he rests his
pathology—his “plea of insanity.” If, as we suspect, Dr.
Wood’s pamphlet is intended not less for the legal and ge-
neral reader than for his medical brethren, then must it
follow, that a short preliminary discourse of even two or
three pages length, containing a mere abstract of the uses
of the brain—its healthy manifestations and general adapta-
tion to the wants, sentiments, and desires implanted in the
human constitution—would have rendered its contents more
acceptable to the reader, because so very much more compre-
hensible and distinct. Surely the time is gone by when an
author, of whatever rank, may feel it thus expedient or ne-
cessary to keep his belief in phrenology in the back ground.
The physiology of Gat, it may be presumed, has got well
over at least the first dangers and difficulties which beset the
path of rrutH—narrow, precipitous, and dangerous, though
it be, to the few wayfarers who care to make it a thoroughfare.
We should have felt glad had our author shewn himself, more
plainly than he has done, one of those few bold and honest
travellers, who, keeping the great and good end of his journey
in view, and intent only on the grand panorama to be realized
at its close, pursues the even tenor of his way through good
and through evil report, and awaits in all patience and hu-
mility the reward of his perseverance in a good and righteous
cause.*


* Dr. Wood was a member of both the Phrenological Society and Asso-
ciation, and two phrenological accounts by him are printed in No. I. He
was Dr. Elliotson’s chief mesmeriser at University College Hospital and for
two or three years afterwards, and some of his cures are detailed in No,


by Drs. Wood and Burnett. 105


Dr. Wood has some excellent remarks on the difficulties
which beset the “ plea of insanity,” and on the vague notions
which prevail among the intelligent classes of society and
even among medical men as to the nature of insanity, &c.
It Has often occurred to us that the most ready way to under-
stand what constitutes insanity, is to be perfectly agreed as
to the nature of sanity. If the test of a perfectly healthy
mind be the capacity to respond duly, and in all order, to
the many and varied calls made upon it—adapting itself to the
ever changing circumstances which are associated with the
stimulus or stimuli offered to the brain, and enabling the in-
dividual to preserve, at all times, a strict and wholesome obe-
dience to the physical or organic and moral laws—then does
insanity presuppose the very converse of all this.

Dr. Wood very properly remarks :—


“The difference in position, education, and means, would make
all the difference in estimating the conduct of an individual with a
view to determine the question of his sanity. What in one person
may be perfectly reasonable and judicious, may in another be alto-
gether most unreasonable and imprudent; whilst in a third, the very
same act would be unhesitatingly admitted as undeniable evidence of
some mental disturbance.”


The great question raised on the Commission of Lunacy in
Mrs. Cumming’s case, than which none other of the kind has
created a greater interest, owing, probably, to the very pal-
pable discrepancy in the evidence of the medical witnesses,
was, whether or not the aversion of this lady to her daughters
was the natural result of their unkind behaviour (?), or the
consequence of a disordered state of the affections and pro-
pensities, to which the intellect was rendered not only sub-
ordinate, but accessory. Now, in accordance with the fore-
going views as above quoted, it will be directly seen that upon
the relative “ position” of these several facts to each other
would rest the nature of this said aversion. If a sufficient
cause for such an effect had been shewn, then it may be pre-
sumed the duty of the jury towards Mrs. Cumming would
have been rendered comparatively easy ; but inasmuch as this
important feature in the case was wanting, it was directly
felt that that mother could hardly be sane who would not
only deny her offspring the promptings of our commonest
instinct, but add, moreover, to such denial a protracted and
inveterate hatred. Wheresoever the capacity of the brain to
respond duly to the natural stimuli offered to it is suspended,
and whensoever the conduct of the individual infringes at


II., I11., and IV. His testimony to the truth of clairvoyance with a
detailed proof will be found in Dr. Elliotson’s Physiology, pp. 1185-93.


106 Review of two works on Insanity


the same time the physical, or moral laws—then may insanity
be more than suspected. Dr. Wood asks what degree of ex-
aggeration of a natural emotion may with propriety be con-
sidered as constituting insanity. This question is a very
important one to the medico-legal jurist. We all witness
from time to time in persons, it may be near and dear to us,
various excesses of feeling or emotion, or instances of uncon-
trollable impulse and exaggeration of speech and conduct,
which—if they were not preceded by a sufficient cause or
apology, and if they were not temporary only—would, of a
surety, constitute so many indications of a disordered mind
—of, in one word, insanity. Joy, grief, anger, &c., may
each be manifested most intensely or acutely, so much so as
to lead one to conjecture that the whole nervous power of the
cerebral mass has been absorbed or concentred into that in-
dividual portion of the brain presiding over these emotions
or passions respectively; but in a state of health this local
excess of action would presently cease, and the balance of
the “ nervous power” would be re-established. But circum-
stances may aud do arise wherein the /Jocal excess of action
does not “cease,” and wherein the aforesaid “ balance” is
never realized, and then is insanity a matter of easy demon-
stration. A most affecting anecdote is related by Dr. Uwins.
A lady on the point of marriage, whose intended husband
usually travelled by the stage-coach to meet her, went one
day to meet him, and found instead of him an old friend, who
came to announce to her the tidings of his sudden death.
She uttered a scream and piteously exclaimed, “ he is dead.”
From that fatal moment, says the author, has this unfortu-
nate female daily for fifty years (in all seasons) traversed the
distance of a few miles to the spot where she expected her
future husband to alight from the coach; and every day she
utters in a plaintive tone, “ HE Is DEAD.”

We are glad to find Dr. Wood an advocate of the opinion
which allows to certain forms of mental disorder an integrity
of the intellectual powers. To know ricut from wrong is a
very different thing to being able to prefer the former: a con-
sciousness of these qualities by no means presupposes a capa-
city to avoid the latter of them. Esquirot and Pinex have
both recognized the fact that very many insane persons con-
tinue to enjoy the use of their intellectual powers, and that
the extravagance, incoherence, &c., of such indicate rather a
disordered condition of the affections and propensities ; and
that these so control and subjugate both the perceptive and
reflective faculties as to render them subordinate only to their
caprices or disordered manifestations. ©


by Drs. Wood and Burnett. 107


In 1843, the “ pLua or 1NsaNITY” occupied much of the
attention of our legislators, and, as our readers may be
aware, the result of their proceedings was embodied in five
very important questions, which were submitted by the House
of Lords to the supexs; and these were designed to shew the
real state of the law respecting criminal lunatics and the law
of insanity. Nine years have now elapsed; and it may be
considered necessary at this time to enquire how far the no-
tions of the judges alluded to are applicable to the views of
the present day; or, in other words, how far behind the doc-
trine and science now recognized and taught are the replies
of these notabilities to the not very learned interrogatories
of the Lorps. We doubt not our readers will quickly per-
ceive on a perusal of the said questions and answers here sub-
joined for their attentive consideration, that both peers of
the realm and lawyers, learned though they are, can boast
only of a very superficial and erroneous view of physiological
and pathological matters. Psychology, like chemistry, is but
little attended to by our legislators, or Lord Seymour would
hardly have afforded our witty contemporary Puncn so good
a joke as that which appears under the signature of “ Ris-
ING TEN.”


First question—‘ What is the law respecting alleged crimes com-
mitted by persons afflicted with insane delusion in respect of one or
more particular subjects or persons; as, for instance, where at the
time of the commission of the alleged crime, the accused knew he
was acting contrary to law, but did the act complained of with a
view, under the influence of insane delusion, of redressing or reveng-


ing some supposed grievance or injury, or of producing some sup-
posed public benefit !”’


Answer—-“ That notwithstanding the party committing a wrong
act when labouring under the idea of redressing a supposed grievance
or injury, or under the impression of obtaining some public or pri-
vate benefit, he was liable to punishment.”


Mem.—There are two important matters for the psycho-
logist embraced in the preceding,—the one having reference
to “partial insanity,’ or monomania ; the other, to the delu-
sions of the insane. It is doubtless a much easier thing to
declare that a partial disease of the brain (mind) does not
absolve one from the liability to punishment, than to fix the
line of demarcation within which the guilty party shall be
held punishable, and beyond which he shall escape the legal
penalty. The supces are bold men; they see no difficulty in
defining the marginal line of sanity and of responsibility,
however difficult the pHysic1an may deem it. Although a
slight or partial mental disturbance may tolerate or excuse a


108 Review of two works on Insanity


trifling offence, the same may be insufficient in itself to impel
the lunatic to the commission of the highest crime; but ne-
vertheless, as Dr. Wood truly and with much humanity ob-
serves, “ where any amount of positive insanity is proved to
exist, there may be a great deal more which cannot be
proved.” And this fact must in every case be allowed its
full weight. In the report of the trial of D. Macnaughten
for the murder of Mr. Drummond, we remember it was ob-
served by some party, in answer to one of the medical wit-
nesses who manifested a disinclination to attach any import-
ance to the question of partial insanity, if an apple had a
speck in it, however small, would it be right to call that
apple a sound one? To limit the external phenomena or
symptoms of a partial affection or disorder of the liver, lungs,
or heart, would be found not a little difficult and hazardous ;
and why not similarly of the Brain! As for the delusions of
the insane, these can be in no way the measure either of the
sanity or the responsibility of a party accused or convicted.
The uncertainty of delusions, regarded as an indication or
symptom of mental disorder—their independence of the ex-
tent or variety of the cerebral affection—their temporary and
fleeting nature, and, what is more than all, their association
with the predominant morbid feelings by which the intellec-
tual powers are so manifestly overruled, and to which they
are, moreover, made subservient,—each and all assure us of
the undue and inconsiderate importance attached to their ex-
istence or otherwise. Moreover it has been contended by
Dr. Davey, and we quite agree with him, that a delusion—
so called—must be regarded only as a morbid colouring to
deranged moral feeling or emotion—as a voluntary and tangi-
ble ideal of an innate, involuntary, and morbid impression—
or as a mere passing and external sign of a temporary and
internal excess of feeling or desire. Love, joy, ambition,
anger, pride, religion—each and all of our affective feelings
and our passions, tincture and colour the intellect with their
peculiar hue; and precisely the same psychological principle
which obtains in sane man does also among the insane of our
species.


Second question—‘‘ What are the proper questions to be sub-
mitted to the jury, when a person alleged to be afflicted with insane
delusion respecting one or more particular subjects or persons is
charged with the commission of a crime, murder for example, and
insanity is set up as a defence?”

Answer—* That every man should be considered of sane mind,
unless it was clearly proved in evidence to the contrary. That before
a plea of insanity should be allowed, undoubted evidence ought to


by Drs. Wood and Burnett. 109


be adduced that the accused was of diseased mind, and that at
the time he committed the act he was not conscious of right or
wrong. This opinion related to every case in which a party was
charged with an illegal act, and a plea of insanity was set up. Every
person was supposed to know what the law was, and therefore
nothing could justify a wrong act, except it was clearly proved the
party did not know right from wrong. If that was not satisfactorily
proved, the accused was liable to punishment, and it was the duty
of the judges so to tell the jury when summing up the evidence,
accompanied with those remarks and observations as the nature and
peculiarities of each case might suggest and require.”


Meu.—This answer, like the preceding, constitutes a
very fair criterion of both the assumption and ignorance of
the judges. “ Fools rush in where angels fear to tread.” The
lucid interval of one liable to periodical attacks of insane
violence does not constitute him either a sane or a responsible
being. It is not to be supposed that because the symptoms
of cerebral disorder are not continuous, the cause which pro-
duces them is only temporary—beginning and ending with
its effects. Many years since (1843) a paper was read by
Dr. Davey at a meeting of the Phrenological Association, on
the “ Law or Lunacy,” in which we find these words, viz. :—


“The brains of those liable to intermittent insanity are diseased,
and therefore such persons must be deemed irresponsible for all
those acts which are dependent on such alteration of structure. How-
ever quiet and comfortable they may usually be when protected from
the anxieties and irritations of life, and when subject to the kind
and considerate dictations of those under whose care they are placed;
they are no sooner removed from such wholesome influence, than the
brain necessarily rebels with the stimuli offered to it. No individual
under such circumstances can possibly be held accountable for his
conduct. The infliction of punishment could never alter the patho-
logical condition of the brain and membranes which may exist.

‘In reference to the nature of the lucid intervals of the insane,
Dr. Combe says, ‘In ordinary circumstances, and under ordinary
excitement, his Lig, ston may be accurate and his judgment per-
fectly sound; but a degree of irritability of brain remains behind,
which renders him unable to withstand any unusual emotion, any
sudden provocation, or any unexpected and pressing emergency.’

“Dr. Ray, the celebrated medical jurist, affirms that the reasons
why we ought never to convict for a crime, committed during the
lucid interval, are, that the criminal acts are generally the result of
the momentary excitement produced by sudden provocations: that
these provocations put an end to the temporary cure, by immediately
reproducing that pathological condition of the oaks called irritation :


and that this irritation is the essential cause of mental derangement,
which absolves from all the legal consequences of crime. He adds,
‘ Burdened as the criminal law is with false principles on the subject


110 Review of two works on Insanity


of insanity, the time has gone by when juries will return a verdict of
“« guilty”’ against one who is admitted to have been insane within
a short period of time before the criminal act with which he is
charged.’ ”

It is perhaps impossible to imagine anything in the whole
range of medical jurisprudence more truly inconsistent, un-
philosophical, and vindictive, than the assertion contained in
the reply we are analyzing, to the effect that if it were not
satisfactorily proved that the party accused did not KNow
right from wrong, then was the infliction of punishment in-
evitable ; so that in point of fact the dictum of the once
famous Lorp Hatz is still to be the criterion of either sanity
or responsibility—of one who lived and flourished in a period
when cerebral physiology and pathology were as little known
as was the last new comet before the investigations of Verrier
and Adams, or is the fate of the illustrious Arctic voyager at
the moment we write.—Inasmuch as each one of the primi-
tive faculties of the mind has its seat in the grey or cortical
substance of the brain, or, in other words, its location on
the cerebral surface ; and inasmuch as the various emotions,
affections, and propensities, equally with the intellectual,
powers, depend for their healthy manifestation or otherwise
on the quantity and quality of distinct portions of cerebral
matter—all being united into one homogeneous mass (the
brain), then must it follow that the peculiar nature of any
given case of disordered mind (insanity) will not only depend
on the portion or portions of the brain affected, but that any
one, or two, or three of these said primitive faculties may be
deranged, the remainder preserving, more or less, their indi-
vidual integrity. A diseased “ acquisitiveness” may not be ex-
pected to excite an abnormal action of “ tune”—a diseased
* destructiveness” does not involve “ hope” —a disorder of the
perceptive organs is not likely to affect those of “ adhesive-
ness,” and so on. Consciousness, or the ability to distinguish
right from wrong, or to know this from that, is then seen to
be no criterion of a sound mind or of responsibility. Those
among the insane who possess the physical power necessary
to the commission of violence, for example’s sake, know full
well what is going on about them ; and in the very worst cases
of maniacal excitement, the patient will commonly manifest
an acute intelligence, and not unfrequently really surprise
one by the force and brilliancy of his intellectual powers—
like the hysterical maiden, or the sufferer from St. Vitus’s
dance ; or like him goaded by the delirious impulses of hydro-
phobia ; or, in point of fact, like him worn and shaken by
the deadly rigors of a tropical intermittent fever, the ma-


by Drs. Wood and Burnett. 111


niac is acutely sensible of his unhappy condition, and like
these named, fe is unable to restrain the indications of the
disease which afflicts him. Lunatics contributed their aid to
the attractions of the Great Exhibition—of which we are all
so justly proud; and if the position here assumed were un-
true, this could hardly be the case. Lunatics are usefully
and honourably employed at all well-conducted establish-
ments for their reception and cure, because their intellectual
faculties are not so commonly out of health as their affections
and propensities: it is a derangement of these which, in the
majority of instances, marks the extravagancies and impulses
of the mad-man. Dr. Wood has aptly demonstrated this
fact by the recital of cases of much interest.


“With regard to the third question, viz. :—‘In what terms
ought the question to be left to the jury, as to the prisoner’s state
of mind at the time when the act was committed ?’—the judges did
not give an opinion.

“The fourth question was—‘ If a person under an insane de-
lusion, as to existing facts, commits an offence in consequence thereof,
is he thereby excused ?”

“The answer to this question was, that the judges were unani-
mous in opinion, that if the delusion were only partial, that the
party accused was equally liable with a person of sane mind. If the
accused killed another in self-defence, he would be entitled to an ac-
quittal ; but if committed for any supposed injury, he would then be
liable to the punishment awarded by the laws to his crime.”


Mem.—The remarks already made appended to the first
*‘ question” and its “ answer,” contain all that may be con-
sidered necessary, on the present occasion, to demonstrate
the fallacy so manifest in this—the fourth question, and the
reply here given. It will be seen that the first and fourth
question treat alike of the subject of “ partial insanity” and
of the question of “ delusions,” and to the remarks already
made we would here refer the reader, rather than occupy our
pages with unnecessary repetition.


** With regard to the last question—‘Can a medical man, con-
versant with the disease of insanity, who never saw the prisoner pre-
viously to the trial, but who was present during the whole trial and
the examination of all the witnesses, be asked his opinion as to the
state of the prisoner’s mind at the time of the commission of the
alleged crime, or his opinion whether the prisoner was conscious at
the time of doing the act that he was acting contrary to law? or
whether he was labouring under any, and what, delusion at the time ?’

“The judges were of opinion that the question could not be put
to the witness in the precise form stated above, for by doing so *
would be assuming that the facts had been proved. That was a
question which ought to go to the jury exclusively. When the facts


112 Review of two works on Insanity


were proved and admitted, then the question, as one of science,


could be generally put to a witness under the circumstances stated
in the interrogatory.”


Mem.—It requires no lynx-eye to discover the miserable
vanity which prompted the “judges” in forming this “ opi-
nion:”’ but the professions of Law and puysic are truly so
naturally repugnant to each other that supGz and pHysIciaN
could hardly be expected to pull very harmoniously together.
As the law now stands, the physician is to tell the legal
functionary all he knows of the matter; but the latter may
accept or reject just so much as suits his object and final
purpose.

We trust we have written sufficient to assure the impartial
reader that the “Law or Lunacy ” is at the present anything
rather than what it should be, and that its various parts are
not only in a sadly disjointed state, but that each one is ter-
ribly at varianee with the facts of psychological science.

Dr. Wood lays great stress on the fact that different de-
grees of responsibility belong to varieties of mental endow-
ment or disorder; or, in other words, that the same offence
committed by two different persons, by no means implies an
equal amount of responsibility, and the extent of this respon-
sibility it is which must determine both the nature and dura-
tion of “ the penal consequences.”

Dr. Wood writes :—


“It has been attempted to shew that no well-defined line se-
parates the sane from the insane ; that the different circumstances of
individuals make that insanity in one, which is not insanity in another ;
that this sometimes consists of a simple exaggeration of what, in a
minor degree, is perfectly natural, and that, therefore, a trifling
amount of mental disturbance should not entirely exonerate an
offender from the penal consequences of his crime, although, con-
sidering its mysterious nature, and the possibility of its being more
intense than it appears, it should in all cases, where it can be dis-
tinctly proved to exist, even in the most mitigated form, be admitted
as a reason for not inflicting capital punishment.”


With the suggestion to abandon the use of the expression
“ criminal lunatic,” which, as Dr. Wood says, involves a con-
tradiction, we highly approve, and also of the substitution of
the terms, “ insane convicts,” and “ state patients.” The
former Dr. Wood understands to mean those who become
insane while undergoing their sentence of imprisonment or
transportation ; and the latter, those who have committed
some offence under the influence of insanity. Dr. Wood’s
pamphlet, though in some respects deficient and incomplete,
is, nevertheless, not only well written, but what is more, it


by Drs. Wood and Burnett. 113


contains much valuable information, and agrees with what
has already been advanced in this journal.


Dr. Burnett’s book is a strange compound of theology
and psychology, containing some few important truths among
a great mass of errors. It is with extreme regret that we
find a man of Dr. Burnett’s accomplishments putting forth
opinions which, at this day, are hardly to be expected ; it is,
however, no small consolation to feel assured that the re-
vengeful and sanguinary character of our penal code will
never again reach the climax which once characterized it. In
spite of Dr. Burnett’s enthusiasm, there is no reason to anti-
cipate that the labours of Basil Montague and others will fall
into disrepute, or that capital punishment will ever again be
so disgracefully frequent as it once was.

The cause of crime and insanity, Dr. Burnett teaches us,
is “the fall of man.” . This begot sin, and sin begot crime,
and to the latter we are indebted for insanity; a theory this
which our author would, we think, find it difficult to prove—
logically. We do not think sin, crime, and insanity stand in
such a relation the one to the other; and they certainly do
not observe such a sequence. Moreover, this said “ cause,”
Dr. Burnett assures us, is twofold ; “primary” and “ second-
ary :” and the first, he says, is “ the principle of evil,” which
has been regarded as inherent in the nature of man, but which
is rather a “ spirit” of so peculiar a quality that “ the ordinary
spirit,” which belongs to all “ created beings,” “and to man
more especially, cannot alone resist.” The secondary cause,
which is referred back to the first named, is supposed to
reside in “the natural substances, whether designed for food
and sustenance, or for therapeutic and medicinal or hygietic
purposes, the abusive employment of which leads the way to
intemperance, dissipation, disease, and finally to death.”

The relation of these primary and secondary causes of
“crime and insanity” occupies the principal part of Dr.
Burnett’s small book; and those of our readers who are
desirous to obtain a tolerably fair idea of the Jewish criminal
code, and the repulsive and barbaric features which it recog-
nised, and not less a correct notion of our author’s views in
reference to “ the symbols of the spirit of evil,” and its “ true
relation to the mind” of man, and “ the abusive power which
Satan can exercise upon all natural substances,” may find their
time not unsatisfactorily spent in perusing this mystical,
metaphysical, or German production. Dr. Burnett, we doubt


not, possesses certain of his cerebral faculties in excess, or we
VOL. X. .


114 Review of two works on Insanity


could scarcely expect him to manifest such an undue prefer-
ence of the sanguinary code of the Jews, to the benevolence,
and charity, and good-will which mark the Christian dispen-
sation: the former is hardly compatible with the views and
requirements of the present day. Jesus Curist, though a
Jew, taught not the doctrines of Judaism ; he lived at a later
period, and, what is more, had the wise and good example of
the Essenes, or the modern or reformed Jew of that day
before him. We perfectly agree with Dr. Burnett, that
the due observance of the physical laws would be attended
with the happiest results; that a proper attention to diet,
clothing, exercise, &c., &c., is well and eminently calculated
to improve the tone of our whole organism, and so avert dis-
ease, or it may be “sin,” “crime,” and “insanity.” We
think with him too, that these “ stages” of disorder “ may be
and are greatly modified by good or bad legislation :” but we
must object strongly to the kind of explanation offered for
the non-observance of the same physical laws. We see no
reason why “ Satan” should be said to hold the mind of his
victim so firmly in his grasp, “that it cannot act in any way
but in an involuntary one.” And more than this, we will
not hesitate to express our entire dissent—we had almost
written abhorrence—of that man who, so fanatically impressed
as Dr. Burnett too evidently is, feels it either expedient or
necessary to recommend that neither an insane person, nor a
natural idiot, should “ evade the penalty,” if either one should
have a knowledge, more or less, of right and wrong. Prefer
we “ the poetry of justice,’ if Dr. Burnett will so have it, to
injustice such as this, to cruelty so startling. One is almost
tempted to forget the dignity of the reviewer’s office, in com-
menting on doctrines such as these ; it is indeed painful to find
such an amount of learning as is contained in the ninety-six
closely printed pages of the book before us, so unhappily
employed. The laws of Theseus, of Draco, of Solon, of
Euclides, of Demetrius, of Lycurgus, and of Moses, were all
different, it is true, and only because the political and other
circumstances surrounding each Lawgiver were dissimilar ;
and if, as we doubt not, the “political and other circum-
stances” of the present day are infinitely more unlike any
thing of the kind which have preceded it, then must it follow
that we can have nothing at all to do with “ the early nations,”
from whom Dr. Burnett draws his aspirations. If antiquarian
research is likely to lead to conclusions such as the above,
we should be glad to see the art forgotten.

Dr. Burnett very properly admits that in the majority of
instances of insanity, the patient knows full well “ what is the


Unfounded insinuations of the Medical Times 115


difference between right and wrong ;”’ and such are, he says,
medically but not legally insane, and such he is inclined to
hold as responsible as those reputed sane, and equally amen-
able to the laws of the country. The term “ insanity,” Dr.
Burnett prefers to restrict to those “ who do not know right
from wrong,” or, in other words, to those who having, either
in themselves or in their progenitors, gone through the various
stages of “ sin,” “ crime,” and “insanity,” have reached that
condition of physical incapacity, in which life is reduced to a
mere vegetative existence. But if our author thinks thus to
have put all difficulty on one side, he grievously errs; for not
unfrequently consciousness will return for a season to these
poor creatures, and with it will be rekindled those softer
emotions and sympathies which so rightly belong to our
moral nature. This it is which gives a due appreciation of
right and wrong, modified in some way. by the intellectual
faculties. Only allow the means of prevention to fairly pre-
cede those of punishment, and the latter will in due time be
wholly uncalled for. May this fact sink deeply into the mind
of Dr. Burnett, and he will then no longer think it needful
to recommend a sanguinary criminal code, as the best means
of restraining from crime, and even insanity. We much
regret Dr. Burnett should have thought it necessary to pub-


lish his last book. May both he and all forget that the press
ever gave it birth.


XI. Unfounded insinuations of the Medical Times respecting
Dr. Davey and the Committee of Magistrates at the
Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum.


In the Medical Times for March 20, is the following editorial
article :—


“In our number for January 24, we felt it our duty to record
the exhibition made by Dr. Davey in the Cumming case, and to
comment upon his declaration in favour of mesmerism. The pro-
fession will be gratified to learn, that our remonstrances were not inef-
fectual; and that the Middlesex magistrates have proved themselves
not unworthy of the trust reposed in them. They think with us
that it were monstrous to permit a mesmerist to have the medical
charge of their pauper lunatics ; and, in consequence, Dr. Davey will
resign his appointment.

“* Madness, we know, as hysteria, is sometimes ‘catching ;’ and,
removed from its dire influences, we trust Dr. Davey may yet arrive
at the conclusion, that to disbelieve in clairvoyance is not evidence of
an unsound mind.”


|


|


116 The Royal Institution & the progress of Mesmerism.


Now THE FACTS STAND THUS.


When Dr. Davey’s evidence in the case of the poor
lunatic, Mrs. Cumming, appeared in the papers, a gentleman
was so struck with the honesty, manliness, and intelligence
manifested in it, that he called upon another gentleman,
who, he presumed, knew Dr. Davey, and requested a letter
of introduction to Dr. Davey. He received the letter, saw
Dr. Davey, and made a highly advantageous offer—an offer
of something three times more lucrative even at the present
moment than the appointment at Colney Hatch. As soon
as the arrangements were completed,—nearly a fortnight ago,
Dr. Davey sent in his resignation to the Committee, who “ ac-
cepted” it with much “ regret,” and many kind expressions
towards him.

Before the gentleman communicated with Dr. Davey, the
Committee and Dr. Davey had settled the business about
mesmerism and Mrs. Cumming most amicably. The Com-
mittee “resolved” that he should write them an explanation :
he did so: and they expressed themselves satisfied, and sent
him a resolution to that effect.

Dr. Davey is one of the most intelligent, kind-hearted,
honest, intrepid, and noble persons in the world—an example
to all.

The virulent feeling of the medical journals towards mes-
merism—one of the greatest blessings to mankind—is thus
again perceived. Mr. Churchill, the proprietor of the Me-
dical Times, would consult his own reputation if he employed
no individuals to manage his journal who can act as those
have long acted whom he has employed. The Medical Times
cannot pretend to higher respectability than the Lancet.


XII. The Royal Institution, and the progress of Mesmerism.
By the Rev. George Sanpsy, Vicar of Flixton, Suffolk.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Oxford and Cambridge Club, Pall Mall,
March 16th, 1852.

Srr,—The friends of truth may be congratulated : for the
movement in our favour is proceeding steadily. Facts, which
a year or two ago could only be named in certain circles
at the risk of a sneer or of a dispute, are now publicly an-
nounced as realities in the salons of science ; and the question
respecting them, that is now raised, has reference altogether
to their rationale or cause. A marked change is perceptible :


&


&


—


~


By the Rev. George Sandby. 117


let us bide our time, and we shall soon have to chronicle a
progress still more noticeable.

I was present the other evening at the Royal Institution,
when a lecture upon “biology” was delivered by Dr. Car-
penter. It is not my intention to offer a report or analysis of
his observations: you will probably receive this from some
other quarter: a few points struck me as significant, and may
be worthy of record.

1. Phenomena, which were formerly rejected as impos-
sible, or as the effects of imposture or collusion, were spokep
of as indisputable truths, and their strange details were lis-
tened to by the audience without manifestation either of
surprise or of offence.

2. The word “mesmerism” (or mesmeric), a term lately
so odious to ears scientific, was twice introduced by the lec-
turer in the course of his illustrations, and in the same way
in which he might have alluded to any other facts in nature.

3. Dr. Carpenter’s views on the suggestive power of the
lecturer upon the brain of the subject were identical with
those which first appeared in The Zoist, in an article by Dr.
Elliotson, April, 1851, and in fact might almost be said to be
taken from it: the very word “bullying,” introduced after-
wards in a paper by myself, October, 1851, as explanatory of
the lecturer’s compulsory tone, was also employed by Dr. C. :
the conclusions, in short, were the same: so that, in fact, we
have had the very opinions of The Zoist on electro-biology
repeated at the Royal Institution, adopted by the lecturer,
aud listened to with attention by a philosophic and literary
assembly.

4. Dr. Carpenter called the biologized state a revérie, and
narrated some curious anecdotes illustrative of that condition.
These were rather cases of absence of mind, and bore no
resemblance to the subject of the lecture. The term revérie
appeared most misplaced.

5. The lecture on the whole was an agreeable and able
discourse, lucid in its arrangement, and pleasantly delivered ;
and its introduction at the Royal Institution marks the change
in public feeling. At the same time there were serious short-
comings ; it was wanting in broadness of views and philoso-
phic freedom, and shewed a man more anxious to follow, than
to lead, opinion. This was a characteristic of the lecture :
Dr. C. had taken the gage of his audience, and knew how
far he might go. Perhaps he was right, and shewed tact as
well as judgment. On a future occasion he will probably go
further, and inform his hearers, that, though the phenomena
of electro-biology are to a degree intelligible, the great facts


118 Postscripts to Articles Il. and III.


of mesmerism stand upon higher ground, and must not be
confounded with the effects of suggestion, or the revéries of
a dreaming and absent mind.
I remain, Sir,
Your humble servant,
Grorce Sanpsy.


XIII. Postscript to Article 2.


6th September, 1851, Saturday evening,
My dear Sir,—I mesmerised Margaret Stewart for the
last time this evening: she is now quite well. Upon the
second time of mesmerising her, she said that if I would
mesmerise her for twelve times she would be quite well.
This evening, the twelfth time of mesmerising, when asleep,
she said, “ Doctor, I became poorly last night ; and I had not
seen anything for the last five months until then.” This is
worthy of notice, as it clearly proves the re-establishment of
a function by the aid of mesmerism.
I remain, dear Sir, yours very truly,
Dr. Elliotson. J. B. MoruerweE.t.


The only medicine she has had were two aperient pills.


P.S. Sept. 29th. She remains perfectly well.


XIV. Postscript to Article 3.


Dr. Exxiotson has forwarded to us the following letter re-
ceived by him from Mr. Saunders of Bristol :—


** 1, Upper Portland Place, Clifton,
** March 27th,

**Dear Sir,—Sometime back I stated that I considered electro-
biology was useful in saving time to the mesmerist: but subsequent
experience has proved that in nine cases out of ten it acts injuriously
upon the patient. For most persons after being sent into the biolo-
gical state by means of the disk are incapable of being made to go much
beyond the suggestive state, and are rendered much less susceptible
of the curative effects of mesmerism. Sometime back a Mr. or Dr.
Eden gave some mesmeric lectures in Bristol, and sent his subjects
off by causing them to stare at a piece of zinc attached to the end of
a long stick. His subjects rarely became unconscious, though their
eyes closed, and they generally felt uncomfortable with head-ache
when they were restored to their natural state. Mr. Braid’s patients,
I believe, who are sent off by looking at a bright object, never shew
any of the higher phenomena of mesmerism, and frequently feel
irritable when demesmerised. Miss S r, of Clifton, after being
biologized with the disk, felt very unwell for some days afterwards,


ae od ————


—e ~-—-


Books received, Notices to Correspondents, &c. 119


and I was compelled to mesmerise her in order to restore her. Miss
S——-s, of Clifton, if she gazes for a short time at the disk, is
obliged to put it aside, as it makes her head ache, though the usual
mode of mesmerising calms her head, and she wakes after it quite cool.
Time will not allow me to mention other similar cases: but I have
found that for curative purposes the disk is utterly useless and fre-
quently injurious, as it strains the eye and irritates the brain, instead
of, as the usual method does, quieting it ; and I have therefore quite
discarded it and leave it only to those who wish to create laughter
and amusement in an audience by causing their patients to appear
very ridiculous, and generally preventing them from being in a posi-
tion to derive benefit from genuine mesmerism should they require it.
** I remain, dear Sir, yours truly,


*°S. D. SAUNDERS.
** J. Elliotson, Esq., M.D.”


BOOKS RECEIVED.


The Westminster and Foreign Quarterly Review. No. 1.

Asylums for the Insane. Observations upon the importance of establishing
public hospitals for the Insane of the Middle and Higher Classes: with a brief
exposition of the nature of Insanity and the present provisions for the treatment
of the Insane. By Thomas Dickson, L.R.C.S.E., resident Medical Superin-
tendent of the Manchester Royal Lunatic Hospital ; Member of the Literary and
Philosophical Society. London: 1852.

An address to the Working Classes on the means of improving their condi-
tion. By the Rev. David Esdaile, minister of Rescobie. Edinburgh.

The Cabinet of Reason: a Library of Free Thought, Politics, and Culture.
The Task of To-day. By Evans Bell.

Chapters on Mental Physiology. By Henry Holland, M.D., F.R.S., &c.
Founded chiefly on chapters contained in Medical Notes and Reflections, by the
same Author. London.

Recueil d’opérations chirurgicales pratiquées sur les sujets Magnétis¢és, par A
Loysel, docteur en Médecine 4 Cherbourg. Cherbourg.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


Tn our Midsummer number will appear, without fail, 1. the first part of Dr.
Burq’s remarkable paper upon the metal-cure, or the effects of the external ap-
plication of metals in health and disease, containing facts surprising to those not
acquainted with mesmerism, but not to us mesmerists who are so familiar with
the effects of the external application of metals in the mesmeric state. 2. Two
remarkable cures under the direction of Dr. Elliotson; 3. the last report of the
Bristol Mesmeric Institute, with cures by Dr. Storer; 4. cases by Mr. Saunders
of Bristol ; 5. by Mr. H. S. Thompson, 6. Mr. Marshall, 7. Capt. Hudson, Dr.
aan and some others. We have already exceeded our six sheets by one and a
half.

Mr. Biggar may see that in two numbers we have expressed our disappoint-
ment at not receiving Dr. Burq’s article. Half of it has now arrived, but too
late for this quarter. We must make experiments ourselves before we speak of
the effects of mesmerised persons upon the compass.


Dr. Symes begs us to announce that, Mr. Churchill having liberally subscribed
for 100 copies of his translation of Gall, the work will be published as soon as
the plates can be completed. Dr. S. had had specimens of some of the plates
engraved on wood: but, not being satisfied with the appearance of those which


120 Books received, Notices to Correspondents, &c:


require shading, such as the various sections of the brain, and considering that
many of the plates are referred to again and again, at different parts of the work,
so that it would be extremely inconvenient to refer to them if incorporated with
the letter press, as at first proposed, he has determined, regardless of the addi-
tional expense, to publish them in a separate form, as in the original, and has
accordingly engaged Mr. Aldous, the artist who executed the beautiful zincograph
illustrations in Owen’s Odontography, to make reduced copies of Gall’s plates in
a similar style ; and he hopes it will be ready for publication in a very few months.


Obituary.


Died on the 18th of March, 1852, William Buckley, Esq., Major in the
Bengal Cavalry. This amiable gentleman was a very ardent supporter of the
truths of mesmerism, and spared no expense in promoting benevolent designs in
connexion with them. He was in his seventieth year, and died of exhaustion
= repeated attacks of asthenic gout, &c., in a frame enfeebled by the climate of

ndia.

Our readers will no doubt recollect the remarkable case described by Sir
Charles Ishan in No. XXXIII., of William Dring, near Nottingham, who had
the faculty of seeing the apparitions of persons a short time before their death,
whom he had previously known. His mother had the same faculty from the age
of 20 for many years. She was 85 years old when Sir Charles wrote his most
interesting account of her and her son and some others.

Dr. Elliotson informs us that he has lately received the following letter from
Sir Charles Ishan, in which Dring’s death is thus announced :—


** Gotham, Jan. 8, 1852.

“* Dear Sir,—I recollect saying to you that should I hear anything more re-
lating to W. Dring I would let you know. I am sorry to say that the account I
sent you a year since is the last we shall ever hear of W. Dring. Upon coming
to this place two days since, I heard that Dring died a fortnight since. The cir-
cumstances were as follows :—Dring, although not a drunkard, was in the habit
of occasionally indulging in beer and rat-pies to a considerable extent: upon the
present occasion he drank too liberally and brought on a fever, which carried him
off in a few days. I have not seen his family, but understand that he had not
seen anything unusual during the past year.

‘* Believe me, yours very truly,
“C, E. R. IsHan.”


MESMERIC INFIRMARY.


THE NEXT ANNUAL MEETING
Will take place, WEDNESDAY, the 26th MAY,


At Two o’Clock.


By a recent regulation of the Committee, it has been decided that the Annual
General Meeting of the Subscribers shall in future be held on the last Wednesday
in May instead of the first, as originally proposed.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. XXXVIIT.


JULY, 1852.


I. Nervous Affections. Metallo-therapia, or Metal-cure :; new
properties of Metals illustrated through Mesmerism, by
Dr. Burg, of Paris. Translated and communicated by
Dr. Elliotson.


‘* We are living in an age of wonders—guns are fired on the cliffs of Dover by

a galvanic current sent in less than a second under thirty miles of sea from the

opposite coast of France. The portrait of a respectable gentleman, including

whiskers and eyelashes, is transferred by light in a second of time to a plate of

silver : and the quantity of sugar in the urine of a diabetic patient is actually mea-

sured by a ray of polarized light. Any one of these facts would have led to the

bustion of the inventor in Smithfield two hundred years ago: their

effect at the present time is to make us cautious in what we admit and what we
pENyY.’’—London Medical Gazette, Dec. 12, 1851.*


FIRST PART.


Tue interesting discoveries of Dr. Burq, a Parisian physician,
were announced in The Zoist for last September: and mes-
merism, so unfortunately scoffed at by its opponents, was said
to have led him to the brilliant results, which, under the title
of metallo-therapia, or metal-cure, promised farther important
additions to our inefficacious and difficult treatment of nerv-
.ous diseases.

Dr. Burg, being lately in London for the purpose of treat-
ing a lady of high rank in his peculiar method, communi-


* The London Medical Gazette, after an existence for nearly thirty years,
difficult even under the parental care of the house of the Longmans, gave up the
ghost on the last day of last year, and was buried in the Medical Times, outside
which its name may be seen,—omne quod restat: and, though it had called all
the writers of The Zoist impostors,* and declared that none but the writers
themselves ever read The Zoist, and carefully excluded the splendid facts of The


* See Zoist, No. XXVII., p. 309.


122 Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals.


cated to the conductors of The Zoist, both in conversation
and by presenting them with his writings,* such statements
as the following, and exhibited to them fa¢ts which must shed
additional splendour upon the great truths advocated by them ;
and, if the alleged discoveries of this physician are real in
every particular, as it is hoped they will prove, it will be very
curious, after the mode in which they originated has been
described, to see the detractors of mesmerism push their denial
so far as to reverse the conduct of the Roman emperor, who
considered even the money gained through vice to be good.
“In 1847,” writes Dr. Burg, “I noticed in a woman
labouring under hysteria and phthisis, and whom I had begun
to mesmerise publicly in the hospital Beaujou, that, as often
as she was thrown into the mesmeric sleep, the direct contact
of certain metals was insupportable; whereas that of others
was agreeable to her touch, or at least caused no signs of


Zoist from the knowledge of its own unfortunate readers,t just like the rest of
the conscientious medical journals, and abused mesmerism and mesmerists in
a way absolutely shocking for ‘a learned,’’ ‘“‘an honourable,” ‘‘ a benevolent,”’
and ‘‘an enlightened ”’ profession,—the Medical Gazette, like a worn-out sinner,
poured forth on its death-bed the confession constituting our motto, within three
weeks of its decease, in true penitence, I trust, for its evil courses in preventing
to the utmost of its power the spread of science and the means of alleviating to an
incalculable extent the sufferings of sentient beings, and in abusing and injuring
men who were anxious for good only, and willing to suffer for the sake of truth
and humanity.—Joun Exiorson.

* Especially an unpublished memoir, entitled Les Métaux éclairés par le
MAGNETISME.


+ In No. Il. of The Zoist, 1843, is Mr. Chandler’s fine mesmeric cure of
insanity, and before that time it had been rejected by the Lancet in these words :
‘We cannot undertake to give publicity to any communications on animal mag-
netism.’’ Oct. 27, 1838. And again: ‘‘ We have already stated that we cannot
insert any communications in support of the extravagant humbug of animal mag-
netism.”’ Dec. 8, 1838. ‘The letter of Mr. Chandler’s is inadmissible.” Dec.
15, 1838. Mr. Chandler then sent it to the Medical Gazette, Messrs. Longman
and Co.’s editor being Dr. Macleod, a physician of St. George’s Hospital. It
was rejected in these words: “ Although we do not always agree with the editor
of the Lancet, yet with respect to Mr. Chandler’s communication we must also
answer that it is inadmissible.” Dec. 22, 1838. Dr. Esdaile not long since sent

ic cc ication from India to the Medical Gazette ; but, though pub-
lished, it was ‘‘ mutilated in the most unwarrantable manner,” as he informs us.
in the pamphlet just published by him, entitled The Introduction of Mesmerism,
&e., p. 6. 1852.

In No, XVII. is a report upon 102 of Dr. Esdaile’s cases by a committee.
*« It was dvawn up by men quite ignorant of mesmerism, and violently prejudiced

inst the subj t, and thus unfit, intellectually and morally, for the task. I
exposed the report in the same number, and published the exposure of it made by
the honest, manly editors of all the Indian newspapers.” “‘ Dr. Esdaile demo-
lished all the sayings and doings of his weak official visitors, as may be seen in
No. XXII., p. 158.” The editor of the Medical Gazette published the report,
but did not even allude to Dr. Esdaile’s demolition of it: to its exposure by all
the newspapers of India: or to my refutation of it. Other gross acts of the
Medical Gazette will be found in Zvist, Nos. XXVII. & XXVIII.—J. Ex.iorson.


Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals. 123


repugnance. If, for instance, I suddenly placed a piece of
copper, iron, or steel upon her bare hand or any other part,
she instantly, and* sometimes in the midst of the apparently
deepest sleep, repelled it roughly, often with an expression of
suffering, or even of anger, if the experiment was repeated
too frequently. If a key, or a shovel, or iron tongs were
placed upon her bed, near enough to her to make their influ-
ence felt, she instantly discovered them and got rid of them,
either by a sudden movement if the object were not fixed nor
large, or with her hand, covered previously with something to
insulate it, when a greater and more direct effort was required.
The latter precaution was always carefully taken when, in
order to open a door in her sleep-waking, she was under the
necessity of slowly turning the key or the handle of the lock.

“Tf gold or silver, on the contrary, were placed in her
hands, she was pleased to handle them, provided the gold,
and especially the silver, was not much alloyed with copper.
If it were, her repugnance almost always indicated the general
degree of the alloy.

“ Being greatly surprised at these preferences, aid unable
to explain them, I one day made the following experiment.
The patient being mesmerised and her insensibility perfectly
proved by a pin, I repeatedly applied to several parts of her
body different pieces of money of nearly equal size. With
the copper coins, a few seconds were sufficient to restore sen-
sibility, first in the parts touched by the metal, and then in
the surrounding parts: whereas with the gold and silver no-
thing of the kind was observed, except when, instead of the
silver coin, I substituted another piece of the same metal of
inferior value by being an alloy.

“The patient died a few days afterwards, before I could
draw any conclusion: but these first results had presented
me with a new and easily accessible aspect of mesmerism :
and I almost entirely quitted the delicate and difficult study
of sleep-waking, in order to examine the physical and thera-
peutic phenomena only, and the means of giving to the
former the character of scientific truth. Paris was at that
time so shamefully overrun with sonmambulism and its errors,
and the fourth part of its journals had been'so often disgraced
by the false statements of its pretended prophetesses, that
a new direction of investigation was not favourably re-
ceived: and, among mesmerists and my masters and col-
leagues in the hospitals, some pardoned me or at most pitied
me for pursuing such dangerous enquiries, while others, more
prudent or less prejudiced, did not deny what they believed
to be true in the matter, as regarded either Mesmer or his
K 2


124 Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals.


followers, and took a pleasure in seeing me occupied in stu-
dying his writings afresh.

“T, therefore, had no want of subjects for my experi-
ments, and I received frequent flattering invitations to prose-
cute my investigations in several of our large hospitals. But,
notwithstanding the kindness of my masters and the warm
sympathy of my colleagues; notwithstanding my residence
and my duties as house-pupil in an hospital where a large
number of patients were of course accessible to my experi-
ments, I felt myself constrained in the wards of an hospital,
and I hired a private house that I might, at my own sole
responsibility, observe and experimentalize freely upon such
poor people as were willing still to receive my gratuitous
services,

“At a later period, joining to my own private patients
those of my friends, I neglected no opportunity offered to
me by chance or intentionally to enrich my own observa-
tions with those of others, and thus, dear Dr. Elliotson, I
have been enabled, after persevering in my researches for
three years and conquering my difficulties, to discover and
class the numerous facts, the most remarkable of which I
will now relate to you.”

Many pages would be necessary to detail all that Dr.
Burg has communicated or been desirous of communicating
upon this new and interesting subject; but the present com-
munication must be limited to the consideration of the metal-
cure and of mesmerism from which this originated.

Soon after the death of that patient, Dr. Burq never
losing sight of mesmeric insensibility or anzsthesia, which he
was gradually induced to regard as the most prominent mes-
meric phenomenon and in some measure as the groundwork
of mesmerism, made fresh experiments with the same metals
and found his results completely confirmed, and this more
extensive and varied observation furnished him with addi-
tional facts. For instance, nearly all his mesmeric subjects,
when in the state of sleep-waking, lost their sensibility alto-
gether or in part, and in those who lost it entirely a few
square inches of copper, applied upon a bare limb fully open
to observation, gave rise in a few seconds to a sensation,
usually disagreeable, of cold, or of burning, as it might be,
according to the individual, and to a sense of tingling that
was always in relation with the degree of anesthesia and
followed by almost immediately a return of sensibility. The
tingling and insensibility, excited at first when the metal was
applied, spread to the surrounding parts, and sometimes at
length reached the most distant. The patients, thus restored


Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals. 125


to sensibility, the loss of which was an inevitable condition
of their mesmeric sleep, then awoke. But this mode of
awaking them,—by a plate of copper applied to one limb
only, required longer time and was occasionally incomplete
and not free from disagreeable effects on the nervous system.
On the contrary, if Dr. Burg had supplied the legs and arms
and pit of the stomach with plates of the same metal, the
demesmerisation, always preceded by the return of sensi-
bility, took place rapidly and without any disagreeable effect.
The mental condition of the patient and operator made little
difference in the result. The will had no influence, and the
avidity of the copper for the mesmeric agent was such, that
Dr. Burq had often seen it act directly through a piece of
thick silk, or continuously beyond a tight broad silk bandage.
This metal did not act on mesmeric insensibility only : for,
operating exactly like negative mesmeric passes, whatever
might be the degree of the spasmodic contraction of a strongly
mesmerised limb, or whatever intensity had been given to
artificial contractions of the stomach, by the aid, for instance,
of supplementary passes, the mere application of the brass
was sufficient to relax them rapidly and completely, and at
the same time to restore perfect sensibility to the skin.

But, if the brass always proved equally powerful over sen-
sibility and contractility, this was far from being the case
with other metals. Thus Dr. Burq occasionally found iron
and steel demesmerise as readily as copper; but in other
cases they either were readily saturated with the mesmeric
force or appeared to produce no effect upon it. Gold and
silver exhibited the same uncertainty and variability, and,
whereas gold was usually agreeable or indifferent to the sense
of touch and also without effect upon sensibility, it was so
powerful upon some persons, though certainly but a small
number, that, to give but one instance, Dr. Burq one day
saw a robust man, a professional sleep-waker, seized with a
violent chattering of the teeth, because, during his mesmeric
sleep-waking, a gold watch had touched one of his hands.*

The difference in the action of these various metals, which
are all nearly equal as conductors of electricity, threw no
light upon the very remarkable discovery of the difference of
the aptitudes of metals that contains the germ of the metal-
cure, and at first only embarrassed him, as he confesses, and


* This sleep-waker had so thoroughly learnt the antimesmeric property of
gold, at his cost, during his hours of consultation, that, before be‘ng sent into
sleep-waking, he always removed his gold rings and other ornaments and gold
money, which he had about him in his ordinary state without the least inconve-
nience, and of which he shewed himself very fond, like all persons of his profession.


126 Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals.


occupied no more of his attention, and indeed left scarcely
any trace of their valuable suggestions.

After investigating the effect of the different metals upon
mesmeric anesthesia (loss of common feeling) and upon amy-
osthesia (loss of motion), Dr. Burq examined the effects of
electricity, mineral magnetism, insulating substances, saline
and other liquids, of the wind when in different quarters, &c.,
and fresh and very interesting facts, not unexpected indeed,
on account of the presumed analogy of the mesmeric to the
electric fluid, soon presented themselves, and added to the
physical and almost material demonstration of mesmerism.
A single example, like many others to be found in Dr. Burq’s
second memoir, entitled Le Magnétisme éclairé par les métaux,
will suffice for illustration.

“ After experiencing nothing but incredulity from my
colleagues and friends,” says he, “I thought of convincing
them by the opposite qualities of conducting and non-conduct-
ing substances. I, therefore, placed copper, iron, and steel
on one side, and glass, resin, and various sorts of wood on the
other, in the form of cylinders of equal weight, volume, and
polish; and, with the view of obtaining more accuracy, I
wrapped each up in a little piece of dark coloured cotton.
Having satisfied myself of the demesmerising power of one
or two of the metallic cylinders on particular individuals and
of the inertness of one or two others, I insulated them: and
it is very remarkable that there were differences in different
persons as to their aptitude for insulation by various sub-
stances, just as for their aptitude to be affected by the various
metals. I next gave the metals to the persons, begging them
to rub the substances either successively or simultaneously
upon different parts of their bodies that had been ascertained
to be insensible: and, as the sensibility never returned except
in the part to which the metal was applied, I frequently satis-
fied the incredulous by this unanswerable demonstration.

““ However, these researches had led to no practical result
beyond mesmerism: when, towards the end of 1848, a for-
tunate circumstance, on which I must dwell a little, having
proved the perfect similarity as to every particular in mes-
meric subjects of the spontaneous spasms with those induced
artificially by mesmerism, a very wide field was opened for
the application of the metals.

“ Among the patients in the Hépital Cochin, to which my
colleague was attached at that time, was a case of hysteria of
long standing, in which the surgeon of the establishment
gave me permission to try mesmerism as a last resource.”

As soon as this new treatment was adopted, the patient


Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals. 127


became so fond of mesmerism, that, in spite of all Dr. Burg’s
care to free her from it, she was frequently seized with attacks
in her chest that nothing but demesmerising passes would
overcome.

One evening, when the spasms of the stomach were more
violent than usual, and the rather late hour made his col-
league very anxious to produce a calm, which was as im-
portant to the other patients near her as to herself, it struck
him that, instead of the mesmeric passes and breathing, he
would apply the metal which he had so often used success-
fully in the cramps produced artificially by mesmerism. “TI
applied,’’ says he in his first memoir, “a large plate of copper
upon the pit of the stomach and a ring of the same metal
around each limb: and in three or four minutes the chok-
ings, palpitations, and vomitings ceased. The patient, libe-
rated in this manner from an attack which usually lasted
several hours, fell asleep, and did not wake all night, not-
withstanding, or more properly in consequence of, the me-
tallic rings. Two or three days afterwards, the same attack
returned, and I again had recourse to the metal, and again
the spasms at once yielded to it. After several minutes of
the greatest calm, I removed the armature, and almost im-
mediately the retchings, and presently the vomitings and the
violent chokings and palpitations, recurred in their original
intensity. I wished to take advantage of this opportunity for
making a last trial of the mesmeric measures proper in such
circumstances: but I was as unsuccessful as ever, and could
produce a momentary calm only which had to be procured
again on every fresh attack. I was therefore compelled to
trust to the copper; and I applied the plate and rings. In
less than a minute the most complete success proved to me
for the third time their antispasmodic property.

“ However, as the spasms were the result of the mesmer-
ism only, it was still more necessary to remove all doubt of
the efficacy of the metals.

“For many months, every fourth evening, at nearly the
same hour, this patient, who was a rich mine of observation,
had long and frightful hysterical attacks with loss of con-
sciousness. Jl the ordinary measures did but modify them.
I alone, once in the presence of my two colleagues in the hos-
pital, was able to master them by negative mesmeric passes :
but the struggle had been so long and difficult, and so com-
pletely failed to cure the disease, that I felt no desire to gain
a second victory at the same cost.

“On the 15th of December, about five o’clock in the
afternoon, the usual precursors of the attack began: at eight


128 Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals.


o’clock they had reached their height, and a moment after-
wards the convulsions made their appearance. The patient
being upon a high bed with nothing to prevent her falling
out, five attendants threw themselves upon her to keep her
in it. Four held her extremities, each one: and the fifth, the
strongest of all, took charge of her body. The patient, a
strong peasant girl, with voluminous muscles, and semipa-
ralytic in her ordinary state, was convulsed with an energy
which none could believe but those accustomed to see such
cases.

“T remained for a moment an inactive and silent specta-
tor, wondering what could be nature’s object in instantane-
ously causing such a prodigious loss of innervation. Then, in
the midst of the strongest efforts of the assistants against
the mysterious power which resisted all their efforts, I applied
pieces of brass successively :—two rings 5 or 6 centimetres
(2 English inches) broad upon each limb ; two other larger
and broader rings upon the trunk; and a crown of it upon
the head. In proportion ‘as their operation proceeded, the
convulsions diminished in the limbs: the pelvis was less vio-
lently thrust forwards ; and, before the last ring was placed,
the poor creature had recovered her consciousness, left off
shrieking, and begged the astonished assistants to set her
limbs at liberty. A moment later she was calm or nearly so ;
almost motionless upon her back. But a little stiffness, in-
sensibility of her surface, and some confusion of ideas, with
some difficulty of expressing herself, wandering pains, slight
nervous twitchings, and a degree of agitation, gave evidence
that the attack had not completely subsided. In order to be
certain, I took the ring off one arm, and immediately the
convulsions began again: I replaced the ring, and the arm
regained its semirelaxation. I made the same experiment
with other limbs, and equally obtained partial convulsions at
pleasure and regulated them at will. I then removed all the
pieces of metal, and, before the last was taken off, the whole
attack was renewed. In two or three minutes it had reached
the height of the most violent paroxysm ; but, on the reap-
plication of the pieces of metal, it ceased a second time, as
if it had been dispelled by the breath of a superior power.
However, from fiye to ten minutes more of perfect calm under
the influence of the metals were required before a general in-
action and relaxation of the limbs, preceded by a general shud-
dering and a chattering of the teeth, satisfied me that I
might remove all the metal.” “Oh! that day,” said Dr. Burg
to us, “my joy was great: and my gratitude to mesmerism
as complete as the action of the metal that it had been the


Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals. — : 129


means of my learning: and from that time brass armatures
were applied to all mesmeric subjects ;
“1. For the purpose of dispensin, § with constantly watch-


ing them in their mesmeric state, and for enabling a stranger
to liberate them from all accidents during or after their
sleep.

“2. To awake them without my intervention, and with
much more certainty than I could even do so myself.

“3. To put an end to the greater part of the nervous
attacks of persons susceptible of mesmerism.

“ But was brass applicable to every body? (I shall men-
tion farther on that only those hypochondriacal, hysterical,
and neuralgic patients are the better for it who are suscep-
tible of the mesmeric influence) and can this metal, which
before 1849 I had never ventured to suppose more than a
palliative, effect a cure? What would be its effects upon the
spasms of cholera, of tetanus, epilepsy, and neuralgia?

“T had succeeded so far and was thus hoping, when, in
February, 1849, the cholera* broke out in the Salpetriére.


* “The disease appears to have obtained this absurd name from the sudden
appearance of vomiting, purging, and spasms in it, just as in true cholera; the
totally different nature of the matter discharged, and the various peculiarities
which shew it to be a specific disease and not a merely inordinate natural secre -
tion, being overlooked. But, as it entirely suppresses the bile, and also is a spe-
cific affection, we surely should no longer call it dile-flow, and should give it a
distinct appellation. Even the term leucorrhoea would be far more appropriate
than cholera, which signifies the very opposite to fact; but this term is already
engaged. Acholia (nulla bilis) is a good Greek word, and harmonizes with a
characteristic fact. Asiatic acholia_might be thought still more designative.”
There is a disease of the lungs which is just as absurdly called apoplery. ‘‘ The
lungs can no more be affected with apoplexy than with dyspepsia. Apoplexy is
a loss of all sense and voluntary motion,—a suspension of the functions of the
brain. This may arise from debility, poisons, pressure by bone, serum, or blood,
&c. But, because, in fatal cases of the disease, we sometimes find that conges-
tion and effusion of blood have been the source of the symptoms called apoplexy,
circumscribed congestions and effusions of blood in the lungs have been strangely
termed apoplexy. The condition appears in all respects so exactly what we call
ecchymosis, if near the surface of the body or in membranes, that, rather than
coin a new name, I would term it ecchymosis of the lungs.” If these appear-
ances are observed in the dissection of any organ, they are now termed apoplexy !

I wonder that any sensible man can sanction such a senseless and confusing
designation. When air exists in the thorax outside the lungs, the disease is called
pneumo-thoraz: a term signifying lung and thorax, not air and thorax: a
nerve which unites with the lung and stomach is correctly called pneumo-gastric.
The name for air in the thorax should be pneumato- thorax ; just as certain air-
tumors are correctly called to-cele, and p halos: and we say
also varico-cele, sarco-cele, hepato- cystic, gastro- -entiritis, hamato-cele, and say
actually PNEUMATO-CELE.

Another splendid instance of absurd medical nomenclature is the designation
of red, solified, lung by the word hepatization, as though, because the lung has
become solid and red like liver, it were converted into liver.

See my paper “on the Medicinal properties of Creosote,’’ in the Transactions
of the Roy. Medical and Chirurgical Society, vol. xix, : 1835,—Joun EL.iotrson.


130 Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals.


This scourge, after having been confined for some days to
that great hospital, spread all over Paris: and every other
hospital was soon filled with victims. The first patient at-
tacked with cholera who was given to me for experiments
in the Hospital Cochin was a strong and vigorous man, who
had risen in the morning in as perfect health as usual.
When carried to the hospital at three o’clock in the after-
noon, he was already blue, his extremities were cold, the cha-
racteristic evacuations were profuse, and the cramps of his
legs intense.

“In the evening two warm baths and various frictions
had produced no effect upon the cramps. Guided by the
effect of the metal in the artificial mesmeric cramps, I placed
a large copper ring at the highest point of the affected parts.
The muscles instantly relaxed, and the patient left off com-
plaining. After a most satisfactory calm for half an hour, I
endeavoured to remove the ring: but the cramps and pains
instantly returned, and the patient implored me to apply it
again. His wish was no sooner gratified than he again ceased
to complain.

“ A little later, during the night, the arms were attacked
with violent spasms. The patient very wisely seized one of
the rings which were upon his legs, and, not being able to
apply it on account of its shape, he for several hours fol-
lowed the cramps with it wherever they went. The metal did
not fail to produce its effect; and, what is well worth notic-
ing, the right arm, it being the right hand which was used
on this occasion, was not seriously affected till fatigue com-
pelled the patient to take the metal in his left.

“At the morning visit, having become calm and being
much better, he was loud in his praises of the blessed virtue
of the armature.”

On the same day, Dr. Burq ordered a large number of
brass rings to be made, and, not content with employing
them in the hospital where they were first employed, he went
day and night, as long as the cholera lasted, to the great
hospitals in order to shew the method of using them—Val de
Grace, the Hétel Dieu, the Salpetritre. Whenever the arm-
atures were properly employed, they were so serviceable that
Professor Rostan in his clinical lectures upon cholera recom-
mended them, from having seen them almost always suc-
cessful against the nervous phenomena peculiar to this scourge.

The Hospital Gazette of November 8, 1849, stated that
the surgeons of Val de Grace, as well as the physicians who
were sent into the provinces, eagerly forwarded the strongest
proofs of their success to the minister and to the academies,


Dr. Burg on the effects of Metais. 131


Even two of the latter, in a report to the National Academy
of Medicine in October, 1849, declared “that in one depart-
ment of the Haute-Marine the armatures under their care
had become so popular that, as soon as the cholera appeared
in a family, the relatives or friends, who were nearly all work-
ing cutlers, made an armature at once of a band of melchior,
copper, zinc, or nickel, which they generally had by them in
large quantity; and applied it immediately without waiting
for a medical man.”’*

During the whole period of the epidemic of 1849, Dr.
Burg, being much occupied with cholera patients, had little
time to continue his original researches; yet, finding a few
opportunities for the practice of mesmerism, he made a new
application of his metals.

A mesmeric patient presented herself who had been sub-
ject to natural sleep-waking from infancy. She had fre-
quently left her bed in the night and made dangerous excur-
sions and done the most difficult things in her sleep. As
brass completely arrested her artificial sleep-waking, four
brass rings were applied upon her limbs when she went to
bed; and, from that time she slept without any chance of
another attack.

But how little have we yet said of the improvements which
we shall derive from mesmerism in the treatment of affections
of the nervous system !

When the cholera had disappeared, Dr. Burq began to
spread the knowledge of his experiments upon hysterical
patients ; and, not being contented with isolated cases, he
applied for and obtained permission to transfer his metallic
arsenal to the Salpetriére, which is an immense receptacle of
all kinds of incurables. There, in one vast building, are
hundreds of unhappy females, some still young, whom the
most terrible diseases, as well as poverty, have placed under
the charge of public charity. For these ordinary medical
treatment can do nothing, and they live apart in this asylum,
visited hastily by a physician, whose office it is to notice any
dangerous complaint with which any of them may be seized.
For them there is no hope: no domestic bliss! Their diseases
are kept up by their injurious influence upon each other ; and
hardly three or four quit this tomb of the living in the course
of ten years.


* As a last proof of the benefit of Dr. Burq’s method of arresting the cramps
of those seized with cholera, it may be mentioned that, at the suggestion of the
Paris Board of Health, the minister who had already rewarded the exertions of
Dr. Burg with a medal, presented him in 1850 with a sum of money to indemnify
him in some degree for the expense which he had incurred in armatures.


132 Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals.


“It is lamentable,” says Dr. Burg, “to see sometimes
ten or twenty of these wretched beings confined by very strong
bands, to which they are accustomed early to submit, all
calling out at once, roaring, foaming, twisting themselves
about, and struggling against the resistance which is opposed
to them and frequently in vain.”

The disorders of the place are so horrifying that the
hospital board admits officials only: and Dr. Burg, though
accustomed to such diseases, required several days before he
was habituated to this novel sight. One moment he hesi-
tated and despaired of doing such poor creatures any good :
and required nothing less than the recollection of the unfor-
tunate patient in the Hépital Cochin, and a most useful
amount of firmness, to have the courage to modestly offer to
replace the straight jackets and all other forcible means of
restraint with his armatures. He proposed them not as
curative, but as palliative: the possibility of cures he never
thought of.

His first trials were unsuccessful. Being surrounded by
epileptic patients, and having but too many to select from, he
made his first trials upon them. But the armatures produced
no effect, and paroxysms continued equally in spite of the
rings. Finding no reason to hope for success among them,
he directed his measures to hysterical cases only.

What is unhappily one of the worst circumstances in all
hospitals which, like the Salpetriére, contain an assemblage
of every variety of convulsive diseases, irritation, or other
causes, had already exerted its too fatal influence and caused
epilepsy to supervene in almost every case which had been
simple hysteria at its admission. Dr. Burg, however, being
obliged to make a.choice among those who were offered to
him, selected five from the most severely affected with con-
vulsions—Valois, Verderet, Lh »* Peffert, and Sylvain.
All of them, though the eldest was not 30 years of age, had
been long in the Salpetriére, and almost every week, for two,
three, or four days successively, they were in what is termed
a bad state—in which hysteria, madness, and epilepsy, shared
in turn their wretched existence, and made it necessary to
confine them in separate cells.

A most interesting fact, which will be mentioned very
particularly in the course of this article, was that in these
five patients, just as in so many other hysterical patients who
were examined subsequently, both general and special sensi-
bility had undergone great changes, and that all complained


* This person, having left the hospital and belonging to respectable family, is
designated by initials only. -


Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals. 133


of a greater or less diminution of strength. Thus Lh
and Sylvain, who suffered more than the rest, had, and espe-
cially Sylvain, scarcely any sensibility in some parts of the
trunk, had lost the perception of even the position of their
lower extremities, and possessed no longer any trace of the
sense of touch, taste, or smell. Sylvain, in addition, was
semiparalyzed as to motion, and obliged to be almost always
in the recumbent position.*

The first trials were made in these unfavourable circum-
stances. We will not give all his details, but limit ourselves
to the general results.

The armatures employed in these experiments were plates
of brass (the only metal used by him up to that period), com-
posed of two rings four or five inches broad,—one for each
limb, a crown for the head, and two large plates for the
trunk that were united before and behind by a steel spring
to facilitate their application.

From the 10th of November to the end of the following
December, the metal was seldom applied except at the mo-
ment of an hysterical attack, or during the usual precursory
symptoms.

In two patients, Valois and Verderet, the first effects
were as immediate and varied as those in the female whom he
had thus treated in the Hépital Cochin; and the cessation
and return, general or partial, but immediate, of the convul-
sions was produced at pleasure.

In the third patient, Miss Lh , the action of the
metal, though not less evident, was sometimes incomplete,
especially in the cataleptic state which so often accompanied
her hysteric paroxysm. But in her, as in the two preceding,
there were also, as was expected, purely epileptic paroxysms.

The fourth, Peffert, obtained a slight diminution only of
the violence and duration of her attacks: and in the fifth,
Sylvain, who sometimes had very violent spasms in the chest
and sometimes formidable attacks, the brass had no effect,
at whatever time and in whatever way it was applied.

The metal was never capricious, and its effects were inva-
riably the same ; so that the three first patients, being accus-
tomed to see their attacks dispelled, seldom neglected to
apply the armature at the least threatening of a paroxysm ;
and the two latter, Peffert and Sylvain, after having made
every effort to obtain the same relief, gave up the metals
altogether.


* Dr. Burg remarks that he never met with a case of epilepsy, pure and quite
without the combination of hysteria or hypochondriasis, in which such a partial
functional disturbance existed.


134 Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals.


At this period, a sixth patient, Miss Sequerlay, who had
been many months in the infirmary of the building on ac-
count of almost constant nervous vomitings and a paraplegia
of the same kind, and, being more epileptic than the others,
had not succeeded in inducing Dr. Burg to try the metals
with her, took up the armature of her neighbour Sylvain,
and, as much from curiosity perhaps as jealousy, put them
on several times in the night without the knowledge of any
person.

“In a few days,” writes Dr. Burg, “she told me what
she had done, and said, probably, I thought, to excuse herself,
that she was decidedly better for it. I almost laughed in my
sleeve at her harmless efforts, and, without encouraging her,
allowed her to continue the use of the armature.

“ However, a month had scarcely elapsed from the time
that the three first had begun to employ the armatures, before
their attacks seemed less frequent and shorter. Being curious
to ascertain the effect of the brass upon the anesthesia, the
extent and intensity of which began to seem always in pro-
portion to the violence and frequency of the hysteric parox-
ysms, I remarked, though without paying much attention to
the fact at first, that this metal, just as in the mesmeric
sleep, soon restored the sensibility, first in the spot to which
it was applied and then in the neighbouring parts ; so that,
after a crisis which had taken place entirely under the appli-
cation of the rings, the tingling succeeding the attack, just
as in the patient in the Hospital Cochin, invariably indicated
that all the parts in which it was decidedly experienced had
become sensible, and these were especially the parts which
had lost their sensibility before the application.

“ Equally as in mesmeric anesthesia, it was of no import-
ance what was the extent of surface or the locality of the
application of the metal: the effect was as rapid whether a
mere thimble were employed or a large ring. The sole dif-
ference was in the extent of its action.”’*

At the end of December an accidental circumstance
caused the suspension of Dr. Burq’s experiments. When
the patients learnt this, they feared that it would be of long
continuance, and were greatly distressed: nor were they
comforted till they received a positive assurance from him that
he would soon return, and witnessed the pains which he took
to leave the armatures with them. He had no need to advise


* For more details consult a letter addressed by Dr. Burg to the Academy of
Sciences, and published in the Medical Gazette of Paris for February, 1850,
entitled Note pour servir a l'étude des effets physiologiques et thérapeutiques des
armartures métalliques, ou de influence des métaux sur la Paralysie nerveuse.


Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals. 135


them to make use of the armatures. Being accustomed to
find relief from them, the poor women were the first to believe
in their curative powers,—a sweet illusion, which Dr. Burq
had not the courage to dissipate, though he did not believe
- that the improvement was more than a coincidence—and, as
soon as one of them was seized with an attack, her friends
ran to her and applied them.

“ After an absence of six weeks I returned,” says Dr.
Burg, “to the Salpetriére, supposing that my patients, like
the unfortunate man in-the fable, who was never further from
obtaining his object than when he fancied himself on the
point of success, had fallen back into their original condition.
But what was my astonishment on finding that, by means of
three or four fresh applications for some hours, the three
hysterico-epileptic patients, Verderet, Valois, and Lh ;
who, when I first attended them, passed scarcely a day with-
out an attack, had seldom been ill since I left, and began to
talk of leaving the Salpetriére ; and that Sequerlay, who had
found her spasms and attacks disappear and at the same time
the power of her limbs return, had not experienced any attack
of vomiting during the time, and, having become one of the
strongest women in her division of the establishment, was
employed in servant’s work. Miss Lh , being better
educated than the others, shewed me an accurate register of
the cases ; and I found that there had been a few unimportant
spasms only, and but one nervous attack, and that this had
been excited in Valois by an act of violence! What was still
better, the epileptic attacks, as I have already said, although
they at first took place even under the use of the armatures,
were hardly to be found in the register: and Lh was the
only one who had enjoyed the sad privilege of experiencing
three or four attacks.

“ All these patients, who,—there was no possibility of de-
nying it,—were now advancing to their cure, ascribed this to
the increase of muscular power, that was so remarkable in
_ Sequerlay: and I at once began to examine the condition of
their sensibility. These poor girls, in whose skin and mucous
membranes, with the exception of Sequerlay,* I, two months
previously, stuck pins with impunity,” (whose skin and mu-
cous membranes I Jarded, would be the exact translation,)
“ suffered pain now from the least pinching or pricking : their
senses were all perfect: and I could no longer force a spoon


* This patient was the first in whom my attention was directed to the proportion
between the painful phenomena and the diminution of moving power when the
sensibility has undergone little or no diminution: and in truth, although hyste-
rical in the highest degree, she had scarcely experienced any loss of the latter.


136 Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals.


far into their mouths, or a feather into their nostrils, without
exciting vomiting, or sneezing and a flow of tears.

“ Struck with these new facts, I examined Sylvain, Peffert,
and several other patients whom I had already studied. None
of them had improved, and all were as destitute of feeling as -
before. It was evident that this want of feeling, common in
hysteria and consequently in all the forms of nervous affec-
tions that hysteria comprehends, was, just as in the mesmeric
sleep, the most important phenomenon, and in some measure
the base, of the disease,—that it is a new means of measure,
a kind of nervous pulse, calculated to shew us the degree of
the affection; and that, as it had always been impossible to
act upon the nervous disease without acting upon the anzs-
thesia also, the metal-cure ought to employ it in the first
instance as a touchstone for indicating the propriety of using
the metal.

“ Why, therefore, all these expensive and troublesome trials
upon an hysterical patient in convulsions? Ought not a little
brass plate, a simple brass thimble, placed, for example, upon
an anesthetic patient, to indicate the treatment as satisfac-
torily as a complete armature? and is not the restoration of
sensibility by the metal in a preliminary trial (I might add,
of motility likewise, as we shall find further on) sufficient to
satisfy us of our power over the convulsions and the whole
nervous affection ?

“In order to obtain a positive proof of this, I made fresh
experiments upon other hysterical patients ; and those—and
those only—were all liberated from their attacks, in whom
the metal restored the sensibility. The more intense and
rapid the action of the brass upon the anesthesia, the more
effect had this metal upon the spasms, convulsions, and hys-
teric pains.

“ But, although many hysterical patients in that division
recovered their sensibility by means of the brass, many others,
as well as Sylvain and Peffert, remained equally insensible
after its application as before. In vain I changed the time,
direction, and mode of my examination: the result was al-
ways negative.

“Taking Sylvain as a type of this resistance, I did not
attempt to interfere with her attacks, but directed my efforts
to restore sensibility by local applications of the brass. But,
whatever was the surface, the polish, the moisture or dryness
of the metal, its electric or non-electric state, by the super-
position in the former case of a plate of zinc or the addition
of the wire of one of the poles of a galvanic pile in action, I
obtained no result. Aware of the importance of the problem


Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals. 137


which in that patient was expressed thus by the formula—
‘GIVEN AN HYSTERICAL AFFECTION, TO FIND THE MEANS OF
RESTORING THE SENSIBILITY,’ I worked at its solution ; al-
most even in my sleep. But in vain: Sylvain continued in-
sensible to all my prickings. Yet never was the solution of a
problem more easy. The road to it was traced out before-
hand. Mesmerism pointed it out, and I had only to follow
it. Had not many circumstances shewn me that, in the mes-
meric sleep, a different metal from copper would influence the
anzsthesia of one patient and not-affect the sensibility of
another; and vice versd? so that gold, for instance, which
yesterday had no effect upon the latter, completely demes-
merised the former to-day? Why, therefore, continue blindly
attempting to obtain the same good effects? and how, in spite
of, or rather on account of, the good effects which mesmerism
had procured for me, could I, who was hardly quite liberated
from the prejudices of yesterday, have such faith in its powers
and incessantly make demands upon it, as a spoiled child
does upon its indulgent mother ?

“TI thus continued to neglect its indications, when, one
morning, March 2, 1850,—a day too important to the future
progress of the metal-cure for me ever to forget it—I found
Sylvain sewing for me with a steel needle.

“ Having a long needle with me, as indeed I now always
had, and which, as well as the dynamometer, I now use even
more than most practitioners use their watch for counting the
pulse, I thought I would ascertain the degree of, her sensibi-
lity under the influence of this fresh metal. I pricked her
rather sharply, and she, not less astonished than myself,
withdrew her hand suddenly, complained of an acute pain,
and then wiped away a drop of blood which appeared at the
wound.* Farther prickings made more carefully upon the
same finger were perfectly felt, especially in the neighbour-
hood of the steel, although the insensibility continued in the
other fingers. I changed the situation of the steel thimble :
but, wherever I placed it, the pain of a wound was felt in
from eight to ten minutes. If copper thimbles instead of the
steel were placed upon the finger, or upon the fingers which


* A very remarkable fact, proving incontestibly the influence of the metal
upon the capillary circulation by means of the nervous system, is, that the pricked
wounds of anesthetic patients, which, however deep, give no blood, do bleed when
copper or steel has restored nervous power to the spot and brought back its
sensibility to the healthy state. The common return of the catamenia after the
application of a suitable metal to the lower stomach or lower extremities (exam-
= of this will be given further on), is sufficient practically to prove this
influence.


VOL. X. L


138 Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals.


had remained insensible, the insensibility returned in the
former, and no change occurred in the latter. .

“ Delighted with this result, but not venturing to believe
too much, I requested the house-pupil to verify it with me :
and the experiment succeeded with him as perfectly as with
me.
“Two days afterwards, reasons, which I will not mention
that I may not reveal the unprecedented brutality or jealousy
of a professional brother, compelled me to quit the Salpe-
triére, without having had time to try the effects of a steel
armature upon Sylvain, or to continue my investigations with
the four other patients,* whose cure was thus most inhu-
manly prevented. But I had now discovered all the indica-
tions afforded by mesmerism that up to that time had so un-
fortunately been unnoticed; and my discovery was complete.
It would be evident in future that when brass, or even steel,
fails, other metals ought to be tried—copper, German steel,
gold, silver, platinum, &c., either pure or alloyed, which
all occupy the same place in the scale of electric conductors
as the two former; and that we ought not to despair of the
metal-cure till all the metals and all their known alloys, and
all those which I myself could imagine, have been tried in
vain.

“One thing, however, was wanting ; and the following is
the way in which I learnt it.

“ After I had left the Salpetriére, I prosecuted my expe-
riments in the great Hétel Dieu, where the recollection of my
measures with the cholera patients obtained me a very hand-
some reception by the medical heads of the establishment.

“ Fresh patients were given to me there, and soon a com-
mittee of the Academy, consisting of Professors Berard,
Cloquet, and Jules Guerin, did me the honour of witnessing
my treatment and experiments.

“One day I presented to the committee one of Dr.
Rostan’s patients, labouring under intense hysteria with pa-
raplegia and almost universal anesthesia. I had examined
her carefully, and being certain that English steel filings
would restore her sensibility, I ventured to promise a speedy
cure. The committee fixed another meeting: but, on this
occasion, alas! and in vain, I varied the trials of steel, and
then employed other metals. She was scarcely at all relieved ;


* One of them, Miss Lh——, whose recovery continued perfect, returned to
her family in two months. I do not know what became of the three others: but
I greatly fear that, remaining in the Salpétriére, they have relapsed into their
former state.


Dr. Burg on the effects of Metals. 189


the sensibility alone was a little modified, and the palsy of
the lower extremities continued nearly the same.

“This check shewed me that the metal might have no
action on motility , although it acted evidently upon the sen-
sibility ;* and distinctly pointed out the propriety of not
limiting our examination of the effects of metals to anesthesia
only.

% A few days afterwards, however, another mishap oc-
curred in nearly the same circumstances that deserves to be
mentioned.

“There was an hysterical and paraplegic patient in the
same division of the hospital. English steel had been se-
lected after two trials upon the lower extremities; and as it
had produced a good effect upon the sensibility and motility
both which were greatly impaired, I thought myself justified
in giving a very favourable prognosis to the committee. But,
after the application of the steel to the limbs, which I had
neglected to examine previously, I was greatly mortified at find-
ing the paraplegia continue, as well as most of the nervous
phenomena.

“These two successive checks, which would have seriously
injured my discovery but for a large number of successful
cases, had the good effect of bringing me to this wise and
strict conclusion, which it had been impossible to foresee,—
‘THAT IN A NERVOUS AFFECTION WITH ANESTHESIA AND AMY-
OSTHESIA, we ought not to pronounce upon the efficacy of the
metallic treatment till we have acquired the threefold assur-
ance, not of the perfect action of the metal upon the sensi-
bility and motility of the upper extremities only, but of the
lower also, especially if the latter are completely palsied.’

“When the suitable metal has been ascertained, there is no
nervous affection,” says Dr. Burg, “which can resist its ge-
neral application during some hours daily for a week or a
fortnight, at the times most favourable to the patient—at
night, for example—with a few suitable necessary directions
as to regimen, and the observation of the causes which gave
rise to the disease.”


In the next number will be given the authentic proofs
which Dr. Burg has collected to substantiate so important an
assertion: and likewise his doctrine of the anesthesia and
amyosthesia of nervous diseases, together with the means
which he employs to ascertain their different degrees.


* Dr. Pierre, a house-pupil of the Hétel Dieu at the time, has published a
case of hysteria treated with metals, in which case English steel had no effect
except upon one portion of the insensible parts, whereas silver with =’ of alloy
restored the sensibility throughout.


L2


140 Mesmerism in Australia.


His second memoir, entitled, Mesmerism illustrated by the
Metals, will shew the remarkable relation which he has dis-
covered between the effects of brass and those of mesmerism,
and the method of accurately ascertaining by means of this
and other metals, without previous mesmerising, the degree
of mesmeric susceptibility in different individuals.


(End of the First Part.)


II. Cure of long-standing and intense Palsy and Debility,
after the failure of all the routine measures in the hands
of eminent men. By Dr. Moruerwe t, of Australia.
Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘* * Origin of Life. By James Morison, the Hygeist.’—By this short treatise
any person of common understanding may at once see why all the deadly poisons
now used as medicines can never tend to cure any disease, Also, why all mental
diseases should be treated like other complaints ; and also why such fallacies as
mesmerism, electro-biology, homceopathy, can never be of service as curative
agents. As it is most important that all persons should be fully informed on
these questions, the above treatise will be forwarded by post to all persons, on
application at the British College of Health, New Road, London.’’—Advertise-
ment in the Daily News, April 27, 1852.

“* We regret that Dr. Carpenter should have lent himself to the promulgation
of the imbecile vagaries of Dr. Henderson, and thus more completely than ever
identified himself with the follies of animal magnetism. The countenance thus
given to views so much in opposition to true science, is not only injurious to the
scientific reputation of the individual entertaining them, but also to the public
whom they mislead.”"—Tuomas Wak.ey, Lancet, March 20, 1852; p. 300.


To Dr. Elliotson.
Collins Street, Melbourne, Oct. 10, 1851.
My dear Sir,—If the following case of long-continued
paralysis, successfully treated by mesmerism when all other
means had failed, is worthy of publication in the pages of
The Zoist, I shall feel obliged by your sending it to the
editor. It might be the means of inducing some poor suf-
ferer, similarly affected, to use this great remedial agent, and
of opening the eyes of medical men to the curative powers
of mesmerism. The invalid was under the care of Drs.
Stokes and Goodshaw, and Mr. Cusack of Dublin, besides
several other medical gentlemen there, who are all well ac-
quainted with the case. His father was a Protestant clergy-
man in Ireland, known to the Bishop of Meath. He does
not wish his name to appear in print, but has no objection to
my giving it to you, or to your mentioning it to any person
who wishes to enquire into the facts and authenticity of the
case. I send you a note from him to that effect.
I first became acquainted with Mr. Henry L in
August, 1849, when he embarked at Plymouth on board the


Mesmerism in Australia. 141


barque Nelson with his father, mother, and other members of
his family, as passengers for Port Philip. I was surgeon-
superintendent of the vessel. Mr. L. was then an helpless
invalid. He was unable to walk or move his legs; he could
not sit up; he was always carried up on the deck, or in and
out of his cabin, by a servant. He was then about 20 years
of age; and the history I heard of his case was, that, when
about 11 years of age, he was first observed to suffer from
obstinate constipation of the bowels: whence this arose could
not be discovered. The parents were not cognizant of his
ever having received any injury of the spine, though they
remarked that he was very fond of jumping off high places.
However, he began gradually to lose the power of his limbs.
In spite of all the remedies that wealth could procure, or that
medical skill could afford, this state of paralysis continued
to progress. Medicine usque ad nauseam, blisters, issues, ho-
meopathy, galvanism, and electricity, each had its trial and
each failed. Change of climate—that “ dernier resort” of
medical men when they get tired of their patients—was re-
commended, and consequently the family embarked for this
colony. When I first saw him at Plymouth, J do not think I
ever saw a living body in such an extreme state of attenuation.
Of adipose tissue there was none. The skin covered a mass
of bones, ligaments, tendons, and some loose flabby flesh,—
the remnants of a muscular system. The joints and extremi-
ties of the bones appeared large and prominent. He was
obliged to be carried about. He could not sit up. He could
not raise his legs off the ground, but could with an effort raise
his arms. If he were held up erect, I should think that his
height would have been upwards of six feet, and yet a man
could almost span his thighs or the calves of his legs with his
hand. His appetite was very, very small. His pulse ranged
from 58 to 62 in a minute. His skin was icy cold and dry.
The animal heat was very low. Sensibility was diminished,—
he seemed not to feel the alternations of cold or heat that we
all experienced during the voyage. The mental power was
weakened. He would not read himself, and took little or no
interest in what was read to him by others, or in any kind of
amusement. He reclined all day in a state of listless apathy.
During the voyage I tried to induce him to make some exer-
tion. He used to make an effort, but the torpor of the brain
and nervous system seemed insurmountable. I tried galvan-
ism for about ten days during the voyage, and could produce
muscular contractions in any part that I touched with the
handles ; but he had Jost ali hope, and the use of galvanism
was given up. Thus he continued during the voyage and for


23 Safa See Seer


142 Mesmerism in Australia.


twelve months after his arrival in this colony. The heat of this
climate appeared to make him more languid. He grew, if
possible, weaker. From the time of his arrival here he could
not taste animal food: the very sight of it caused nausea.
At length the little appetite he had began to fail. The sto-
mach commenced to reject the small portion of farinaceous
food which he used to exist upon, and he complained of a
distressing weight at the epigastrium, and of a sensation of
a ball rising up in the throat that made him most uncom-
fortable. In these circumstances he applied to me to try
whether the use of galvanism over the stomach would give
him any relief. I tried it without success.

At that time I was mesmerising a young lady, who was
clairvoyant, and from whom I had oftentimes obtained much
useful information about diseases and their remedies.

Now, Sir, mark me, though a fully qualified medical and
surgical practitioner, the profession to which I have the
honour to belong may deem me weak-minded, or, if they
choose, a charlatan, because I listen to what is told me by
one in this clairvoyant condition. But, when I know that
she is not practising any deceit, that the treatment suggested
by her is rational, that it has been of benefit where: other
means used by myself and other practitioners have failed, I
do not hesitate to adopt such treatment as she recommends,
though she is ignorant of and wondering at the whence, how,
or wherefore she obtains information, and speaks about sub-
jects of which she knows nothing in the waking state.

I asked her one evening while mesmerised if she could
then see Mr. L.: she had never seen him in her waking
state. She said, “ Yes; I see him lying on a couch: oh! so
thin, and pale, and weak.” I asked her, did she see any
thing that would do him good. After a little time she replied,
“T see bottles and medicines, but they all disappear again :
they will do him no good. I see a box with a galvanic ma-
chine in it; it remains, but does not come close to him: I
do not think it would do him any good at present. I see two
hands mesmerising him, and after some time he appears to
become brighter—to have a light round him; and the gal-
vanic machine then comes closer to him: but I think it will
be a long time before he would be fit to use it.”* I asked
her, could she tell me what was the difference between the
light from galvanism and that from mesmerism? and she
said, “ Why, the light from galvanism appears to go over the
body—on its surface, and to go away sooner: but the light


* On the figurative manner in which the ideas of clairvoyants frequently are
conceived, see Dr. Elliotson’s remarks in No. XXIV., pp. 372-5.—Zoist.


Mesmerism in Australia. 143


from the mesmerism appears to be of a more searching, pene-
trating nature, it goes into and through the body, and remains
in it for a long time.” I asked her, “Could his brother mes-
merise him?” and she said, “I should think so.” Accord-
ingly his brother commenced to mesmerise him by making
passes over him twice each day, and for half an hour at each
time. I continued to use the galvanic machine with him.
After a lapse of ten days I again asked her, could she see
him, and if there were any change produced by the brother’s
mesmerising? She said that she saw him, but that the
brother was not doing him any good,—that she saw him
making the passes, but that no light was coming from him:
he was thinking of something else. I then ceased to galva-
nize, and commenced to mesmerise him myself, without appriz-
ing her of my intention to do so. I produced no effect upon
him of which I was cognizant; but I asked her one evening
to look at him, and tell me how he was getting on. She
surprised me by saying, “ Why, doctor, some other person
has been mesmerising him. I see some light upon his head.
Ah! I think you must have been mesmerising him.” I then
told her that I had; and she said, “Go on then, persevere,
and you will do him good.” Thus encouraged, I continued
to mesmerise him for an hour daily for a period of five months.
After the first eight or ten days the oppression about the epi-
gastrium ceased entirely, and the disagreeable sensation of a
dail rising in the throat was not experienced. After a few
more days the temperature of the hands was increased, and
the feel of the skin became more natural and healthy : slight
perspiration began to appear upon the hands. Some time
longer and his mother told me that she observed some moisture
and warm perspiration upon his feet,—what she had not seen
for six years previous.

I never could produce sleep: but I observed that after a
time I produced nervous twitchings of the muscles about the
forehead and eyes, afterwards of those about the lips. After
some time longer the entire head used to be shaken violently
and involuntarily. During this time the clairvoyant used to
tell me that she saw the light going down through his body
more and more every day. I began to get him to raise his
arms over his head; then to raise a small weight in them ;
then to shove his legs out from him and draw them back
again ; then to raise them off the ground; at length to be
able to put them on a chair.

Slowly, gradually, almost imperceptibly, this change was
going on, and already three months had elapsed ; the shak-
ing of the head became more violent, until the whole body


144 Mesmerism in Australia.


participated in these irregular muscular contractions, and
fits similar to epileptic were produced. These fits, which
were at first only produced when I was present and mesmer-
ising him, soon became more frequent and came on of their
own accord. He had two in the day ; then three; then four ;
and eventually as many as eight in the twenty-four hours.
They lasted from fifteen to twenty minutes. During the time
they were present he was quite unconscious.

About four months after I began to mesmerise him, he
was attacked with a diarrhoea; and after a few days he passed
off from his bowels some horribly fetid offensive matter,
which the parents told me they could compare to nothing but
putrid rotten flesh. After that he had a relish for animal
food, and his appetite increased. The continuance of these
fits was a great source of uneasiness to both his parents and
himself. They were afraid that his mind would be eventually
affected, and that these fits would continue for life. Never
having heard or read of such an extreme case as this, I could
not speak positively ; but I told them that, from what I had
read of some cases of epilepsy by Dr. Elliotson, it appeared
that mesmerism occasionally increased the frequency of the
fits for a time, and that the fits were to be regarded as favour-
able symptoms ; and in his case, where there was such great
torpor of the nervous system, my opinion was,—that mes-
merism had brought on these fits—that they were increasing
in frequency under its influence—and that, when sufficient
tone had been given to the nervous system and the constitu-
tion generally, they would subside.

I must tell you that, when these fits were becoming fre-
quent, I asked the clairvoyant one evening about them ; and
she said, “ Let them go on, they are doing him good; do not
be uneasy about them. T’ll tell you, doctor, what I see. I
look at him before one of these fits come on, and he appears
heavy and dull. The heart is beating slowly and with diffi-
culty, and the blood appears to be dark and thick and impure :
but after the fit it appears more pure—to have more vitality
in it, and the whole body seems then to be refreshed and in-
vigorated by it.”

When I had been mesmerising him about three months,
she told me one evening that she saw the galvanic box had
come quite close to him, and that she thought it would be
now of service; so from that time I began to use galvanism
in addition to the mesmerism.

I continued the mesmerism daily for more than five
months, and sometimes twice in the day, until I became un-
well myself, and, his family having removed to another resi-


Mesmerism in Australia, 145


dence, whence the roads to town were almost impassable
during the winter months, I was obliged to omit the mes-
merism for about a fortnight, when I was informed by his
parents that the fits were becoming less frequent, and in a
few days afterwards they entirely ceased. He continued to
use the galvanism. I rode out to see him in about a week
after the subsidence of the fits, and had been only a few mi-
nutes in his company when he fell off again into one of these
fits: but he so dreaded their recurrence that I did not again
visit him, though perfectly satisfied that they were of service
to him, more especially as he always experienced a feeling of
excitement and anxiety at the time of day when I used to
mesmerise him, as if his system was craving for something
that it could not obtain. Still, as I saw that the impulse to-
wards amendment had been given; that its progress was slow
indeed, but certain; that his appetite was improving; and
that he was using every means in his power, so far as per-
sonal exertion would permit, to restore himself to health, I
determined not again to visit him until he had more strength
and was able to see me. Well, in a few weeks I heard that
he was able to crawl about the floor like an infant: in another
week he was able to raise himself from a sitting posture and
stand on his legs: in a few days more he was able to walk
some paces: and soon afterwards (about eight months from
the time I commenced to mesmerise him) he was able to walk
about unaided, without stick or crutch, or assistance of any
kind.

In the statements made to me by the clairvoyant there
were many circumstances worthy of note. When I first
asked her about him and inquired if he would get well, she
said that she saw him after being mesmerised a long time able
to walk about unaided. I asked her what length of time?
and she said she saw the figure 5, and that she thought it
meant five months. I therefore concluded that, at the expira-
tion of five months, he would be able to walk about. But,
no; I was disappointed. He could not walk; and I have
since thought, in explanation of the figure 5 which she saw,
“ could it (the figure 5) have reference to the time I continued
to mesmerise him ?”

Upon another occasion I asked her, could she see what
was the cause or nature of his disease? She said she did
not understand and was unable to describe perfectly what she
saw: but that a white thing like a cord, which ran down the
back, did not appear to be healthy—it seemed to be more dry
than it ought to be; it was shrivelled up: and, said she,
“Doctor, I think that there is something wrong here (point-


146 Mesmerism in Australia.

ing to the top of the head); that part does not appear to be
like the rest of the brain.”” Now it is a remarkable fact that,
in all his previous modes of treatment, after they had each
been tried for some time, he ceased to have hope in their effi-
cacy and relapsed into his usual listless apathy ; whereas, after
mesmerism had begun to have effect upon him, his hope and
perseverance each day became more strongly developed. And
now his habits are completely altered. He is anxious for his
recovery, uses every exertion to promote it, rises early, and
delights in being out moving about in the open air. It ap-
pears to me that mesmerism gave a stimulus and healthy tone
to this defective portion of the brain, and the effect produced
corroborates the remark of the clairvoyant.

Upon one or two occasions I tried the effect of mesmerised
water upon him. I sent him by his brother what I told him
was a bottle of medicine, with directions to take a wine-
glassful twice in the day. No person knew that it was only
mesmerised water, and the family were surprised to see that
a fit was produced immediately after taking his medicine.*

It would be impossible for me to speak in sufficiently eulo-
gistic terms of the untiring, unremitting care of Mrs. L.
during this long treatment. None but a fond and devoted
mother could have endured the constant vigilance that she
had to sustain. Her mental distress was indeed extreme at
seeing her son working so frequently each day in these fits.
I had told her not to allow him to be held or restrained while
in them ; and consequently she had always a mattress laid
on the floor for him to be placed upon, and pillows and air-
cushions about him, upon which he might beat his head, or
thump his hands and arms without danger of hurting himself.
Therefore, when the fit subsided, he had none of the pains
and aches or straining of the muscles which are the result of
strong men holding the patient while in the fit.

I was amused at an article, “ What is Mesmerism ?” in
“auld” Ebony+ for July, 1851. Poor old fellow, he is in
his dotage.

Believe me, very truly yours,
J. B. Mornerwe.t.


* See a striking fact at p. 99.—Zoist.
t See No. XXXV., p. 274.—Zoist.


( 147 )


Ill. A few words on “ Electro-Biology.’” By Mr. Roserr
Emer Cane, Kilkenny. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘* Electro-biology, mesmerism, and such like exposed, and the public mind
disabused, by a treatise on the Origin of Life, which may be had, gratis, by post,
on application to the Bririsa Cottece or Heatran, New Road, London.—
Morison. Times, April, 1852.

“The remarks on ‘the recent innovations in the practice of medicine,’ by
Mr. Henry Meymott, are inadmissible in the columns of this journal. We can-
not allow the Lancer to be made the channel for promulgating such frauds and
delusions as homeopathy and MESMERISM.”—WaAkKLEy, Lancet, March 20,
1852; p. 300.


To Dr. Elliotson.

Si1r,—On reading an article of Mr. Acland’s in the April
number of The Zoist, entitled the Galvanic Disk Delusion
dispelled, it occurred to me that I had a few remarks to make
on the same subject that might, perchance, be interesting
to you or your readers.

I have had many opportunities of observing the modus
operandi pursued by Dr. Darling in his experiments ; and the
first fact which influenced me strongly in favour of attribut-
ing to mesmerism the results produced was the observing of
the strong concentration of will used by him when dealing
with subjects whose susceptibility was not above the average.
His entire aspect, under such circumstances, was that of a
man energizing violently ; his body was erect, lips compressed,
and in fact every muscle in his frame appeared to be ina
state of sustained action; and, when his experiments were
concluded, I remarked that he was bathed in perspiration,
and seemed occasionally to be in a pitiable state of bodily ex-
haustion. During the experiments he appeared to me to use
distinct mesmeric passes ; he always seconded his verbal asser-
tion with some manual contact with the subject, unless in
extremely susceptible cases; and he appeared to me to make
use of a sudden downward pass before the face in almost
every case where he desired to control the perceptions. I
have myself since that used this sudden pass to produce the
same results in individuals whom I had brought into the
“ biological” state without any disk or pellet whatever, and
generally with success.

I mentioned this state of mental energy, and these quasi-
mesmeric passes to Dr. Darling as so many reasons against
assuming any other cause but mesmerism to be at the bottom
of these effects; but, if I understood him rightly, he in-
formed me that he was not aware of using any concentration
of will whatever; only a positive and determined mode of
making the suggestive assertion; and that the contact, and


148 A few words on “ Electro-Biology.”


what I conceived to be local mesmerisation, were merely for
the purpose of heightening, by a local impression, the effect
caused by the verbal suggestion. I also understood him to
repudiate the existence of any galvanic virtue in the disk, and
to consider it much according to your own view, merely as a
means of tranquillizing and fixing the attention.

I am confirmed in considering this to be the purport of
what Dr. Darling was kind enough to inform me on the sub-
ject, from an account I have heard, from a very intelligent
friend, of his lectures in the Portobello Gardens in Dublin,
where from some accident or other he was obliged to experi-
ment without the disks; and the mode he pursued was /ook-
ing intently into the eyes of the subject, and making downward
passes over his head and shoulders. He was not at all so suc-
cessful in Dublin as in other places—indeed his experiments
are pretty generally considered a failure in that city—and
this is again precisely what we should expect on the mesmeric
theory, in consequence of the much greater expenditure of
magnetic fluid which would be required to produce the same
results on subjects who had not been previously prepared and
tranquillized. While I am speaking of Dr. Darling, I may
state that the most susceptible of his subjects I saw always
complained of severe head-ache and uneasiness after his expe-
riments; I have since acted on the same party by my hand
and eye, and no uneasiness whatever followed. This certainly
is an argument against the disk.

It is but fair to state, while I am speaking of Dr. Darling,
that I found him most gentlemanly and polite, and disposed
to accommodate me in every respect in my inquiries.

After this I attended several of Mr. Stone’s lectures in
Dublin, and I was the more confirmed in believing this so-
called electro-biology to be simply mesmerism in the waking
state. Mr. Stone appeared to me to be a more powerful mag-
netizer than Dr. Darling, and hence not to require the same
amount of energetic concentration of will to produce his
results; but he also used mesmeric processes very distinctly.
Besides the local passes and touches I have alluded to, Mr.
Stone’s injunction to his subjects, when at first disappointed
in obtaining any result, is, “Look into my eye, Sir ;” and
then follows that steady collected glance, which no mesmerist
needs a description of. Mr. Stone stated in the last lecture
he gave in Dublin that a galvanic battery would be the most
effective means of inducing the “biological state,” but, as
that would be rather inconvenient and bulky for carrying
about, the galvanic disk was used as a substitute. These are


as nearly his words as I can recollect them ; they are certainly


By Mr. Cane. 149


equivalent to what he said. He then stated, however, that
the same results would be produced by gazing in the pre-
scribed manner at a piece of paper, or in fact at any fixed
object ; and he wound up by giving us the “ secret divulged”
of the “ pressure on the ulnar nerve,” and by disposing of a
goodly number of his disks at, I believe, the price of a shil-
ling each !

When I myself first commenced the study of “ electro-
biology,” I was unable to procure disks: so I prepared the
subjects by fixedly gazing into their eyes and making passes
downwards over the head and shoulders ; and in this way I
obtained averagely successful results. This certainly looked
most suspiciously like mesmerism, and the following occur-
rence which happened with one of Dr. Darling’s most im-
pressible subjects, M. M., removed almost any doubts I had
as to the identity of it and “ biology.” I happened on one
occasion to see this M. M. standing in a very unsleeplike po-
sition, and the thought struck me that I would see how far I
could influence him magnetically in opposition to his will. So
I at once looked fixedly into his eyes, and commenced making
passes in the manner I have described. However, after about
ten minutes spent in this manner, although the clock-work
descent of the eyelids described by Mr. Townshend had com-


menced, I gave up the process, fearing that, owing to the un-
g , P & g


questionable and decided mental opposition he was giving me,
the setting him asleep would occupy more time than I could
then conveniently spare. At that moment it occurred to me
that this would not be a bad case to test the theory of “ bio-
logy” on, as with about the same amount of preparation I
had before produced its results. But then the preparation
was given with the declared intention of rendering the party
susceptible to suggestion; here it was given with the declared
purpose of causing the magnetic sleep. So I made before his
face the sudden downward pass I have spoken of, and said to
him, “ The ground is burning hot.” The suggestion imme-
diately took effect. I afterwards attempted other results of
suggestion on him with success.

This was pretty strong evidence ; the same cause produc-
ing both effects. It now only remained to prove the effects
themselves almost identical—and I believe I was some time
afterwards enabled to do this. Here you must allow me to
digress for a little space.

From the amount of observation it has been in my power
to make, I should be inclined to enumerate four stages of
mesmeric effect :—I1st. That which is named electro-biology.


150 A few words on “ Electro-Biology.”’


2nd. Common mesmeric sleep. 3rd. Trance-waking. 4th.
Clear vision of distant things. I know little of the last—
nothing of any higher stages ; and I even give this classifica-
tion with very great diffidence, owing to my limited opportu-
nities of observation. All know what is implied by the term
“ electro-biology,” which I call my first stage. My second
degree is a deep sleep, in which the patient is generally sus-
ceptible to suggestive impressions. I have several facts in-
clining me to think that the phenomena termed phreno-
mesmerism are peculiar to this stage, and hence I am rather
inclined to believe those phenomena to depend on suggestion,
than on any exoteric action on the brain.* The third degree
is trance-waking, where the subject speaks in his own cha-
racter,t and in which the phenomena of traction, rigidity, and
community of sensation are capable of being produced. When
this state is fully induced, I have not been able to produce
phreno-magnetic results. The fourth stage is as yet so little
known that I omit it for the present. The difficulty in clas-
sifying mesmeric phenomena is, that the stages are not sepa-
rated by a distinct and strongly marked hmit; they glide
into one another, as it were. Mixtures of the second and
third, and of the third and fourth stages are not uncommon ;
and I shall have to say a little just now on a mixture of the
first and second.

To return to my subject. I had a mesmeric subject in
Dublin, named J. P., whom I often threw into what I have
called the second stage in about two minutes. Laying my
fingers on his eyes, I would then tell him he was Dr. Chan-
ning, Dr. Elliotson, O’Connell, any one, and that he would
have to deliver a speech immediately; or something of that
sort: and he would immediately set about doing so. I could
vary the nature of his discourse by exciting different organs :
but the original suggestion ruled all. I placed his arms ex-
tended, and told him he could not move them: he would
move about vigorously, but admit his inability to stir them.
On my removing my fingers from his eyes, all ceased and he
was again in a heavy and unbroken sleep. This case was
somewhat similar to some of those Mr. Acland describes ; and
it proves that the effects of suggestion can be produced in the


* They are in some cases clearly the result of suggestion : but in others clearly
mesmeric, as shewn by me in No. III., pp. 240-4. The mesmeric excitement of
distinct cerebral organs is possible not in this stage only, but in all the states ex-
cepting deep coma; and even in the common normal waking state (see No. XII.,
p- 481): and so are traction, rigidity, &c., &c., and suggestion.—J. EL.1orson.

+ The patient sometimes has an hallucination and fancies himself to be an-
other person.—J. E.


By Mr. Cane. 151


sleeping as well as in the waking state, and thus tends to break
down that arbitrary distinction between mesmerism and bio-
logy which Mr. Stone would have us take for granted.

Some time afterwards I lost sight of this individual; but
lately, being at one of Mr. Stone’s lectures while he was act-
ing on a soldier among the audience, over whom he had pre-
viously established his power, I was struck with a resemblance
in the gait and expression of this man to that which J. P. had
in the unconscious state. I cried out, “ All right,” to him
pretty loudly, but he did not seem to hear me; indeed, but
for the open state of his eyes, I might have believed that he
was altogether in this second stage I have spoken of. As it
was, I would say he was in an intermediate degree between
my first and second stages.

I have thus, Sir, seen those phenomena of suggestion as
well in the sleeping as in the waking state; and produced as
well by the usual mesmeric means of passes and gazing as by
staring at the loud-sounding disk: and am I not then justi-
fied in holding this “ electro-biology ” to be, not a manifes-
tation of nature distinct from mesmerism, but merely a more
easily produced species, or first stage, of it ?

In concluding, Sir, allow me to express to you my sincere
admiration of your abilities and courage, and of your stern
devotion to the cause of truth, and to remain,

Your obedient servant,


Rosert Emmet Cane.
Kilkenny, Ireland, April 20th, 1852.


Note by Dr. Elliotson: including a letter from Mr. Joseph
Aylieff.

I beg to communicate to you a letter from Mr. Joseph
Aylieff, whose experiments I alluded to in No. XXXIIL,
p- 111. He was told of the method by a person who had
learnt it from Mr. Dods: and, as he practised without quack-
ery, using no disks, not talking of electricity, not pressing
particular parts, not pretending to any sort of secret, and
therefore not attempting to extract money from the ignorant
by pretending he had any secret to sell, I forward his letter
with great pleasure.—Joun ELLiotson.


“St. Mary Cray, March 21st, 1852.

“ Sir,—Having attended a small party at Farnborough,—

a village about three miles from this place,—and my success
being of an unprecedented nature, I am induced to forward
you the particulars thereof. I tried my powers upon seven-


152 The Roman Catholic Priesthood and Mesmerism.


teen individuals of both sexes, and succeeded in impressing
thirteen of the number, taking each person separately, and
not all of them in a body, as generally practised. Seven in-
dividuals were labouring under the fancied effects of intoxi-
cation at the same moment, exhibiting various peculiarities
and different stages of its effects: three were in a deep sleep,
insensible to sound or feeling when pinched, pricked, and sub-
jected to various tests at the discretion of the audience: the
other four, amongst whom was the son of the medical gen-
tleman, Dr. Fowler, were completely helpless, unable to arti-
culate distinctly, partially raising themselves and again fall-
ing down in ridiculous positions. The whole were aroused
instantaneously by a word and sudden stamp on the floor by
myself. Not one of these persons had I had any previous
interview or communication with. They were principally
strong, robust, and healthy. Twelve I controlled so that they
could not move an inch from the wall, I having requested
them to place themselves in a line before me. Then I caused
each to fall in a stiffened state towards me. Much amuse-
ment was occasioned by some of them ringing a hand-bell
and being unable to stop the motion : smoking the handle of
it under the impression of its being a cigar, pipe, &c.: by my
affecting their sense of personal identity, causing them to
ride chairs as imaginary horses, to suffer excruciating pains,
perspiration to start on their face. Indeed I used every expe-
riment I could think of, arresting them in the act of leaving
the room, compelling them to resume their seats, and to
assert their thorough conviction of the truths of mesmerism.
I was warmly applauded, and invited to attend the following
week.

“T know not whether to attribute my success to the pre-
vious spreading of fame, or té a power of determination I
feel increasing upon every occasion that arises for gaining
converts to the extraordinary power of mental influence.

“Three of my subjects were agricultural labourers of strong
and vigorous frames. In three public trials I have produced
the effects on 27 individuals out of 40.

“T am, Sir, your obedient servant,
“To Dr. Elliotson.” “ JosepH AYLIEFF.


IV. The Roman Catholic Priesthood and Mesmerism. By
Ant1-GLori0oso.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Rue Richelieu, Paris, May 3rd, 1852.
Sir,—I was glad to perceive; that in your last number,


By Anti-Glorioso. ; 153


p- 100, you referred to a misapprehension which is unfortu-
nately somewhat prevalent, viz., that the employment of mes-
merism, as a remedial agent, is expressly forbidden in the
Church of Rome: There can be no greater mistake. Certain
statements and opinions, and certain assumed facts, (which
statements, opinions and facts were both erroneous in them-
selves, and built on most erroneous data,) were communi-
cated to the highest ecclesiastical authorities, and the question
was asked,—“ Is this system right, and are we permitted to
make use of such a power?” The answer was—“ By no means,
accordingly as you represent it ; (prout exponitur) for, if your
representation be correct, the art is clearly illicit.” Now that
was simply the nature of the response which was given. A
false or incorrect account is rendered of a science,—and then
the authorities are interrogated as to its propriety and legality.
It is clear that the answer is conditional,—i. e., contingent
upon the picture which is painted being a faithful portraiture.
It need hardly be added, that the representation was a dis-
torted caricature,—some such a description as that which
M‘Neile and “Charlotte Elizabeth ” formerly put forth in the
Protestant Church.

It is, therefore, important that it should be well under-
stood that it is in this sense and with these qualifications
that numerous members of the Church of Rome receive the
official answer. Several ecclesiastics have given, and con-
tinue to give, their warmest sanction to mesmerism. They
conceive rightly enough that the answer of Cardinal Cas-
tracane does not touch the real merits of mesmerism in the
slightest degree. Among the most eminent of its friends
may be numbered, as you justly mention in your note, the
eloquent Dominican Preacher—the Abbé Lacordaire. A more
distinguished name can hardly be referred to in all Paris: and
perhaps it may not be unpleasant to some of your readers,
especially to those of the Roman Catholic persuasion, to re-
ceive some testimony corroborative of your assertion.

I was passing, not long ago, down a passage which leads
into the Rue Vivienne, when my eyes were attracted by an
affiche at a bookseller’s stall, announcing a.sermon by Le
Pere Lacordaire on the subject of Magnetism. I went in,
and purchased the book, in which it was contained, entitled,
“ Le Monde Occulte ou Mystéres du Magnétisme, Précédé d’une
Introduction sur le Magnétisme par Le Pére Lacordaire. Par
Henri Delaage.” The book contains a good deal of useful
matter, and a large amount of insufferable trash. The tricks
and impositions of professional somnambules are well exposed,
and some new and curious anecdotes connected with the

VOL, X. M


154 The Roman Catholic Priesthood and Mesmerism.


unrivalled clairvoyant Alexis are also given: but sundry wild
notions about spiritualism, the “ mysteries of eternity,” and
the revelations of Cahagnet’s dreamers, shew so clearly the
main tendencies of the writer that a further analysis of his
opinions would be quite unnecessary. The interesting pas-
sage in the book is the introduction relating to the Abbé
Lacordaire, which, with your permission, I will now present
to your readers in an English dress.

“It was the month of December, 1846. In spite of the
snow which enveloped the earth, a numerous crowd filled the
vast nave of Notre Dame, impatient of hearing the voice of
inspiration eloquently unfold the problem of eternity. Soon
all eyes were turned towards the pulpit, in which the white
habit of the order of St. Dominic had just made its appear-
ance. The cowl thrown backward allowed the shaven head
of the preacher to appear: a man with an elevated forehead,
an animated eye, a spiritual lip, and a countenance of varied
expression. This preacher was Lacordaire. With the first
sounds of a thin and trembling voice, he swayed his hearers,
and held them captive under his word. Lacordaire, that day,
and in the presence of a most enlightened audience, ap-
proached one of the most stirring questions which have agi-
tated the nineteenth century : that question was Magnetism.”
We will bring forward a few passages from his discourse on
that occasion.

“T will without scruple allude to the accusation that
Christ had recourse to occult and magnetic powers for the
performance of his miracles: this charge is easily disproved :
as science not only disclaims such powers, but rejects them.
However I prefer obeying the dictates of my conscience to
those of science. You then invoke magnetic power. I like-
wise believe im it firmly and sincerely. I believe that its
effects have been verified by learned and candid men, more-
over by Christian men, although as yet in an imperfect man-
ner, and one which may always continue such. I believe
that these phenomena in the generality of cases are purely
natural. I believe that the secret of them has never been
lost to the world, that it has been transmitted from one age
to another, that it has caused a multitude of mysterious ac-
tions in which its power is easily recognized, and that it is
only in our day that it has passed out of the shades of dark-
ness because the present age is peculiarly stamped with the
spirit of enquiry. I believe all this. Yes, gentlemen, as a
holy safeguard from the pride of materialism, as a check to
that science which would attempt to soar beyond its allotted
limits, God has permitted that there should exist an irregu-


By Anti-Glorioso. 155


larity in the powers of nature, at variance with the laws of
science. God has permitted this in order to prove to man,
content with his own wisdom, that even without revelation
we have within us revealings of a higher order of being;
awful glimpses of the invisible world—of a kind of crater,
into which the soul, emancipated for a moment from the pow-
erful fetters of the body, plunges through depths it cannot
fathom, and of which it retains no recollection, but which
fully warn it that the present state conceals a future, in com-
parison with which our existing state is a mere void.

“ All this is true—I believe it; but it is likewise true that
these unknown powers are so restrained as to exercise no
dominion over the laws of nature. Plunged into an artificial
sleep man sees through opaque bodies to a certain distance ;
he prescribes remedies fitted to relieve, and even to cure
bodily diseases; he appears to know things of which he was
previously unconscious, and which he forgets the moment he
wakes ; and at his will he exercises great power over those
with whom he is in magnetic communication. All this is
painful, laborious, mingled with feelings of uncertainty and
depression : it is far more a phenomenon of the mind than of
action, a phenomenon which belongs more to the prophetic .
than to the supernatural class. For instance, we never see a
sudden cure as an evident act of absolute power,—and as to
the claim of prophecy, nothing can be of a lower order than
its pretensions.”

We are not called upon to defend either the logic or phi-
losophy of the preacher: the point claiming attention is
the warm support which Father Lacordaire has here given to
mesmerism. First, then, it appears that the Church of Rome
has not under all circumstances, simply and plainly, forbidden
its use. The Sacred Penitentiary, presuming that mesmerism
was such as was set forth in the case reported to it, decided
that a power so characterized was not permissible. Secondly,
it follows that, as the description of mesmerism given in the
letter to Rome was erroneous, the answer founded on that
description is not to be received by Roman Catholics as a
prohibition. And thirdly, we see that one of the most emi-
nent churchmen of the day, the Abbé Lacordaire, so under-
stands the answer, and has given his warm adhesion to the
practice of the science.

IT am, Sir, yours, &c.,
Ant1-GLorIoso.


_ PS. It is universally felt that The Zoist well maintains
its ground. The last was an admirable number. I have
M2


156 A domestic proof of the


observed with pleasure the able papers which have appeared
on the subject of electro-biology. It is necessary that the
right position of that system should be well understood by
mesmerisers. And Dr. Elliotson, too, acted wisely in again
introducing the facts connected with his retirement from Uni-
versity College Hospital. The grossest misstatements are re-
peated, year after year, by medical men upon this subject,
and upon the cases of the Okeys; and their refutation cannot
appear too often.


*,* We have received the following information from a
Scotch correspondent.—Zoist.

“I do not know if you are aware that Cardinal Wiseman,
in a public lecture on ‘The Communion and Invocation of
Saints,’ lately made the following reference to mesmerism.
In reply to the objection, ‘How do I know that the saints
can hear me?’ he says,—‘ A strange objection this for such an
age as the present, when men of science believe and profess
that they can draw out from a poor cataleptic patient a know-
ledge of what is passing in America—aye, and in the unseen
world. If the mind unaided can know things at a distance,
* it is surely not much to believe in a power which this age
proves to be within the range of physical laws.’ The whole
lecture is reported in the Weekly Telegraph newspaper for
Saturday, March 13, 1852.”


V. A domestic proof of the truth and value of Mesmerism.
By Mr. Simmonps, London.


‘* Mrs. Elizabeth Wildman begs to inform Mrs. Field,* that Dr. Rowef has
POSITIVELY FORBIDDEN the lady} being mesmerised, therefore her services will
not be required.

** 10, Cumberland Terrace, Regent’s Park, Oct. 26th, 1850.”


9, Upper Fitzroy Street, Fitzroy Square.
May 14th, 1852.

Srr,—I have been induced, from reading the cases of
benefit from mesmerism recorded in The Zoist, to think that
the following might be considered of sufficient importance to
be inserted.

I may perhaps be allowed to state that it is now about
seven years since I first felt inclined to try some experiments


* A most respectable mesmeriser, residing at No. 18, Newland Street, Eaton
Square.— Zoist.

t We are not sure that the name is properly spelt by the lady.— Zoist.

+ Mrs. S. K. Lushington, Norton Court, Feversham, to whom the forbidding
doctor was doing no good.—Zoist.


|


|


truth and value of Mesmerism. 157


to satisfy myself of the truth of mesmerism, as I had heard
many remarkable accounts of it and had read the works of
Messrs. Sandby, Townshend, Teste and others. My subject
was my brother, a lad of eight years of age. After a few
trials I found I could produce the phenomena recorded by
them, such as rigidity of the limbs, the phrenological mani-
festations, sympathy of taste, feeling, &c., as also some strik-
ing proofs of the faculty of introvision. Some time after this,
he had a large and painful swelling on the under side of the
face, arising, I believe, from weakness of the glands of the
neck. At the recommendation of our medical adviser, Mr.
Dansey, poultices were applied to increase the suppuration :
and, after a time, it was thought best to lance it, that the
scar might be less when healed than it would have been if
allowed to break of itself. But, as he was so young and the
pain likely to be intense, mesmerism was proposed and con-
sented to; and the operation was to be performed on the fol-
lowing morning, May the 13th, 1846. Not having mes-
merised him for several months, I put him to sleep three
times during the day, and tested his insensibility to pain by
pricking, pinching, &c. The next day, when Mr. Dansey
came, I had put him into a deep sleep: and we proceeded to
unfasten the bandage round his head, and to place him in a
favourable position. An incision was then ake, sufficiently
large to allow the matter to be pressed from the wound till it
seemed all extracted. During the whole of the time not the
slightest expression of pain was manifested. I asked him if
he knew who was with us: he said, yes, but that he felt no
pain. We now thought of testing whether he would have
any knowledge of it when awake: and, to do this, it was
suggested that Mr. Dansey should leave the house, that the
handkerchief round his head should be replaced, and every
thing arranged in the room as it was prior to his being put
to sleep. This was done, and I awoke him. He made no
allusion to what had taken place, but got up and ran away to
play as he had been accustomed to do on other occasions.
The next morning, he saw that the wound had discharged,
and thought it had broken during the night. It was not till
some weeks afterwards that he knew anything of it ; and he
was very surprised when made acquainted with it.

The facts occurred just as I have stated, at Blandford in
Dorsetshire : and, should any one be desirous of ascertaining
the truth of them, Mr. Dansey, who was a sceptic at the time,
will confirm the statements I have made.

I beg to remain, Sir, yours respectfully,


Joun SIMMONDS.
To the Editor of The Zoist.


( 158 )


VI. Last Meeting of the Bristol Mesmeric Institute,* with
details of cases by Dr. Storer: Tic Douloureux, Extreme
Nervousness, Palpitation, Disabling Tremors, Dimness of
Sight, Asthma, Sleeplessness, Despondency and suicidal
tendency, Palsy, Debility, Rheumatism ; painless Surgical
Operations ; Cures aided by Suggestion to the Imagination.

“ Watt in 1744 was determinedly opposed by all engineers, particularly by
Smeaton, who went to great expense to make Newcomen’s engine equal to
Watt’s, and made even one on Newcomen’s principle, though Watt offered to
put up one for him, taking for his remuneration only one-third of the saving in
working his own engine.

‘* Within twenty years, when Stephenson was examined before the House of
Commons and talked of going ten miles an hour, one M.P. observing his Scotch
aceent, asked if he were a Scotchman: and another M.P. replied, ‘ No; a mad-
man |’ ”’—Ezxtracted by me from some book: but I forget what.—J. ExiioTson.

A clergyman who was present informed me that, as Stephenson was leaving
the room, an M.P. who was highly amused at Stephenson’s saying he would take
us ten miles an hour by steam, called after him in derision, ‘‘ I suppose you could
take us twenty miles, Mr. Stephenson :’’ and that Stephenson, turning his head,
replied, ‘* Yes; and forty miles too.’”-—Jonn Ex.iorson.


Tue chair was taken by Mr. Janson of Exeter.

Among letters from different gentlemen who regretted
their absence was one from Mr. Barham of Clifton, who in
it observed,—


**That the question had often been asked, ‘ What is the use of
mesmerism?’ Mesmerism is useful: 1. Because the phenomena it
reveals in the sphere of philosophy, confirm and illustrate, by a
a of analogy, many phenomena in the sphere of revelation, and
thus tend to give a new and grand development to the argument of
Bishop Butler, in his Analogy of Religion and Nature. 2. Mesmerism
is useful, because it confirms and illustrates a great multitude of pas-
sages in the ancient classics, oriental and occidental, which had per-
plexed the critics for ages. I especially allude to passages relating
to mythologic initiations, and occult sciences and arts, not to men-
tion medicine and therapeutics, as an author has fully proved, in his
work, entitled, Isis Revelata. 3. Mesmerism is useful, because it
unfolds some of the most important principles and laws of pneuma-
tology, psychology, and metaphysics. In connection with phreno-
logy it has thrown more light on the profound mysteries of our
mental being than all the modern metaphysicians have ever afforded.
4. Mesmerism is useful, because it can give sleep precisely on those
occasions in which sleep is most requisite, and yet most difficult to
procure by other means. 5. Mesmerism is useful, because it cures
several diseases, mental and bodily, which have defied every other


* This communication ought to have appeared long ago: but was unavoid-
ably postponed. We regret to hear that the Institution exists no longer: and
this from dissension and mismanagement. We shall specify nothing: but the
Institution might have succeeded admirably. The mesmerisers were not all paid :
and workers can rarely be depended upon without remuneration unless they are
solitary labourers. In the London Mesmeric Infirmary are four paid mesmer-
isers : and there is perfect harmony : no one desiring to turn it or mesmerism to
his own advantage.—Zoist.


Bristol Mesmeric Institute. 159
method of treatment. 6. Mesmerism is useful, because it increases
the strength and restores the balance of the constitution ; it accumu-
lates energy, and invigorates sensation : besides it frequently removes
pain, calms agitation, and enables the patient to pass triumphantly
through the most terrible operations of surgery. 7. Mesmerism is
useful by revealing the connection that subsists between the spheres
of mental, nervous, and electrical light, and illustrating their resem-
blances and their differences. 8. Mesmerism is useful, because it
reveals and explains many curious phenomena of sleep and somnam-
bulism. 9. Mesmerism is useful, because it reveals the vast extent
and development of mental consciousness, within the body, and with-
out it, independent of the operation of the ron senses. 10.
Mesmerism is useful as proving the power of mental volition over
men and animals. 11. Mesmerism is useful, because it often cures
the disorders of insanity, nervousness, and hypochondriasis, which
are too subtle to be defeated by other applications. Finally, mes-
merism is useful, because it teaches the lesson of reverence for that
Being who has made his image man so wonderfully and so fearfully ;
and it enforces the great lesson taught us by Hamlet, when he says,


‘ There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in our philosophy.’


What wonder is it that mesmerism should have so rapidly extended
in its influence and authority, when we consider that its uses are as |
numerous as its proofs, and only require full examination to produce
full conviction !””


Mr, Ryland, the Secretary, read the report, which stated,


“‘That they could not but rejoice that the Bristol Mesmeric In-
stitute had fally realized the intention of its promotors. He said
fully only in regard to the great amount of good effected by small
means, the fact of which they would ascertain when the medical
officer presented his report. In order to enable them to do all the
good they would desire, the public must aid them more substantially.
At their last annual meeting upwards of 40 cases had been under
treatment ; on the present occasion he had pleasure in informing
them that from 60 to 70 patients had been cured, or materially bene-
fitted, and to effect which the subscriptions, donations, and receipts
received had been under £50. They must bear in mind that the
cases were usually protracted and long ones, and where medical as-
sistance in general had proved ineffectual. They had to thank their
worthy physician for his constant and unwearied services, and his
labours had been continually assisted by his kind lady, Mrs. Storer.
They had been obliged to refuse numerous applicants, but they
trusted the public would enable them by increased assistance to
effect a far greater amount of benefit.

‘Dr. Storer then read the medical report, which stated that at
the last public meeting 47 cases of diseases were mentioned as hav-
ing come under the notice of the medical officers. Since that period


160 Bristol Mesmeric Institute.


67 cases had been admitted, making upwards of 100, among which
had been comprised the most serious and complicated cases of dis-
ease, such as paralysis, epilepsy, mental aberration, tic douloureux,
deafness, defective sight, rheumatism, hysteria, with other affections
of the nervous system, besides several painless operations. The ma-
jority had been greatly relieved, several of the most distressing dis-
eases cured, including all the varieties stated. Many of the patients,
having been too ill to attend at the Institution, had been provided
with the necessary attendance at their homes; and others, though
receiving great good, did not continue long enough to experience
more fully the benefits of mesmerism. There were 12 patients re-
maining under treatment, all more or less progressive. Many of
these cases were of the worst description, and the rejected of the
Infirmary, the General Hospital, and the Bath Hospital. As a me-
dical man, he (Dr. Storer) used mesmerism as an adjunct. There
were many cases in which medicine did no good, but mesmerism had
been effectual in all. On this point he could speak from much expe-
perience, having when in London been an officer in a public hospital
where he saw a large variety of nervous disease, in which ordinary
medicine failed ; but the same class of disease had yielded to mes-
merism. He regretted that as a medical man he stood alone, and re-
ceived so little support; the profession however were too well aware
that in the diseases referred to they had little control.

' ** Mr. J. B. Parker, of Exeter, in moving the adoption of the
report, observed that he had not come there to boast of mesmerism,
but to bear his testimony to the great good which had been effected
by the science. It was the same in Exeter as it was here, and, as
Dr. Storer had said, he (Mr.'P.) also stood alone there; but he
eared not for that, as he had the cause of truth to support him
(cheers). All they had to attend to was the curative powers of mes-
merism, and the science of mesmerism was not confined to geogra-
phical position. The pains of labour, and the pains of childhood
may be relieved by the science, and also cases of cancer. All the
ancient writings contained proofs of the agency of mesmerism. They
had to do only with the curative powers of mesmerism, and if they
tried it for themselves, they would soon be convinced of its efficacy.
He would tell them of the case of a lad, whose father was deranged,
and the boy also, from overstudy at school, got deranged, and me-
dical men pronounced the case hopeless. He (Mr. P.) went for him,
brought him a distance of 10 miles, and under the treatment of
mesmerism the boy recovered, and is now living and well (hear,
hear). If mesmerism could relieve such an extreme case of insanity,
what may it not do in the relief of other cases—19 cases out of 20
may be cured by its agency (hear, hear). It had been said that
mesmerism was an agent of the devil, but the day was not far dis-
tant when those who condemned mesmerism would be looked upon
as enemies of society. He looked forward to the day when educa-
tion would be conducted on the principles of phrenology—conducted
on the principles of mesmerism. The words of Lord Bacon with


|


—
—


-
ee ‘ — a —


:
|


oo IR PS Ahan,


ee


a


nn |
ees


Bristol Mesmeric Institute. 161
respect to the ant, the spider, and the bee, were applicable with
respect to knowledge, and he hoped that what he had said that day
would be brought to reality (hear, hear).

**Mr. Brooke Smith seconded the resolution. Mesmerism had
been objected to as being a trick and delusion, but his own experi~
ence had given him many opportunities of seeing the experiments of
Dr. Storer and others, and he was quite satisfied they were bona fide.

“Mr. Mead bore testimony to the good effects of mesmerism,
and said he fully concurred in the observation of Mr. Parker, that
education ought to be founded on the principles of phrenology and
mesmerism.

“Mr. Phelps also related some very extraordinary cures which
had been effected by himself with the aid of mesmerism.

‘The Chairman observed that there was one point in Dr. El-
liotson’s letter which he had not sufficiently dwelt upon, which was
respecting the new General Hospital, expressing a wish that mes-
merism may be introduced there and in every hospital in England.

**Dr. Storer said it was very desirable that mesmerism should be
introduced into the New Hospital. They had no wish to keep up
the Mesmeric Institute if that could be done.

**A vote of thanks to the Chairman, on the motion of Mr.


Parker, having been carried and acknowledged, the meeting sepa-
rated.”


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.
Cases in connexion with the Bristol Mesmeric Institute.


Sir,—The large number of cases which have presented
themselves at the Bristol Mesmeric Institute, and which have
been cured or greatly relieved, prove how useful mesmerism
may be made amongst the poorer classes. I hope gradually
to present these to the public; but, as a medical man, I am
aware that repeated details would become tedious. I have
therefore selected the present as conveying types of similar
diseases, and as proving how much can be done by steady
perseverance. The cases now sent were all of very long
standing ; the patients were at first too ill to come out, and
almost all name a large number of medical gentlemen who
had previously attended, or under whose care they had been
at various hospitals or other public institutions. They also
all continue to enjoy comparatively good health.

I am, Sir, yours obediently,
Bristol. Henry Srorer, M.D.


Severe Tic Douloureux with other nervous affections.
Mrs. B., widow, applied for advice in June, 1849. She
had suffered from severe pains in the head and face for years,


162 Bristol Mesmeric Institute.
and had frequent attacks of erysipelas in various parts of the
body. She got no rest at night, and from constant pains
became depressed in mind. She had tried a variety of means,
and been so severely salivated that her gums and teeth have
suffered great injury: many of the teeth were loose, and
there was a constant flow of saliva.

She was first mesmerised for a fortnight by myself, and
then admitted at the institute, where she was chiefly operated
upon by Mrs. Storer and the assistant.

Within the first week an impression was made; the pains
being somewhat less violent, and her sleep improved. She
attended regularly for two months, and by the end of that
period expressed herself so much better that she discontinued
for a short time. Her occupation—that of a pew-opener—
exposed her to constant draughts, which brought on a slight
return of her pains; but, by resuming mesmerism for another
month, she got quite well, and has remained so now a
twelvemonth.

No actual coma was induced by mesmerism, but a most
lulling, pleasant drowsiness, which made her always regret
when the sitting was over.


Extreme Dimness of Sight, with sleeplessness.

Mrs. G., aged 32, residing at Alden’s Court, Broadmead,
applied in April, 1849. She said that her sight was so im-
paired that she could hardly see to read, or do her work : and,
as she has a family and is unable to use her needle, she feels
it a great drawback. She gets very little sleep, and complains
of great general debility, with depression of spirits: had tried
every form of advice and medicines, but without any benefit ;
and at last, from the known good done to others by mes-
merism, was very anxious to have it applied in her own case.
I mesmerised her for the first few days, but, being poor, she
was allowed the benefit of the institute. She continued mes-
merism regularly for two months ; at the end of that time she
expressed herself quite well.

She became very susceptible, so as to have good sound
sleep induced in less than three minutes, and always awoke
refreshed. She was also suckling a baby, which partook of
the general irritability ; but, on both being mesmerised together
for a few times, the baby became as improved as the mother.
The sight continues fully restored, and the general restless-
ness removed. She expresses herself to be now quite free
from all her former ailments.

“ This last report is now many months from her previous
illness.


—— ~


Bristol Mesmeric Institute. 163

The amount of good that can be done with mesmerism
amongst children, applied properly and perseveringly, is very
great. Even bad tempers can in this way be greatly im-
proved.


Case of Despondency and suicidal tendency.

John Hobbs, residing at Church Lane, St. Phillip’s, ap-
plied January, 1849. Stated that he had been deranged
three times, and had been twice an inmate of a lunatic asy-
lum. His friends advised him to try mesmerism. Being
very poor, he was admitted a patient at the institute in March.
I had previously attended him for a month, and had produced
some marked effects upon him. He was a tailor, but no one
would employ him, though he was able to work and said to
be a good workman.

By a continuance in mesmerism for three months, he was
greatly improved. His peculiar aberration was a morbid
desire to destroy himself. His wife and family were obliged
to be removed for some time lest he should commit violence
upon them. After four months’ treatment he was enabled to
resume his trade, and went by my advice to a different lo-
cality, where he is in good work ; and his family is restored
to him. When I was in Wales some time since, he accosted
me, and was so greatly improved in health and circumstances
that I hardly knew him to be the same man.

The marked effect referred to was excitement of particular
cerebral organs. Just previously to waking him, and after
he was demesmerised, I usually excited certain organs, such
as those of Mirthfulness, Firmness, and the whole moral
region. So fully did these respond, that the patient admitted
the feeling of joy and hope to last for some hours; and, on
one or two occasions when I omitted the excitement of his
organs in his waking state, he has returned, and begged me
to do as I usually did to him.


Severe Rheumatism with Palsy and long-standing Asthma.

Thomas Cooper, aged 63, residing at Bedminster near
Bristol, a married man with children, has been suffering from
fifteen to twenty years with most extreme pains and distress
from varied attacks of rheumatism and asthma. The rheu-
matic affection was so extreme as to be considered by his me-
dical attendants to be combined with partial paralysis. His
limbs have been swollen and disabled, and are quite stiff from
repeated attacks; he has had the best advice, been in the
Bristol Infirmary and Bath Hospital, and considered himself
no better when he last came out. He has continued much


164 Bristol Mesmeric Institute.


in the same state for the last two years. Becoming very de-
sirous to try mesmerism, was admitted in October, 1849, and
continued a patient for three months.

By a steady perseverance he was most essentially relieved
within a south. At the end of the second month he was so
much better that his pains had nearly left him, and the
asthma was so far relieved that he went to bed comfortably
and had good nights. He was enabled after the third month
to walk to the institute in less than half an hour, though
previously it took him from an hour to an hour and a half.
He was also mesmerised at home for some time, and by the
end of the fourth month expressed himself nearly well, and
most grateful for the benefits received.

He was highly susceptible in the mesmeric state, and,
being of a religious turn of mind, would under the mesmeric
excitement of the organs of Veneration and Language give
utterance to ideas and sentiments which he was quite un-
equal to express in his natural state. Advantage was taken
of this to excite the action of the muscular system ; and this
excitement answered well, when we consider his age and his
present near approach to perfect health.


Palpitation and general Debility.

Mrs. H. had been suffering for some years from palpita-
tion of the heart, with pains on each side, languor and ge-
neral debility, and very disturbed sleep. She had tried every
available means until her attention had been directed to mes-
merism by her friends; she then consulted me, and was
attended for three weeks by myself, afterwards at the insti-
tute. Within two months she was so decidedly better, that
she hardly knew herself to be the same person. She however
persevered for three months, and at the end of that time felt
herself so well that she thought she could safely give up
mesmerism. I allowed her to try; but, a slight relapse com-
ing on, she continued mesmerism for another month, and
has now the satisfaction of being quite well except under par-
ticular excitements, and then a few administrations of mes-
merism entirely relieve her. She shewed all the varied
phenomena up to clairvoyance. She expresses herself truly
grateful for the benefits received.

The utility of commands was well evinced in this case ;
and, by a proper regulation, they were the means of averting
threatened attacks of pain and the particular excitements
before referred to. She has never been better in her life,
and it is now twelve months since she has been mesmerised
for any ailments.


Bristol Mesmeric Institute. 165


Extreme Tremor and Nervousness, with pain.

George Morgan was admitted in September, 1850. His
account was, that he had been suffering for nearly two years
from extreme nervous feelings, which at times affected his
system so violently that he was considered to be under at-
tacks of ague, and treated accordingly; but without any
good. The attacks became more violent, and he could never
consider himself free from pain. He was a shoemaker, but,
from the constant trembling upon him, he was unable to
continue his occupation. He had tried everything that had
been suggested by various medical men, but without effect.

He was mesmerised daily for a month, and by the end of
that time began to feel himself much better. His sleep has
become more composed, and he can hold a tool steadily, which
he had not been able to do since his illness. He continued
mesmerism for three months under a friend who had beer
instructed for the purpose, and by the end of that time be-
came so well as to be able gradually to resume his work,
leaving Bristol for a change, and finding employment where
he was. He now resides in the country, and has called on
several occasions to shew himself, and return thanks for the
benefits received.

After the first month the effects of mesmerism in his


waking state were very sensibly shewn. The tremor could
be overcome by passes made down the arms or legs, and this
improved state would last for a considerable time, giving him
perfect command over his ordinary pursuits, and enabled him
more readily to resume his business.


Painless Operations in Surgery.
Several cases of what are called minor operations have
been performed without pain. These include cases of teeth
extraction, the application of caustic to various parts of the
body, such as the eye, nose, and throat; all generally con-
sidered in the waking state to be very sensitive parts. Thus
in one patient I have applied caustic upwards of twenty times
to the throat and nose. In her natural state she is so sensi-
tive that she shudders at the approach of my hand. Her
ailments are yielding, but without mesmerism no progress
would have been made. Tumors and abscesses, which are
also painful, have been operated upon without the knowledge
of the patients.
Several dentists have at various times extracted teeth, as
I prefer calling in dentists who have not before operated in
the mesmeric state. Mr. Hart, of Park Street, lately ope-
rated on two occasions, extracting four teeth. His convic-


166 Bristol Mesmeric Institute.


tions were most firmly expressed, that the operations were
performed without the knowledge of the patients.


Benefit of suggesting to the Imagination.

This is absurdly termed electro-biology. In the Third
Volume of The Zoist is a most interesting communication
from Dr. Buchanan, of America, to Dr. Elliotson, in which it
appears that all which has been lately demonstrated in this
country, and far more, had been some time previously per-
formed by that gentleman. I am glad to say that I have
found suggestion to the imagination of great use where time
and circumstances did not allow of the more lengthened period
required by the usual application of mesmerism. A large
number of patients are constantly applying for admission to
the institute, but, our means being so very limited, only a
few can be received.

I have on several occasions tried the varied susceptibilities
of parties applying, and, generally finding two or three who
have fallen sufficiently under the influence, have admitted
them.

I will now add the results of three cases which during last
summer came under my notice.


Tic Douloureux and Palsy.

One was that of a stout man, a mariner, who had suf-
fered from palsy of the left side for three years. He was
quite prevented from work, and had tried every available
means of relief. I placed him amongst others to try his
susceptibility by the use of the zinc and copper coin with
occasional passes. He was the first affected, and, passing him
into the deeper mesmeric state, I was enabled to act upon
his limbs in a very satisfactory way. On arousing him he
scarcely knew what had transpired. I repeated the experi-
ments in his apparently waking state, and induced motions
in his arms and legs that astonished him- By himself he was
quite unequal to these movements until after the fourth sit-
ting, when I caused him to exercise his arms and legs, and
this power was retained for a considerable time.

He was operated upon for a few times, and at the end of
a month was enabled to resume his usual duties.


Violent Tic Douloureus.

John Peat, a respectable mechanic, presented himself.
He said he had been a martyr to tic douloureux for some
months. All ordinary means had failed. He could not work
half his time on account of these attacks, and sometimes
was laid by for weeks together.


Cases by Mr. Saunders of Bristol. 167


Trying him with others in June last, I soon saw he was
readily influenced : and, as he was then suffering acute pain,
I confined my attention chiefly to him, and in less than ten
minutes he was asleep. I made passes over the head and
face, and, before arousing him, told him he would wake up
free from pain. This turned out to be the fact, and the pain
did not return until the following day, on which he came as
requested. I now operated in the apparently waking state,
and quite subdued the pain, and gave him reason to believe
it might not return. To this he was quite incredulous. I
desired him to come the following day with his daughter,
promising to give her instructions how to proceed. The poor
man had suffered no return of the pain when he came again.
His daughter then locally mesmerised him under proper di-
rections night and morning for three weeks, and, except on
one or two occasions, he has been quite free from pain. This
freedom has continued now for many months. He considers
himself cured, and says he cannot express too much gratitude,
having previously suffered so long and severely.


Paralysis.

A youth, about 14 years old, sent to the institute by a
gentleman. He had suffered from paralysis of the arms and
legs for three years, and was nearly unable to walk. He
shewed evident symptoms of being easily acted upon at the
first sitting. He was operated upon several times in succes-
sion, and so successfully, that after the third day he was
made to use his arms most freely, to walk and run very
quickly and against his will, so as to make him believe he
was beside himself. By the end of a month he was quite
well.

The above cases were witnessed by a large number of per-
sons, as I was then giving demonstrations at the Rooms, and
at these meetings I presented the patients to give their own
accounts of ailments and cures.


VII. Cases by Mr. Saunders of Bristol. Rheumatism ; Pain
from a burn; Bleeding and possibly a Fit in a Rabbit ;
Pain and Helplessness in a Cat from being run over ;
Rheumatism ; Tooth-ache.*

‘«The ignorance of the Mexicans is equal to their superstition. We were


amused at an instance afforded us in the case of a schoolmaster. While describ-
ing to him the modes of travelling in America, we told him about the steamers,


* These cases have been unavoidably deferred as long as those of Dr. Storer.
—Zoist.


168 Cases by Mr. Saunders of Bristol.


at which he was not much surprised, having heard of them before: but, when we
told him of the railroad, he listened with the same incredulity with which the
king of Siam heard the missionaries describe ice ; and, when we told him of the
telegraph, he slowly arose, wrapped bis serape around him, and moved off, with-
out deigning us a word or a look.””—Sixteen Months in the Gold Diggings. By
D. B. Wood.
I. Rheumatism.

A man by the name of Charles Jennings, who had occasion
to call on me, was observed by my clerk, Mr. Pester, to carry
his head very much to one side: and, upon Mr. Pester ask-
ing him what ailed him, he said that he had been and was
then suffering from a most dreadful pain at the back of his
head, extending to the back of each ear. Mr. Pester made
him sit down, gave him a disk to look at, and in about ten
minutes his eyes closed. After making passes over the back
of his head and ears for about a quarter of an hour, Mr.
Pester woke him up. He said the pain was quite gone, and
he felt his head “nice and light.” In about three days he
called again, and, as he did not feel very strong, my clerk sent
him off again by means of the disk, and, after trying for some
time to stiffen his arms without success, woke him. Just at
this time I went in, and then sent him into the sleep by the
fixed gaze and pointing the fingers. He went off in about
four minutes. After making strong passes from the head
down the spine, I made two or three very strong ones along
the arms, and these became perfectly rigid: as did also his
legs. My clerk also could now cause rigidity. He went
away quite well.

I have just stated that I made some very strong passes.
What I mean is this: I fancy to myself that I have actually
some two or three hundred weight of disease at the ends of
my fingers, and that I am dragging it down. The energy
that I use upon these occasions frequently causes the per-
spiration to drop from my forehead like large peas, and 1 am
perfectly satisfied that a want of energy on the part of the
mesmeriser is, in nine cases out of ten, the chief cause of
failure. I have seen mesmerisers make passes along an arm
for half an hour at a time, as though they were brushing flue
from off a piece of velvet, without producing the slightest
rigidity. I have then made a few strong passes, and the arm
has become like a piece of iron.


II. Pain from a burn.

A lad in my employ, by the name of John Berry, came
crying to my clerk in consequence of having burnt his wrist
with the gas. It was in great pain and looked very red.
My clerk immediately mesmerised it without sending him


eer


Cases by Mr. Saunders of Bristol. 169


into the sleep, and for about a minute the pain greatly in-
creased: but, in less than three minutes more, the pain
entirely ceased, and he felt no more of it. This lad is very
susceptible of mesmerism and the phenomena of suggestion.


III. A bleeding Rabbit, probably in a fit.

My little boy came running to me to say that one of his
rabbits which had lately had a litter of young ones was very
ill. I found it stretched along the bottom of the hutch,
panting very quickly and bleeding severely from the nose and
mouth: the eyes were nearly closed, and those who saw it
pronounced it to be dying. I pointed my fingers with con-
tact just under the ear for about a quarter of an hour, when
it began rapidly to improve, the bleeding stopped, and the
eyes looked much more lively. I then left off, and in two
hours’ time the rabbit was to all appearance quite well; and it
has remained so to this time.


IV. Pain and helplessness in a Cat from being run over.

This morning, August 12, a pair of trucks were accident-
ally wheeled over a favourite white cat of ours: it cried and
struggled terribly, and was quite unable to stand upon its
legs. Some persons who were present advised its being killed
at once, as they said it was impossible for the poor thing to
recover and it would be more humane to put it out of its misery
at once. But my clerk carried it into the room, and, hold-
ing it in one hand, he mesmerised it with the other. In
about half an hour I came home, and, after mesmerising it
strongly for some time, the pain evidently subsided. The
shoulder was exceedingly hot when I commenced the passes,
but soon became quite cool, and the little animal in the course
of about an hour was running about as well as usual, with
the exception of a slight lameness, which went off in a very
few days.

V. Rheumatism.

A labouring man, John Ball, came to me with his right
arm and hand in a sling. He was suffering from rheumatism,
unable to move either his arm or hand; and the hand was
considerably swollen. He could not bear it to be touched.
My clerk sent him into the sleep with the disk in seven
minutes, and, after mesmerising his arm and hand for some
little time, he was allowed to remain in the sleep for about
ten minutes more. I then took him in hand, and made strong
passes over his arm and hand. The swelling rapidly decreased,
and, after being wakened, he went away without his sling,
and said that the improvement he had made was astonishing.
VOL. xX. N


170 Transference of the sense of Hearing.


The following day he came again; his hand continued better.
As I was out at the time, my clerk again sent him off with
the disk, and tried to make his arm rigid; but could not suc-
ceed. On my return home, finding him still asleep, I tried
to induce rigidity or catalepsy of the arms, but failed. I
then woke him up, and sent him again into the sleep by the
fixed gaze and the passes, and I then easily succeeded in
causing perfect rigidity. When I awoke him, he found his
arm and hand quite well, with the exception of a slight swell-
ing in the middle joint of his second finger. He went to
work the next day, and has had no return of his complaint.
He had suffered from attacks of rheumatism, and they
always lasted five or six weeks. This was over in two days.


VI. Tooth-ache.

A servant who has recently come to live with us, a young
woman about 24 years of age, had been a great sufferer from
tooth-ache, and had previously to her coming to us had seven
teeth extracted. Yesterday, August 17th, she was almost
distracted with a pain in one of her teeth, and it affected the
whole side of her face. My clerk made a few passes over the
face, and in a very few minutes the pain entirely ceased, and
it has not returned.

VII. Tooth-ache.

Last night, Aug. 18, my little boy, 10 years of age, was
suffering dreadfully from tooth-ache. I made about ten or
fifteen passes over the side of the face where the pain was,
and this immediately ceased, and he went to sleep.


The boy Berry, whose burn was the first of the present
cures, having been sent upon an errand, returned home crying
and limping. He had fallen down and cut his knee against
the curb of the pavement. A crowd surrounded the door,
thinking he had broken his leg. On examining the knee, I
found it very much swollen, scratched, and very red. He was
mesmerised for about half an hour, and the leg made quite
rigid. When we awoke him, he felt no pain, the swelling had
entirely disappeared, and he was able to walk without the
slightest lameness.

S. D. Saunpers.


VIII. Transference of the sense of Hearing from the Ear to the
Abdomen.


In a recent work, A Faggot of French Sticks, there is a curi-
ous confirmation of the mesmeric fact of hearing through the
stomach. In his description of the National Institution of


.


Mesmerism in Rochdale. 171


the Deaf and Dumb in Paris, the author, Sir Francis Head,
says, “I found under the charge of the Surveillant en chef,
himself deaf and dumb, 116 fine healthy-looking deaf and
dumb boys, amusing themselves at gymnastic exercises : when
all of a sudden a drum beat, on which, just as if they had
heard its roll, they all instantly desisted from their games,
fell into line, and by beat of drum, with which their feet
kept perfect time, they marched away, following the drummer-
boy, who was also deaf and dumb, ‘They cannot be per-
fectly deaf, I said ‘if they hear that drum?’ In reply, my
guide informed me that its roll had no effect on their ears, but
created an immediate vibration in their chests, which, although
in describing it he had put his hand thereon, he termed ‘ dans
Pestomac,’ ”

Here then is a proof, independent of mesmeric authority,
that sound can reach the sensorium through other channels
than the ear. If it be said that, like the ticking of a watch
held between the teeth or placed on the top of the head, the
roll of the drum is merely a vibration acting on the nerves of
the internal ear, and is not like the voice, which conveys
through the proper organ whatever ideas the speaker wishes
to express, it may be remarked in reply that, if it be admitted
that inarticulate sounds like the roll of a drum, as in the case
of the deaf boys, can affect the sensorium through the channel
of the stomach, why, where the senses are peculiarly acute in
certain stages of the mesmeric trance, should not the human
voice be capable of conveying ideas to the mind by the act of
whispering on the abdomen? If we could shew that the
vibration of light acts on the optic nerve while the eye is
shut and insensible to external objects, as the vibration of the
air affects the acoustic nerve while the ear is in a similar con-
dition, we might argue that external objects may be seen, no
less than sounds be heard, independently of the agency of
the eye and ear. May there not be a faculty in the human
organization in its abnormal state that can take cognizance
of the external world through other than the special organs
of sense?


Non-WiIst.


IX. Mesmerism in Rochdale. By Captain Hupson. Com-
municated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘*In The Zoist and elsewhere are found cases of asserted cures of epilepsy,
&e., &c., by mesmerism: but nervous complaints are so proverbially capricious
in their progress and termination, that in such cases it is impossible to ascribe
the results to any ific or r dial property of mesmerism, and hence ob-
servers have lel fallen into the post hoc, propter hoc fallacy. Dr. Fricke,


N 2


172 Mesmerism in Rochdale.


of Hamburg, has shewn that fear will supplant epilepsy, and many patients were
so cured by him in the children’s hospital. Any amendment produced by mes-
merism in such cases may therefore simply result from the emotions excited by
the process, and its employment in cancer seems simply absurd.—Mepicus.”’*
Romford, Essex, Feb. 16, 1852, [A sentence from a long and silly letter in the
Chelmsford Chronicle. ]


Durine three months Captain Hudson was successfully
engaged in demonstrating to the inhabitants of Rochdale and
its vicinity the nature and uses of mesmerism. Though
strongly opposed at the commencement of his lectures, both
by the ignorant and interested, he succeeded by patient per-
severance and a strict adherence to the truth in awakening
public attention to its utility and in making converts of
some of its bitterest enemies. During his stay, he de-
livered no less than fifty-five lectures in the Public Hall.
They were attended by audiences averaging from six hun-
dred to seven hundred persons, and composed not only of
what is termed the lower classes, said to be the most easily
imposed upon, but of magistrates, ministers, members of the
medical profession, and others of the most intelligent and
influential inhabitants of the town. These of course, espe-
cially the gentlemen of the faculty, subjected his experi-
ments to the severest scrutiny and endeavoured by every
possible means to discover some deception. But we are happy
to say that, so far from being able to do this, many of them,
both publicly and privately, confessed to the truth of mes-
merism which they had formerly opposed. Indeed, so strik-
ing were the illustrations of the power of mesmerism, that
the general opinion was that it would require more faith to
believe them to be the result of any secret understanding
between the operator and his subjects, than to give entire
credence to the fact that they are produced by a simple power
of nature with which we are as yet but imperfectly ac-
quainted; while the number publicly operated upon, amount-
ing to between fifty and sixty of both sexes, and of all ages,
some of them. young men among the strongest in the town,
has completely refuted the silly idea, that the power of mes-
merism can only be displayed on the weak-minded or the
tender and delicate.

The efficacy of the science however was most clearly esta-
blished by the Captain’s successful application of it as a
curative agent. From the time that his lectures drew the


* The anonymous Essex writer may well be ashamed to give his name: and
I trust that he is not a medical man but boastingly signs himself Medicus
instead of Vitulus.


‘* Vitulusque inermi fronte prurit in pugnam.”’
Maartrat. IIL., lviii., 11. Joun Ex.iorson.


a


nD a


By Captain Hudson, 173


attention of the public, he has been attended by from twenty
to thirty patients daily. Many of these were relieved from
pain of long continuance, had some senses completely re-
stored that had been partially lost, and limbs long consi-
dered useless restored to vigour and usefulness. The first
case which proved the curative power of mesmerism was
that of a young woman, called Amelia Swale. Thirteen
months previously, she had lost the use of her right arm.
She applied to three medical gentlemen, but none of them
could produce in it any signs of recovery. One of them
advised her to apply to Captain Hudson. She went to him
during the first month of his stay, and after a few operations
the power began to be restored. Gradually the arm grew
stronger, until, in little more than a week, she could use it
with some degree of freedom. Many prophesied that it would
soon relapse into its former helpless condition; but unhap-
pily for their foresight it continued to improve until she had
more strength in it than in the other and was able to use it
more than the other. A second striking case is that of Mrs.
Brown, the wife of a respectable draper in the town, who gives
the following testimonial :—

“77, Yorkshire Street, Rochdale,

“ March 12th, 1852.

“For five years I was afflicted with tic douloureux, and
for two years with spasms: and I was attended during that
time by physicians both in Halifax and Rochdale without
obtaining any permanent relief. When Captain Hudson
came to this town, I attended some of his lectures; and,
although I had but little faith in the science, I placed myself
under his treatment. The first time he operated upon me I
felt considerable relief: and, after several days attendance, I
was completely freed from pain. From that time my health
has continued to improve, so that I am now altogether free
from pain and enjoy better health than I had done for many
years past.

“ Gratitude constrains me to give this testimonial to the
good I have received through the influence of mesmerism.

“ Saran Brown.”


There is another from Francis Winn, a moulder, con-
nected with one of the first families in the place :—


“ Fieldhead, Rochdale, March 12th, 1852.

“ T had been suffering from a chronic inflammation in the
synorial membrane of my right knee for the last nine years.
For six of them my leg has been entirely stiff; and during


174 . Mesmerism in Rochdale.


the last twelve months I had to use crutches. I had every
description of medical advice without obtaining any relief.
Most of my physicians were of opinion that it must be cut
off. Hearing of Captain Hudson, I applied to him. Since
he began to operate upon me I have gradually improved. The
knee which was greatly swollen has been reduced to its pro-
per dimensions. I am now able to bend it more than I have
done for six years, and can almost walk without the assist-
ance of crutches, which, through mesmeric treatment, I
expect soon to be able to lay wholly aside.

“T may also state that my general health has been greatly
improved through the same means, and I most heartily wish
success to every endeavour to spread a knowledge of the
science from which I have obtained so much relief.

“Francis Winn, Moulder.”


Many other cures might be narrated in proof of what has
been effected by means of mesmerism in Rochdale. It is
impossible to describe the gratitude evinced by those who
have been cured. Given up by their physicians, they saw no
prospect but that of leading a life of wretchedness, of de-
pendence upon their friends, or upon the sympathies of the
public. Now they find themselves, through a natural agency,
restored as it were to life, with ability to do its business with
hope. No wonder that they should. be grateful both to the
Author of every good gift and to the agent by whom they
have been cured. Their thanks, together with the conscious-
ness of doing good, form a noble recompense to Captain Hud-
son for all his toils and for all the calumnies he has had to
bear ; while they themselves, despite the prejudices of the
ignorant and the hostility of the interested, will live as un-
deniable evidences that God has implanted in man a power
wherewith to alleviate the physical woes of his brother, and
do somewhat to pave the way for the abolition of the bar-
barous practices which have hitherto prevailed in the so-called
healing art, and for the introduction of the gentler means
whereby nature becomes her own restorer.

We believe Captain Hudson to be well adapted to the
work he has undertaken : the strength of his constitution, the
firmness of his nerve, together with his kindness of heart,
eminently fit him for such a task. Most heartily do we wish
him success in his efforts to spread what we believe to be
truth, and to do good to the poor and afflicted of our race.

The following is extracted from the Manchester Examiner
and Times, of the 28th of February,’and may be looked upon


ji)


By Captain Hudson. 175


as so far corroborative of the preceding statements, all of

which will be verified by any unprejudiced inhabitant of
Rochdale.

Auex. Brrniz, Agent,
Railway Street, Rochdale.
Joun Morrat,
Agent and Superintendent of Public Hall,
Baillie Street, Rochdale.


“Tae Hotmrirta Catamity.—Caprain Hupson’s Lec-
TURE.—Pursuant to announcement, Capt. Hudson delivered a lec-
ture on mesmerism and biology, illustrated. by numerous experiments,
on Tuesday evening last, in the Public-hall, Baillie-street, Rochdale,
when there was a numerous and highly respectable auditory. It
appeared that Captain Hudson had delivered 50 public lectures and
illustrations, in the Public-hall, Rochdale, during the last few months;
in addition to which he had, on five different occasions, lectured gratui-
tously on behalf of some of the institutions connected with the town,
and his concluding lecture was given on behalf of the sufferers by the
late accident near Holmfirth. The proceeds would amount to a con-
siderable sum, as there was a large audience, and all the reserved
seats were occupied, the admission to which was 2s. for each person.
The Rochdale temperance harmonic band was in attendance, and
also Mr. G. H. Keeling, whose performance on the flutina was
much admired. Before commencing his experiments, Captain Hud-
son stated that during the whole course of his entertainments not
one person had come forward to confute what he had advanced on
the subject. The whole of the persons, with one exception, on
which he intended to operate, would be persons belonging to Roch-
dale, with whom he had scarcely had five minutes’ previous con-
versation, and they were not at all aware what he was about to do.
There was an impression that it was likely to prove injurious for per-
sons to be frequently operated upon; but, so far as his experience
went, the opposite was the case, for he had operated upon one per-
son 2000 times within two years, and she had wee visited by 10,000
persons, and was better at the end of the period than she had been
before. In bringing out the various phenomena connected with the
subject, it was too much for him to expect that he would receive the
approval of all: but it had been peculiarly gratifying to find that in
every place which he had visited he had been well received. When he
first came to Rochdale, it was with the intention-of staying one week :
and he had stayed three months. During that period 200 afflicted
cases had been brought before him, several of which had been cured,
and many had been relieved. There were some present who had de-
rived considerable benefit in consequence of being operated upon. He
was glad to have had the attendance of medical men at his lectures,
some of whom had expressed their approval of his proceedings. When
he first visited the town it was said, ‘Get some Rochdale people mag-
netized ;’ but now he had so many that he scarcely knew what to
do with them all. Captain Hudson having made a few passes with


176 Mesmerism in Rochdale.
his hand, about 20 persons, from different parts of the hall, came
rushing towards the platform, apparently drawn by an irresistible in-
fluence. The affinities of bodies were shewn by placing a boy and a
powerful man together, the boy having entire control over the man,
Jeading him wherever he chose. It was somewhat singular to see a
man whose muscular strength was such that he could lift two 56 Ib.
weights above his head, unable to move except with the consent of a
boy. A variety of experiments were then made, some of which were
very ludicrous and greatly excited the risible faculties of the audience.
Captain Hudson could take away the power of motion, and the power
of vision, and could restore them at pleasure. He operated upon
more than 30 persons, some of whom had been greatly benefitted by
being operated upon. One young lady was present whose right arm
had been paralyzed many months, but had been restored to use.
One of the most astonishing features connected with the entertain-
ment was the composure evidenced by Captain Hudson during the
whole of the proceedings, and the entire control which he exercised
over the minds of so large a number of persons in the mesmeric state
at one time.”


We extract the following from the Liverpool Mercury of
Jan. 8, 1851 :—


‘* Mesmerism.
** Liverpool, Ist Jan., 1851.
“MR. HENRY HUDSON.

*‘ Dear Sir,—I have much pleasure in bearing testimony to the
beneficial effects of mesmerism, having experienced the greatest re-
lief in two different cases.

‘‘For several years previous to my seeimg you I was afflicted
with a violent pain in the head, caused by inflammation. All the
remedies from which I sought relief failed, until it was my good for-
tune to try the efficacy of mesmerism, by which you succeeded in re-
moving the inflammation, and in a few days I was perfectly cured,
and have never suffered from the pain in the head since. I had for-
gotten to state that this was about two years since. A short time
afterwards I partly lost the use of my right hand by an accident,
which caused a contraction of the sinews that rendered it painful
to use my hand for the slightest purpose. After eighteen months’
trial of medical treatment, without any beneficial effect, I again ap-
plied to you, and in a few minutes from the time you commenced to
magnetize it I was enabled to open it without the slightest pain, and
have used it with ease and comfort ever since.

** Believing that mesmerism, or animal magnetism, (so beneficial
in my case,) would in many cases be productive of much good, it
would give me pleasure to hear of many others deriving ease by it
from the sufferings incident to our common humanity.

“‘ Thanking a kind Providence for the boon, = | yourself as the
instrument of my singular cure, .

“Tam, dear Sir, yours very truly,
** Halifax.” “J. E. Dean.


{


Remarks upon a form of Sub-mesmerism. 177


‘* Dear Sir,—Having accompanied the above-mentioned lady, who
is my sister, to your house, and witnessed the cure in the latter case,
I have much pleasure in confirming her statement, and expressing
my confidence in mesmerism as a cure for all contractions of the
sinews, or pains of the head similar to those with which she was
afflicted.

** Yours truly,
** Music Preceptor, Dewsbury.” «J, W. Dean.


X. Remarks upon a form of Sub-mesmerism, popularly called
Electro-Biology, now practised in Scinde and other Eastern
Countries. By Ricuarp F. Burton, Lieut. Bombay
Army. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.

‘Redruth, Cornwall, Oct. 23rd, 1849.
“ Dear Sir,—In answer to your inquiry, I beg to inform you that it was
Mr. Titus Deville who told me what I wrote to you respecting the College of
Physicians.*
‘* Believe me to be, dear Sir, yours very truly,
** Dr. Elliotson.”’ “ Henry Harris,


To Dr. Elliotson.

Dear Doctor,—The last time I had the pleasure of see-
ing you, you remarked that readers of The Zoist feel interest
in perusing the accounts of travellers who have taken pains
to collect the débris of an ancient science which they still
find scattered amongst barbarous and semi-civilized races,
This encourages me to forward a few notes upon the subject.
I have only to hope that you will consider them in any way
worthy of your attention.

An old form of mesmerism, under the new name of elec-
tro-biology, has lately been introduced into England ; and, by
the ridiculousness rather than the utility of its phenomena, it
has excited considerable attention. I call it an old form, as
it has been known and practised in the East from time im-
memorial.

Every well-read man has perused half a dozen accounts of
Shaykh Abd-el-Kadir, the Cairo Magician, whose powers of
exhibiting the appearance of absent persons were first noticed
in the pages of an eminent Arabic scholar. . That gentleman,
probably considering the Shaykh a puny descendant from the


* This letter was an answer to an inquiry made by me to the writer, formerly
one of my pupils at University College, who it was that informed him I had lost
my Fellowship at the College of Physicians in consequence of my advocacy of
mesmerism. He had written to me, stating that he had received information to
this effect from a medical man sent from London by the Board of Health into
Cornwall during the time of the Asiatic cholera, and begging to know if it was
true. In replying to him that it was utterly false, I requested to know the name
of his informant.—Joun Ex..iotson.


178 Remarks upon a form of Sub-mesmerism,


mighty men of Egypt’s olden time, began with believing that
the power really existed. Other experimenters, endued with
less credenciveness—to use a lately imported word—followed
him; and even he, I am told, is now convinced that the ma-
gician’s chief virtue resided in an intimacy with Usman Bey,
a Scotch renegade, who taught him the difference between a
turban and a bonnet, petticoat and pantaloons, our “ gracious
Queen and an elderly gentleman.”

But even the most sceptical of the Shaykh’s examiners—
Sir Gardner Wilkinson for instance—testifies unconsciously
to the mesmeric nature of the process. In the first place,
the experimentalist, it is observed, always chooses a boy*
not arrived at the age of puberty. His reason would be that
such subjects are, religiously speaking, pure and without
blemish. But we can supply him with a better cause—clair-
voyance, everywhere rare, is more common among the young
than among the old. Secondly, we are told that in many
cases the boy can see nothing in the ink but his own face,
and that after a time he ends by falling asleep over it. This
is mere hypnotism. And, thirdly, the subjects are sometimes
thrown into a state of fear, which may last for days and even
weeks. The panic is probably caused by want of proper de-
mesmerisation.

Au reste there is nothing scientific in the Shaykh’s pre-
lude to his experiments—burning frankincense in a brazier,
pouring ink into the boy’s palm, and committing to the flames
slips of paper containing the names of angels and demons.
Nor, I humbly opine, exists there any sovereign potency in
“pressing the MEDIAN NeRvE”—“ in gazing upon the ELEc-
TRO-MAGNETIC COIN,” or in “affecting the ORGAN oF INDIVI-
puALITY.” But at Grand Cairo, as well as in Hanover
Square, professional gentlemen are keenly alive to the “ doc-
trine of impressions.”

The most interesting point in this oriental form of sub-
mesmerism is the fact that it is practised in countries which
now have little or no intercourse with one another. It is
found, for instance, in Egypt and in Southern Persia—lands
as distinct as Siberia and Spain—and this too, with hardly
any perceptible difference in the process.

During a five years’ residence in the delectable province
of Scinde, I had frequent opportunities of hearing the ope-
ration described. And, although I never saw it performed,—
the superstition of the natives and the Mephistophelean fame
with which their fears had invested me were my obstacles,—


* In Moslem countries it would be impossible to experiment upon girls.


eee


called Electro-Biology. By Mr. Burton. 179


still the number and the character of my informants left no
doubt of the accuracy of their information in the main points.
Stripped of all miraculous details, their account of the process
was as follows.*

The branch of magic called Vinyano, or Gahno, is now
devoted almost exclusively to recovering stolen goods by means
of Ihzar—summoning the appearance of the thief. The ma-
gician employs a boy or a youth not arrived at the age of
puberty, and begins by directing him to gaze at a spot of ink
rubbed upon his thumb-nail or painted on the bottom of a
bright brass pot. During this preliminary the soothsayer
recites his Azimat (charm) three different times: he then ad-
dresses the boy and orders the seeing to commence. First
appears in the ink a Bhangi or sweeper—the Farrash of Egypt
—who cleans the floor: he, disappearing, is followed by a
host of tent-pitchers, who prepare a royal pavilion. Then
comes a train of servants to spread the carpets, lay down the
pillows, and prepare an elevated seat for a person of dignity.
Next advances in state the king of the Jinns (genii), who,
preceding his suite, enters the tent and takes his place upon
the throne. The loser of the stolen goods appears before
him and with raised hands prefers his complaint, upon which
the potentate despatches a Chobdar or lictor to summon the
thief. The latter, applied to the question in the shape of a
violent bastinado, confesses all the particulars of his crime,
and, after shewing the spot where the stolen goods are con-
cealed, is dismissed from the presence.

This incantation, say the Scindians, is not of diabolical
origin. It is mastered by the particular study of occult
science called Taskhir, or acquiring the command of spirits.
The principal part of the course is the Chillo (or forty days’
fast in imitation of the great prophets), during which the
scholar, living shut up in a darkened room, recites a variety
of incantation-prayers, sleeps little, and meditates intensely
upon subjects laid down for him by his Shaykh or spiritual
teacher. The fast is a rigid one. On the first day the pupil
eats his usual quantity; the next he diminishes it by half;
and so on till he comes to total abstinence from meat and
drink. In this state of starvation he continues as long as
nature permits. When imperatively necessary, he allows him-
self a few mouthfuls, and gradually increases his allowance up
to the fortieth day—the last of his discipline. Having per-
sonally tried this experiment for about a fortnight, I can


* I have already described this operation in a work entitled, Sindh, and the
Races that inhabit the valley of the Indus.


180 Remarks upon a form of Sub-mesmerism.


answer for the fact that it exerts a powerful effect in clearing
the brain and in concentrating its energies.

Vinyano in Scinde is practized by Hindoos as well as
Moslems. This at once points out its origin—India, the
fatal source of half the superstitions which have deluged the
world. Thence it must have travelled through Scinde and
Persia to Syria, where, as in other parts of the East, we find
that a “ belief in the power of calling up the dead and exhi-
biting the appearances of absent persons” was long current.
Another step, and we trace it to ancient Greece, where in-
stead of ink, oil, we are told, was poured into the palm of the
boy. It is still practized—however imperfectly—in Egypt
and the Maghrib. And the magic mirror which shewed the
Lady Geraldine to her absent lover is a proof that it was
not unknown in Italy, whence it was diffused throughout
medizval Europe. Sceptical civilization rejected it as a
grandam’s tale. Science has now stripped it of its fiction
and laid the naked fact before our eyes.

Sir Gardner Wilkinson proposes to explain the mystery
of the Cairo magician by the rational process of considering
the appearances in the ink the result of leading questions
addressed to the boy who is experimented upon.*

I would ask those, who are not thoroughly satisfied by
this or any other similar explanation, to witness the electro-
biological process, and then to consider the following remarks.

The hot dry climates and the pure electric air of the East
are favourable to animal magnetism. The fine nervous or-
ganization of the people and the excitability of their cerebral
development render them highly susceptible of mesmeric
influence, The magnetizer, too, is well constituted: his eye
is piercing, his presence dignified, his nervous energy super-
abundant, and his natural powers of concentrativeness, in-
creased by artificial exercises, assist him in obtaining complete
mastery over himself and others.t| He communicates with
his subject by fixing his attention upon him, and by a strong
silent volition, unaided by manipulating, he throws him into
the sleep-waking state, when—the cerebral organs being ex-
cited, the senses paralyzed, and the imagination powerfully
affected by suggestion—arise the strange phenomena treated
of by mesmerists under “ dominance of the will.” The fas-
cinator mentally orders the subject to see a distant object.


* A simple reason why the operation so often fails is, that all boys are not
clairvoyants. But the magician who trades in magic only wants a certain number
of piastres, which he receives for the séance, not for the success of the séance.

+ This mastery over himself is well proved by his powers of hybernation and
voluntary trance.


Cure of acute Rheumatism. 181


If unfit, he is simply hypnotized, or possibly he is alarmed
by the mesmeric sensations he experiences. But if all the
conditions of clairvoyance be present, the subject will see
what he is directed to look at, passing as a picture before his
eyes, and he will describe it accurately as he saw it.

I offer this explanation with less diffidence, as I have both
witnessed and produced all the most improbable parts of it.

Excuse me, dear Doctor, for having trespassed so long
upon your valuable space; and, with sentiments of distin-
guished esteem, believe me to be,

Yours very truly,
Ricuarp F. Burton, Lt. Bombay Army.

E.I.U. Service Club, 14, St. James’s Square.


XI. Cure of acute Rheumatism. By Mr. Marsnatut, of
Halesworth. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘*Dr. Hale examined—He attended Mrs, Cumming in the year 1847, 1848,
1849, and did not find any indication of insanity. Considers that the delusions
with regard to her children are not insane delusions. Was in her bedroom con-
stantly and saw no indications of filth. He has seen Mrs Cumming, at least,
three times a week since the 26th of last November. Believes her to be of sound
mind now.

**On cross-examination, the witness stated it was an insane delusion when a
person believed in something which did not exist and acted on that belief, or,
where there was some foundation for such a belief, to carry it to an absurd and
extravagant extent. Mesmerism and many sectarian beliefs were evidences of
delusion, but those who professed belief in them were not necessarily insane.’’—
Dairy News, Jan. 21, 1852. Commission of Lunacy on Mrs. Cumming.*


‘* A thoughtful judge of sentiments, books, and men, will often find reason
to regret that the language of censure is so easy and undefined. It costs no
labour, and needs no intellect, to pronounce the words, foolish, stupid,- dull,
odious, absurd, ridiculous. The weakest and most uncultivated mind may there-
fore gratify its vanity, laziness, and malice, all at once, by a prompt application
of vague condemnatory words, where a wise and liberal man would not feel him-
seif warranted to pronounce without the most deliberate consideration, and where
such consideration might perhaps result in applause. Thus excellent performances,
in the department of thinking or of action, might be consigned to contempt, if
there were no better judges, on the authority of those who could not so much as
understand them. A man who wishes some decency and sense to prevail in the
circulation of opinions will do well, when he hears these decisions of ignorant
arrogance, to call for the precise explication of the manner in which the terms of
the verdict apply to the subject.”"—Joun Foster. Essays. Commencement of


the Essay ‘‘ on the Epithet Romantic.” -
Halesworth, Feb. 8th, 1852.
Dear Sir,—If you think the case worth communicating to


* How deep must be the regret of Dr. Francis Hawkins (Zoist, No. XXIII.,
p- 213; XXIV., p. 399) and of Dr. James Arthur Wilson (No. XXXI.) that
Dr. Hale is not of the College of Physicians, but only one of the College of Sur-
geons and Apothecaries’ Hall. They must consider that
** Dignus, dignus est intrare
In nostro docto corpore.”’
Mo tere, Malade Imaginaire.——Joun E.uiotson.


one ae ee eee ree omen


182 Cure of acute Rheumatism.


the valuable Zoist, I have the pleasure to inform you that it
will be done with the full consent of the young lady. She
will be happy to reply to any questions touching upon the
following statements, which are a copy of a note I received
from her.

Miss Baker was attacked in July last with acute rheu-
matism, which rendered her quite helpless. For two months
she was attended by eminent medical professors. Her health
slightly improved, but she still remained in a perfectly help-
less condition. She was advised by some friends to try
mesmerism ; and at last resolved, although at that time she
had little faith in its success. The operation was repeated
three times a week: and, at the end of the third week, she
was able to walk without assistance,—an exercise which she
had not performed independently for three months. She has
been occasionally mesmerised up to the present day (which is
at the latter end of December) the time I received this written
testimony from her: and, with the exception of a slight stiff-
ness at the knees, the cure is complete, which she feels justi-
fied in attributing to mesmerism.

I have two or three more cases of cures, which I shall be
happy to forward, should this be considered worth inserting.

I am, yours obediently,
W. Marsuatt, Draper.
To John Elliotson, Esq., London. —


As I wished for further information, Mr. Marshall
favoured me with a second letter.—Joun ELuiotson.


Halesworth, Feb. 18th, 1852.

Dear Sir,—As I took no notes of Miss Baker’s case, I
will give you the particulars as far as I am able, with the
assistance of a friend who was generally present. But it is
her particular wish that the names of the medical men should
not be published, therefore I have not sent them.

Miss Baker was living in London when first attacked with
rheumatism: and at the end of a fortnight was completely
set fast. She applied to eminent medical men, as stated in
my last: but received no benefit. After remaining in this
helpless condition for more than two months, she was re-
moved to this town, but continued using various things,
recommended by those gentlemen, until I saw her: when,
at my request she entirely left them off, and gave herself up
to mesmerism ; but not without some reluctance. I com-
menced by placing my hand upon her head; and in two or
three minutes I perceived some effect had been produced. I
then took her hands in the customary way, when her eyes


Visual and acoustic illusions and hallucination. 183
instantly closed; but she remained quite conscious, and, if I
spoke, she would just open them, look at me, and then dose
off again. I could deepen the sleep at any time by placing
my fingers on her eyes for a minute or so. I began in about
five minutes making passes from her head downwards, rest-
ing a short time at the knees. After making several passes
in this way, I acted upon her arms and hands, one of which
was quite drawn together and had been so for more than a
month. I applied a gold ring to that hand when in the mes-
meric state, and also while she was awake, from which she
received considerable benefit. In about twenty minutes she
came to herself, and I then asked her how she felt. She
expressed herself as much better. She felt considerable
warmth from my hands, and compared it to hot steam; and,
when I applied the rings, was much hotter.

I continued mesmerising her two or three times a week,
producing nothing but simple sleep. But the benefit she
received each time was very striking, and quite surprised her
friends. When I first saw her, she was in a very depressed
state of mind, and her countenance had a dejected pinched
appearance: and no wonder, for she was frequently kept
awake all night suffering the most excruciating pains. In
about a month the pain entirely ceased: and the natural
healthy color appeared in her cheeks.

I visited her a few times afterwards, and she thanked me
very kindly for my attention: and these are the words she
made use of,—TI think I shall do now, for my health is
better than it was previously to my being attacked.”

I would just add, that she is now about to take a situation.
Trusting you will look over the manner in which I have
put these few observations together,

I am, Sir, yours obediently,
W. MarsHatt.


XII. Visual and acoustic illusions and hallucination, with
Clairvoyance.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.

Sir,—In perusing the Swedish medical journal, Hygiea,
I found in the number for January last the following case
related by Dr. A. J. Bjéck, of Ostersund, which seems to me
of a nature to interest many of the readers of your valuable
journal, especially if accompanied by some observations from
yourself. Mrs. H.’s case, which in a purely medical point
of view might be considered as a delirium uterinum torpidum, ©
evidently belongs to those phenomena which characterize an


184 Visual and acoustic illusions and hallucination,


idio-clairvoyant state of a higher order. Therefore, it seems
to me to deserve a place among those facts in which the pages
of The Zoist are so rich.
Iam, Sir, &c.,
A. Georeit.


“ Mrs. H., aged 23—24, and married four years since, had
passed through the usual complaints of childhood. When
13 she had a nervous fever, during which she was confined
to her bed for nearly four months. Since that period she
has had no serious illness, only now and then suffering from
nervousness and occasionally from cardialgia. She was never
hysterical: but, like the other members of her family, was
rather of a phlegmatic temperament, and not in the least
inclined to the supernatural.

“In the middle of February, 1847, her husband being
away on a journey, she saw one night the following apparition.
Before putting out the light, she fancied that the door was
thrown open, and a man rushed in with an open knife in his
hand, with which he stabbed her husband in the breast, who,
as it seemed to her, was lying by her side in the bed. The
vision was so palpable that she fancied she felt the warm
blood spouting over her. She did not lose consciousness,
but called in the servants, who found the room door actually
open. She did not mention the apparition to them: but
the terror she experienced made her so feeble that for several
weeks afterwards she was obliged to keep her bed. Time”
passed without further apparitions: but she remained in a
nervous and irritable state till the lst of September, when
she was safely delivered of a boy. Eight days after her con-
finement, the first apparition, whose features, dress, &c., were
so deeply imprinted upon her memory, again appeared, and
persecuted her daily and hourly; and, although it did not
shew any murderous intentions, yet it was troublesome and
audacious, and, for example, ate out of her plate, bit at her
bread and butter, and so forth. At the end of October there
appeared another person, associated with the former, and
whose dress and physiognomy were equally palpable, so that


she could accurately describe both. One evening about this —


period, in accompanying Mrs. H. from a supper-party, I
observed that she suddenly changed colour and became pale
with terror, in consequence of seeing both apparitions peeping
at her through the glass door which opened into the parlour.
Daylight or candlelight, however, were always requisite to
enable her to see them. She was not aware of ever having
seen either of these persons before.


-


with Clairvoyance. 185

“The company was increased in the middle of December
by an uncle of hers, who had been dead ten years. She
ventured one day to address him, and got an answer. For
the most part she declined to mention the purport of this
conversation ; but, when at the request of her husband or
relatives she put questions to her uncle about persons either
dead or distant, he answered some of the questions satisfac-
torily, some otherwise; sometimes no answers at all were
given. The apparition appointed a meeting with her in the
parlour every day at 11 o0’clock, and shewed much disap-
pointment if she were not there. I was present at two of
these extraordinary meetings. I found Mrs. H. in an ex-
cited state, her mind however perfectly composed. She was
sitting on a sofa with the apparition, with whom she con-
versed in perfect illusion, partly answering his questions,
partly putting questions to him on her own account, or others
suggested by myself, and which, so far as I was concerned,
were truly answered. Out of these I will mention, as ex-
amples, only two cases. The person above named was a
clerk in the post-office during the first part of my studentship
at the University of Upsala, and he lived in the same house
with me. The identity of this person with Mrs. H.’s uncle
was entirely unknown to me up to this time, and I had men-
tioned nothing of it to any one until I suddenly asked him if
he knew me. Mrs. H. delivered as his answer the above par-
ticulars. The second time that I was present, Mrs. H. said
her uncle entirely prohibited the application of mesmerism,
because it would make her ill and she would probably never
wake again. I was greatly astonished at this; for some days
previously I had spoken to her husband about mesmerism,
obtaining an express promise from him not to mention a word
about it, which he asseverated that he had not done. For
the rest, the conversations at which I was present had so
Swedenborgian an aspect that I took it for granted she must
have diligently studied the writings of Swedenborg; but,
upon questioning her, she did not even know the name of
that seer.

“ Her uncle furthermore informed her about the two first
apparitions, and even mentioned their names, saying that
the first had been in love with her, and that the second was
an intimate friend of his: both had been dead for some
years.

“While I- was absent in the summer, the company was
gradually increased, partly by her own deceased relations,
partly by persons entirely unknown to her; so that, imme-
diately before and after the birth of a second child on the
VOL. X. oO


186 Cure of singular attacks of apparent Coma.


2nd of September, all the chairs and places in the room
were taken up by the ghosts. She says that at last she
became accustomed to this numerous company, and was very
little or not at all alarmed, except when she saw inanimate
objects set in motion by the spirits; as, the key was turned
in the lock of the door, and the door opened, a chair moved,
&c., &e. This frightened her stil]. The uncle sat at the bed
foot during the whole time of the illness of the boy, until
it died on the 16th September, when all at once the appari-
tions vanished, and they have not since reappeared. Accord-
ing to the unanimous declaration of the family, the child was
wonderfully like the uncle. The patient is now, December
19, 1849, in sound health of body and mind.”


P.S. You will find this account in the new edition of Mal-
let’s Northern Antiquities, published by Bohn, pp. 533—538.
Whatever may be made of such anomalous occurrences, they
at least, as you have so nobly shewn, demand investigation,
and can no longer be pooh-poohed. This saga is particularly
valuable, as shewing the way adopted to break the spell of
ghosts.

It is to be regretted that the ignorance of phrenology
amongst medical men in general, and the prejudices against
this important science, prevent them in cases like this giving
any details on the cerebral conformation of the patient, as it
would be a matter of deep interest to ascertain whether the
nervous organization might not belong to those who manifest
that state of sensitiveness which @ la Reichenbach would be
called an odic constitution.

A. Gorell.


*,* For an explanation of the truths of this interesting
case, we particularly refer our readers to an article On the
Superstitions of Mesmerism, by Dr. Elliotson, in No. XXIX.,
p- 68. See Nos. XVII., XIX., for Clairvoyance in Insanity.
—Zoist.


XIII. Cure of singular attacks of apparent Coma.
By Dr. Exxiorson.


‘Of the present Fellows of the College of Physicians, there are at least two
who have fallen into condign disgrace, and one is a member of the University of
Cambridge,* the other of the University of Oxford.’’}—Mr. Wak ry, Lancet,
April 16, 1852.


* Dr. Elliotson.
+ Dr. Thomas Mayo. He does not name Dr. Billing, who is the third Fellow
* fallen into condign disgrace.”


a


By Dr. Elliotson. 187


“« We have little reason to boast as we do of our civilization when we look at
the reception which every discovery of principles new or strange receives, not at
the hands of the uneducated multitude merely, but from men who are supposed
to read and think more deeply than even the mass of educated men. Medical
men especially have been famous for the brutal vehemence of their prejudices,
from the time of Harvey to that of one scarcely less eminent and scarcely less a
martyr than the discoverer of the circulation of the blood. We mean Dr. Elliotson.
Every intelligent man knows what a storm of ridicule and invective phrenology has
had to encounter in its steady advances to the position of a science now almost
universally acknowledged—its phraseology being used even by those who still dis-
pute many of its facts. Mesmerism and clairvoyance are reaching the same goal
through the same ordeal. Learned and educated and eminent men, such as
Elliotson and Esdaile, are denounced as humbugs and quacks because they will not
refuse to believe their eyes and their experience, and mesmerism and clairvoyance
are ex cathedra condemned by parties who have never taken a single step to bring
those discoveries to the test of experiment. A learned counsellor is vastly amused
and county justices are greatly shocked because Dr. Davey professes to believe
that which he has studied and that which he has practised. Dr. Esdaile in Cal-
cutta, ridiculed at first, finally convinced the whole of an intelligent press and
community, and was not only allowed but encouraged to relieve human suffering
by means of mesmerism. Dr. Davey has cured people by the same agency, and
the Ceylon Times is delighted with the sagacious justices who will have no mum-
meries practised—no ‘ American experiments’ tried which they don’t understand
and wont examine. It is the old story and the old logic :—‘ I hate the French for
they are all slaves and wear wooden shoes.’ So our modern wiseacres hate mes-
merists who pretend to cut off limbs without giving pain, and clairvoyants because
they dare to see while their eyes are shut. This is the same spirit which attempted
to explode heresy by burning heretics, and it will be equally successful. Mes-
merism is established beyond all doubt. The kindred phenomena of clairvoyance
are strange and puzzling and often uncertain. But there are brave and persevering
spirits pursuing the enquiry, as well as quacks and pretenders who bring the
truth of this as of all other science into disgrace; and by and by the wheat will
be separated from the chaff, the truth sifted from falsehood and uncertainty. In
the meantime lawyers, and doctors, justices and editors will go on proving their
sympathy with the spirit of the dark ages by denouncing that which they do not
understand and will not calmly examine.’’—Ceylon Overland Observer, April 14,
1852.


On the 3rd of February, 1851, a young lady from Devonshire,
one and twenty years old, was brought to my house by her
mother, carried from the carriage by a man-servant into my
library in a state of apparent coma, and placed in an easy
chair. Her mother told me that she would presently be per-
fectly herself. This proved true: for in a minute or two she
suddenly opened her eyes, sat upright, and was instantly as
wide awake as the rest of us.

It appeared that, as soon as she was ever raised from the
recumbent or sitting posture, she fell into this apparent coma,
and remained with her eyes closed, rigid, and unable to move
or speak, till she was set down either quite flat or at some in-
clination. She therefore could not walk or stand, or even
kneel: for these conditions of course took her from the re-
cumbent or sitting postures. But she could of course raise
herself from the recumbent to the sitting posture, or lie down
when sitting; and also move herself along on a sofa, and
02


188 Cure of singular attacks of apparent Coma.


could allow her legs to hang down or be supported indiffer-
ently, without any appearance of coma. The removal of
pressure from the lower part of the body was the circumstance
which produced the apparent coma :* but occasionally this


* See a similar phenomenon in the case of Master William Salmon, of No.
22, Red Lion Street, Holborn, whom I cured by mesmerism only of frightful
attacks, &c., &c., in 1839, and whose cure is declared in Zoist, No. III., p. 314.

‘On January 26th, 1839, I was summoned to him, late in the afternoon,
and found him lying on a couch, so paralyzed that not only could he not walk,
but he could not raise his head in the least from the pillow, or move it to one side.
If others raised him even a few inches, he became insensible; or, as the family
said, fainted. Of all this I satisfied myself. A fit which had taken place twelve
days before had left him thus paralyzed in the legs and trunk and neck.

‘Though I had just resigned at University College because I was not allowed
to cure my patients with mesmerism, the father had no view to mesmerism, and
gave me pen, ink, and paper to write a prescription. But knowing, as all medical
men in their hearts do, that medicine in the majority of cases of epilepsy and
numerous other nervous afflictions is of no, of little, or of secondary use, what-
ever number of pills and bottles are consumed and other appliances made, I said
nothing, but went to my carriage, and requested Mr. Wood who was in it to come
and help me mesmerise a patient. We returned to the house. I raised the child
to the sitting posture, and almost i diately he b comatose, a8 many
epileptic and hysterical patients are in the habit of becoming between the perfect
fits or when perfect fits have not yet shewn themselves. He was not pale, nor
was his pulse altered :—the state was coma, not fainting. I restored him to the
horizontal position and made transverse passes before his chest and face; and he
awoke suddenly and perfectly, with the usual sudden inspiration which I had
always seen characterize the return of the Okeys and many other mesmerised
patients to the waking state. The parents said that the return to consciousness
was much more rapid than they had ever seen it before,—shewing that his state
was really mesmeric. I then, without saying a word, took Mr. Wood’s hand,
and he the father’s, and with the other hand I made passes before the child from
his face downwards as he lay. His eyelids presently began to droop, and in about
Jive minutes nearly closed, and were in a state of rapid tremor. His jaw had
become locked ; and he could not be roused by rough shaking, nor did he appear
to hear, except that clapping the hands in his face increased the tremulous con-
traction of his eyelids. I made passes along his arm and hand and the extremity
extended and rose, and presently fell: then passes transversely, and it somewhat
moved transversely: and the longitudinal passes on being repeated caused his ex-
tremity to extend and rise again. The child was ignorant of mesmerism and
sleep-waking or somnambulism; but beautifully displayed, though unprepared
for my mesmeric proceedings, the phenomena of mesmerism and sleep-waking.
He was fast asleep, as his breathing and indifference shewed. He fell asleep in
the true mesmeric manner, his eyelids closed and trembled, and his jaw was
locked. Nothing could be more genuine. To talk of imposition would be pre-
posterous, and only display ignorance of the subject.’’

‘*T next moved Master Salmon’s legs by vertical tractive movements ; and
then tried his head. It soon began to move as if an effort were made to raise it.
Mr. Wood and myself made the movements together, and the effort became greater
and greater, till at last the boy raised it from the pillow,—a thing he had not done
for ten days. It soon fell back again. But we persevered again and again, till
he rose into the sitting posture. The-more we slowly retreated in making these
tractive movements, the stronger appeared to be the influence. Every time we
had retreated as far as the room would allow, he fell back powerless. At last,
after having drawn him into the sitting posture, we made tractive passes from the
top of his head upwards; and this soon made him elevate his head, and then
elevate his whole frame till he positively stood erect on the floor. We had moved
him to the foot of the couch with his legs hanging down, before I tried to make


—— %


———<$_____.—_-


By Dr. Elliotson. 189


seized her when in a carriage, and always if the carriage
turned suddenly or went upon a rough piece of road. A
warm hip-bath once induced a severe attack of it which lasted
for many hours.

I have said apparent coma: because, though unable to
speak or open her eyes or move at all, she was all the time
conscious, as she declared and proved on returning to her
ordinary state.

The following particulars were communicated to me.

When a child, her intellect was dull and her back weak,
and she was fat. During a bilious fever she was treated
with violent cathartics for a fortnight, so violent that they
occasioned prolapsus of the bowels, and left her nervous, pale,
thin, tremulous: and she was taken to the Continent.

For five years before the constitutional change, she ab-
horred flesh food and took none: and in the year before her
present illness studied very hard, and read at night. The
change at once took place from fright: but there was no re-
currence till a year had expired, and then the function be-
came regular and had been so ever since, but, what is singular,
only night and morning: always without pain. The bowels
too had always been regular.

I mention these circumstances particularly : because it is
too much the custom to ascribe disease to disturbance of the
uterus or torpidity of the bowels. These disturbances are
often present in such cases: but not so often the cause, as
merely one of the circumstances of the general unhealthy
condition of the system. The abhorrence of flesh food is very
common in the nervous affections of young females: and the
small quantity of food upon which they subsist is often asto-
nishing.

When thirteen or fourteen years old, she was seized with
a feverish attack, and a loud remarkably sounding cough.
Notwithstanding medical advice, the indisposition rapidly in-
creased, and the spasmodic cough changed after a few days
to frequent attacks of apparent insensibility, which was called
fainting, and accompanied by rigidity of the limbs, a rapid
pulse, and what is termed ecstatic delirium with beautiful
visions. This state occurred in the beginning of 1839 in my


him stand. I walked backwards making tractive passes from him to me, and he
slowly followed me. The father and mother were petrified, and called in their
people from the shop to witness the strange sight of their child with his head nod-
ding in sleep and slowly moving after me, though unable to raise his head an inch
or move his legs at all a quarter of an hour before. The room was behind the
shop and small; and I opened the door, receded into the shop, and he slowly


followed me. I turned into the room again, making the tractive passes, and he
went round it after me.”’


190 Cure of singular attacks of apparent Coma.


patient, Miss Emma Melhuish, of Bedford Street, Red Lion
Street, Holborn, and produced, in the midst of insensibility
to all external things, such an expression of holy rapture as
charmed the very numerous persons, many of great talent,
whom I was kindly allowed to take to see her.*

During the whole period of liability to the apparent coma,
the attacks had sometimes continued many hours: and once
lasted without intermission for three days.

She gradually recovered to a certain extent, so that she
bore lifting into a carriage and enjoyed a drive: but a sudden
turn of the carriage and roughness of a piece of the road had
still carefully to be avoided. She ate flesh food at the time
she came to me, and her feet were, as they had been through-
out the illness, very cold. She was feeble, and her loins
doubled on her hips if she attempted to stand. Of course
many practitioners in the country and some of eminence in
London had been consulted, but with almost no benefit,—
none in regard to the attacks of apparent coma.

She was treated at Bath, Clifton, and Tiverton. Some
gave her the most violent cathartics; and their operation
would wake her up for a few minutes from the coma. Some
gave her musk ; some opium ; some quinine ; some valerian:


* “Tn a few minutes the fits began, and were longer and more terrific than I
had ever seen them, and several additional actions took place between the convul-
sive fits, at the end of the fits of rigidity, after she had sit up and pushed her
head forwards. One of the new actions consisted in looking upwards with heavenly
smiles, and clasping her hands together, as if praying; another was crossing her
hands upon her bosom, and looking upwards as if in holy hope and submission ;
another was the expression of attentive and delighted listening.

‘* From that time forward, this addition to the fits of rigidity took place thirty
or forty times a day ; for the fits of rigidity were constantly occurring, and thought
nothing of, on account of the horrible nature of the convulsive fits. These
beautiful ecstatic fits began with her arms suddenly extending and her hands becom-
ing closed; then she rose into a sitting position in her bed ; then pushed her head
forward, stared, and protruded her lips; and, as soon as this, the ‘stiff fit’ had
gone so far, instead of its terminating as usual, she assumed all the attitudes of
holy rapture: her hands clasped, or on her bosom, or pointing to the skies; her
head and shoulders inclined first in this direction, then in that; and her eyes
looking upwards in the successive directions with a beauty of expression unsur-
passed by the paintings of Raphael and all other Italian masters. Her counte-
nance became exquisitely beautiful on these occasions. After going through a
series of those attitudes and expressions in silence, for two or three minutes, she
always sunk back senseless, and then went into her sleep-waking or delirium,
whichever was present when the fit began.”’

The case is fully detailed in No. IV., p. 429, &c.

This exquisite case, and that of Master Salmon, like all the other nervous
diseases which are described at full length in The Zoist, deserves the study of every
one who desires to be thoroughly acquainted with extraordinary nervous affec-
tions and the use of mesmerism. Neither Miss Melhuish nor Master Salmon
has had any return of her or his complaint to this hour. She is as susceptible of
mesmerism as ever: he proved perfectly insusceptible at many trials made soon
after his cure, and no attempt has been made since.


By Dr. Elliotson. 19]


some were anxious to plunge her into cold water, but her
mother would not consent. The gentleman who gave the
violent cathartics could say only, “ Hysteria! hysteria!” give
his cathartic again, and again say, “ Hysteria! hysteria!”
Mesmerism was too gross a “ folly,” “fraud,” and “delu-
sion,” for any of them to waste a thought upon, or make
them desert our old useless routine of musk, opium, quinine.
and valerian, and distressing violent cathartics, so often inju-
rious in the nervous affections of young persons.

The exquisite cure of Miss Bernal, the daughter of the
member for Rochester, and sister of the member for Mid-
dlesex, which was detailed by herself in No. XVIII. of The
Zoist, had reached the despairing mother by Lady , who
was acquainted with both families: and she therefore brought
her daughter to me.

I advised all medicines to be given up, as I had found by
too much experience that their only effect in similar cases is
to render the poor patient’s life more miserable by their va-
rious effects and by the disgust of incessantly swallowing
what is nauseous. The mother spoke of mesmerism, and I
therefore at once gave my true opinion, that it was the only
means worth adopting: that it was very likely to cure her:
could do no harm, and was almost sure to do good in some
respect or other: though I followed a rule of never promising
a cure by it or any other treatment in any disease. I gave
her the name of Mrs. Cooper, a married lady, then residing
at No. 29, Somerset Street, Portman Square, who went out
mesmerising.

Mesmerism was immediately commenced, and repeated at
nine o’clock every evening. On the 7th of February, I,
having been first consulted upon the 3rd, received a note
from the mother, dated February the 7th, Bryanstone Square,
informing me that the effect had been great heaviness and
weariness, and a desire to sleep during the process, but no
sleep till the patient went to bed, and that then she slept
soundly all night: that, on the third night, the mesmeriser,
not contented with proceeding thus quietly, said before leav-
ing the house that,—


“Next time she would try to get her into a clairvoyant state,
and see what the patient would say was good for herself; and that
therefore last night (the fourth night) her efforts were directed to
that object, and she soon succeeded: she brought on a wonderful
condition of mind and of body most distressing to witness ; for it so
much resembled her illness of the last autumn, when Mr. at-
tended her for a sort of bilious or liver attack, in which ped oy
toms were sickness, which appeared connected with the head ; so


192 Cure of singular attacks of apparent Coma.


she thought: but he, from the tongue, believed the seat of the dis-
order to be the liver, being obstructed. She was daily for ten days
(beginning her mornings clear) wandering in the most exalted and
beautiful language, speaking distressing things of birds beating them-
selves against a tower, and a hundred other imaginations—al/ in
exquisite rhythm, in a most musical, delicate tone of voice—turning
to the wall. Of course she was in bed ; and if no one was with her
but her sister, or the maid, or the brother who is just gone to India,
she would run on in these wild fancies; but if I came, there seemed
to be more sympathy, and 1 could draw her off into a sort of con-
versation, and carry her into reason again. The same occurred when
her eldest brother, a very powerful little man, returned from his re-
giment in Ireland on leave. He with a sort of playful wit bandied
about his words, and she would at last laugh and be right: but none
of the others had the power. She ran through French and Italian
in the same way wonderfully. Last night the manner was the same
nearly, the subjects were however different. It was first a wish to
know what her dear brother Newton was doing (we are in anxiety,
having had no letter); a burst of crying; then, a desire of curing
me of my illuesses, and that repeatedly: and she told me what she
believed would do to make me sleep; then, with difficulty, would she
mind herself, for she- was the same unselfish creature as ever; but
she said she thought (not sure, as it was a new thing to her) strong
coffee—the essence of coffee as it were, would do her good. She
spoke of poor Catherine Barrow, with a reasonable fear that she
might have been too long in her state, but that mesmerism might do
her good: it was half reason and half exalted, and all the time she
expressed herself as very uncomfortable—so wearied and so confused,
and that it was a new state, like what she had been in the last ill-
ness. Her eyes were shut, and very black round them, and she kept
rubbing them, or stroking her heal or twisting a bit of her long
hair, as if she was disturbed and distressed, and yet she did not
wish to leave that condition. Her hands grew very cold, but she did
not feel them so. She had the coffee, and then she was awoke.
Mrs. C. gave her two hours at least instead of one, being delighted
at her own success; wished you could have seen it—you would have
been so pleased: said it was like that young lad, and that to-night
and the next night there will be a great progress, and that it will be
as she had told her husband, she will walk round the room, and be
certainly cured, and able to cure others as a mesmerist. The idea
of curing others was delicious to me. Then she should be useful in-
stead of useless; then she might be something like a sceur de charité.
She would cure mamma and the poor people; and once when Mrs.
C. put forth her two hands before her invitingly, she put one of
her's in one of Mrs. C.’s, and very nearly the other, and made a
little effort on being asked to get down her legs as if to follow her,
but did no more.”


This excitement was not calculated to do any good: and
resulted, possibly, from the mesmeriser boasting that she


By Dr. Elliotson. 193


' would now direct her measures to produce clairvoyance.


Nothing should be said to patients about phenomena intended
or expected. The course of mesmerisation should be con-
ducted silently, calmly, patiently, kindly, unostentatiously.
I have no idea how clairvoyance is to be produced: nor did I
ever produce it. When it occurs, it comes forth, I believe,
spontaneously.

Patients do not recover the more frequently or the sooner
for exhibiting wonderful phenomena: though they certainly
appear strengthened by being rendered rigid, subjected to
traction and some other experiments, and the better for being
kept in a state of cheerful excitement during their sleep-
waking. As to learning of the present patient what would do
her good, mesmerism was the measure resolved upon to do
her good, and had not been tried more than four times, was
making her sleepy and giving her good nights: there was
therefore no reason yet to search about for further informa-
tion and disturb the established course of mesmeric treatment.

Probably none of these disturbances would have taken
place had the mesmerisation proceeded quietly in the usual
unostentatious manner. However, they subsided; no more
harm was done, and the plain good effects of mesmerism took
place : so that, after the eighth mesmerisation from the first, I
received a joyful note from the mother, beginning with the
words, “ My daughter walks!” The eighth put an end for
ever to the attacks for which I was consulted, and restored
her permanently to health, though she had been ill four years
and three quarters—from May 25, 1846, to February 11,
1851, and, in the words of an account written out for me
by the young lady,

“She had almost given up all hope of recovery, so that no one
felt more surprised at her sudden and unexpected restoration. Any
person,” her account concludes, “who wishes to learn her name
from a better motive than curiosity, may do so through Dr. Elliotson
or Mrs. Cooper: and she will feel the greatest pleasure in answering
any questions, if by so doing she can be of service to others.”


After my first interview with this young lady, I did not
see her again till she called to thank me-some time subse-
quent to her recovery. She has remained free from her com-
plaint now for a year and a quarter.


( 194 )


XIV. London Mesmeric Infirmary.


Tue Annual General Meeting of the supporters of the London
Mesmeric Infirmary was held on Thursday the 27th of May,
at Willis’s Rooms, King Street, St. James’s. Such was the
assemblage of ladies and gentlemen, that the room which
had been engaged was absolutely crammed, and the staircase
crowded, so that an adjournment was made to the great room
in which the Almack balls take place. There were between
six and seven hundred persons present.

On the motion of Mr. Frere, of Stamford Brook, Chiswick,
Earl Stanhope, one of the vice-presidents, was unanimously
voted to the chair. His Lordship thus addressed the meet-
ing,—

Ladies and Gentlemen,—Although I consider it a distin-
guished honour to be called to the chair of this meeting,
there are now present several of my learned friends, on any
one of whom it would, from his medical knowledge and ex-
perience, have been far more worthily bestowed. From a
very early period of my long life I have taken the deepest
interest in all that relates to medical science, to which I
attach the greatest value, as it has for its object that which is
most important to mankind—the alleviation of sufferings,
and, when it is practicable, the restoration of health, which
is, I need not say, the first of all blessings, and requisite to
the enjoyment of every other. As soon as mesmerism revived
in this country, where it had slumbered for many years,
I was very curious to witness the trials that were made in
the hospital of the London University by Baron Dupotet,
and was much interested in observing that they exhibited
phenomena, both of a physical and psychological nature,
which seemed to me eminently entitled to a philosophical in-
vestigation. I was not discouraged in pursuing the inquiry
by an observation made in the Globe newspaper, that my at-
tendance at those exhibitions ought to be considered a proof
of my insanity; but, if all those who are now convinced of
the truth and importance of mesmerism were to be treated
as insane persons, I do not believe that all the lunatic asy-
lums in the country would be sufficiently capacious to contain
them. The more I examined the facts, the more strongly was
I convinced of their reality ; the more I studied mesmerism,
the more firmly was I impressed with its extreme importance
and practical utility. Such being the opinions which I had
formed after a careful observation and mature consideration,
I avowed them openly, and I have always thought that the
worst and most discreditable species of cowardice is the want


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 195


of moral courage. Those who are deficient in personal
courage may allege as an apology that they have weak nerves,
and a bodily constitution which renders them unwilling, and
perhaps unable, to expose themselves to danger. But no
excuse can be made for those who, being fully and conscien-
tiously convinced of a truth, are ashamed or afraid to avow
that such is the case. It is fortunate for the world—fortunate
also for the honour and dignity of the medical profession, that
some physicians have been found, who, disregarding fame
and fortune and those objects which are the most prized, and
the most eagerly pursued, have nobly, magnanimously sacri-
ficed them in the cause of truth. They may be reviled or
ridiculed—they may be assailed by censures or by sarcasms,
but their names will be transmitted with imperishable honour
to posterity, and they will have the satisfaction to reflect that
truth will ultimately prevail. To mesmerism we may apply
what is said in the Holy Scriptures, “Great is truth, and
stronger than all things. It endureth, and is always strong;
it liveth and conquereth for evermore.” Such was the force
of prejudice with which mesmerism had to contend, that, in
one instance at least which came to my knowledge, it ob-
structed the course of justice; and, as the case is somewhat
curious, I will, with your permission, narrate it briefly. About
nine years ago a young woman, who was afflicted with epi-
liptic fits, and who had in consequence been obliged to leave
her place, applied to me for assistance. I found on the very
first trial that she was so susceptible of the influence as to
fall into a mesmeric sleep in about a quarter of a minute.
On returning home she was seized with a fit, and I was in-
formed, which I ought to have been much sooner, that it had
lasted four hours, and with such violence that several men
had been employed in holding her. I went immediately to
see her; and I found that the fit had produced tetanus, or
lock-jaw, and she attempted to relieve it by forcing between
her teeth a blunt, or what is called, a ripping chisel, which
she used as a lever. The sound occasioned by that operation
was such as induced me to fear that she might break her jaws,
which relapsed at once to their former position; but, after I
had made a few mesmeric passes over them, she opened them
without difficulty, and said, “No doctor could have done
this.” On the following day it was my duty to attend a
county meeting, and as I was in that year obliged to be much
in London, the opportunities which I had to mesmerise her
were “few and far between.” I had however the good for-
tune to cure her complaint, she returned to service, and I
heard nothing more of her for some years, when I learned


196 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


that a man by whom she was employed had in a fit of anger
seized her by the throat and attempted to throttle her. He
was in consequence taken before a magistrate, who consi-
dered the case to be so serious that he refused to inflict a
summary conviction, and desired it to be tried by another
tribunal. The alarm that was caused by the assault renewed
her epileptic fits, of which she was very speedily cured by my
learned friend, Dr. Elliotson, whose eminent services cannot
be sufficiently commended. The case was at last tried by the
late Mr. Law, the Recorder, when the complainant was
asked by the counsel for the defendant whether she had ever
been exhibited as a mesmeric patient, which she denied ; and,
amongst other absurd questions, whether she was quite sure
that she was not in a mesmeric sleep when she was assaulted.
An inquiry was made by whom she was mesmerised. Great
surprise was expressed when my name was mentioned, and
the result was that she was considered an impostor—that the
assault remained unpunished, although it had been regarded
by the magistrate as an offence which was too important for
a summary conviction. Some of the opponents of mesmerism
have shewn a very disgraceful want of candour, and have in
some instances been guilty of flagrant injustice. I allude,
amongst other cases, to that of a labourer in Nottingham-
shire, whose leg had been amputated, while he was in a mes-
meric state, without his feeling any pain. Some medical
persons in London denied that this was possible, and had the
effrontery to represent him as an impostor. But they had no
right to calumniate any individual, whether he is a prince or
a peasant, without having proofs to substantiate the charge.
The folly of the imputation was equal to its malignity; for,
even if it could be supposed that the labourer had, without
any assignable motive, and by an extraordinary command
over himself; been able to repress the cries and groans and
shrieks which he would have uttered during the operation,
there would have been other physical manifestations of suffer-
ing which would not have escaped the notice of the surgeons
and of those who were present. Those who denied that the
mesmeric influence could produce insensibility to pain, must
have been somewhat surprised to find that chloroform had the
same effect; and they are as unable to explain in regard to
chloroform, as we are in regard to mesmerism, the mode in
which that insensibility is produced. I rejoice that chloro-
form is now so extensively employed, and I am ready to
admit that it may be applied with success to those who are
not susceptible of mesmeric influence. But 1 contend that,
when mesmerism can be used, it is thuch safer in its opera-


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 197


tion, and this opinion will, I am sure, be confirmed by the
judgment of the learned friends whom I see near me. Innu-
merable cases have occurred in the East Indies, as well as in
this country, of the most painful surgical operations having
been performed under the mesmeric influence without any
suffering to the patients; and I ask whether such effects
could be produced by imagination? Several persons have
ascribed to the force of imagination the phenomena of mes-
merism, and I am well aware that, as some disorders have
been caused by imagination, it is possible that they may be
cured by imparting to it a contrary direction. Though it
should be admitted, for the sake of the argument, that ima-
gination is the real agent in the cures which have been per-
formed by mesmerism, no valid objection could be urged by
its opponents against the employment of a remedy so simple,
so easy, so efficacious, and also so safe in its operation. I
deny, however, that the physical phenomena of mesmerism
are the effects of imagination, or that the psychological phe-
nomena of mesmerism, of which I will not at present speak,
are to be attributed to collusion between the mesmeriser and
his patient. Let those who entertain any doubt upon the
physical phenomena peruse a very curious and interesting
work by a Fellow of the College of Physicians, late physician
to the Middlesex Hospital, Dr. John Wilson, the Trials of
Animal Magnetism on the Brute Creation. They will find in
it the results of trials on a variety of animals very different
in their species and dispositions ; some being tame, and some
being wild; some being gentle, and some being ferocious ;
and some being fish, which, from their great agility, seemed
very ill suited to such experiments. Animals were very judi-
ciously selected hy him for the purpose, as the effects which
they exhibited, and which were very remarkable, could not
be ascribed either to imagination, or to collusion. Let those
who are sceptical in regard to the psychological phenomena
of mesmerism, peruse the admirable and instructive Letters
of Dr. Gregory, which contain numberless facts upon the
subject, and they ought to satisfy even the most incredulous.
We have been asked, what is the theory of mesmerism? and
in what manner its effects are to be explained? To these
most futile questions I reply, that we are not to disbelieve
any facts, known and proved to be such, though we may be
unable to account for them; that we find both in the animal
and in the vegetable creation an infinity of phenomena which
we cannot explain; that even chemical analysis is often very
defective ; and that no doubt was ever entertained on the
operations of medicinal substances because we are ignorant


19% London Mesmeric Infirmary.


of their precise operation on the human frame. In one of
Moliére’s comedies, a candidate for the medical profession is
asked, in dog Latin, “ quare opium facit dormire ?” to which
he replies,
** Quia est in eo

Virtus dormitiva,

Cujus est natura

Sensus assoupire ;”


and I am not aware that a more reasonable answer could be
returned to such an inquiry. Although we are unable to
state in what manner the mesmeric influence is conveyed
from the mesmeriser to his patient, it seems to operate by
invigorating the restorative powers of nature, the vis medi-
catrix nature, to which we owe ultimately, under the bless-
ing of Providence, the cure of all the various disorders which
afflict mankind. It was a true, as well as a candid, confession
of an eminent physician, “We do not cure disorders,—we
only enable Nature to cure them.” That physician could
not perhaps have explained the precise action of any of his
medicines, but he was not on that account the less justified
in prescribing them, or the less satisfied in regard to their
probable success. We all know that “facts are stubborn
things,” and such are those in mesmerism. We are bound
to believe all facts, however extraordinary in their nature,
and even when rare in their occurrence, if they are attested
by sufficient evidence: and, whatever may be the theory of
mesmerism, we have satisfactory and undeniable proofs, by
long experience and the most accurate examination, that
mesmerism has not only cured many disorders more easily
and more expeditiously than could have been done in any
different manner, but also those which could not otherwise
have been treated with success. It would be endless, and an
unwarrantable waste of your time and patience, if I were to
enumerate a few only of those cases which are the most re-
markable, and I will mention two only of them, one of which
was witnessed by myself. I visited some years ago, in Red
Lion Street, Holborn, a shopkeeper, named Salmon, whose
son, then about 13 years of age, suffered from a paralysis of
the spine, which rendered him unable to sit up in bed, or
even to raise his head from the pillow. His father assured
me that, on the very first visit of Dr. Elliotson, he was en-
abled to rise from his bed, and to walk across the room.*
Never shall I forget the words of the father, which were not
uttered in the presence of my learned friend, or intended as
a compliment to him,—“ it seemed as if Dr. Elliotson had


* See above, p. 188:


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 199


raised my son from the grave.” I had the satisfaction of
seeing the son afterwards at the house of Dr. Elliotson, and
of finding that he had then a healthy complexion, and every
appearance of health and strength and a renovated constitu-
tion, although he was, when I first saw him a few weeks before,
pale, sickly, feeble, and emaciated, as if his vital powers were
nearly exhausted. Need I refer also to a case of total blind-
ness, which was an opacity of the cornea, and had continued
for twenty-six years, and which was cured mesmerically, not
by a medical practitioner, but by a lady, eminent in her
station, and still more eminent in her benevolence.* Could
a cure have been effected, or even attempted, in either of
those cases without employing mesmerism? and if not, may
we not justly consider it to be what it has been-termed by a
reverend gentleman who is now present—“ the gift of God?”
We learn from the valuable record of cases which has been
published by our excellent and indefatigable Secretary, Mr.
Capern, to whom I wish upon this as upon every occasion
to offer the humble tribute of my praise, that mesmerism has
been successfully employed by him in fourteen diseases, some
of which it is often very difficult, if not impracticable, to
cure by other means. It gives me extreme satisfaction to
know that the practice of mesmerism extends itself rapidly,
and that institutions for the purpose have been established
in several districts of this country; and I earnestly wish, as
well as I confidently expect, that the signal benefits which it
confers upon mankind may be enjoyed by future generations,
even more than by the present.

Dr. Elliotson then read the following Report :—

“The Committee of the London Mesmeric Infirmary
rejoice in being able to congratulate the Donors and Sub-
scribers upon the increased support of the charity by the
public, —the increased confidence of the sick and their friends
in the benefits of mesmerism,—and upon the continuance of
proofs of the alleviating and remedial powers of one of the
greatest blessings ever vouchsafed to mankind.

“The conviction of the truth of mesmerism—of the truth
of its phenomena and its alleviating and remedial powers, has
spread most extensively since we last met. To doubt the
mesmeric production of sleep and sleep-waking, and their
dispersion ; of rigidity, catalepsy, and relaxation; the mes-
meric abolition and restoration of sensation; mesmeric trac-
tion ; peculiar, and formerly unknown, effects of metals, crys-


* Mrs. Whately, wife of the Archbishop of Dublin: the case is detailed in
No. XXV. of The Zoist.


200 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


tals, and other substances in the mesmeric state, and in the
ordinary state of some persons who have been in the mes-
meric state, and even in some who have never been mes-
merised,—is no longer regarded as a mark of sagacity and
superiority, but excites surprise and causes an individual to
be considered ignorant and absurd. Even such phenomena
as the mesmeric excitement of distinct cerebral organs, the
sympathy of sensations and ideas, and a certain degree of
clairvoyance, are generally admitted, and their admission no
longer subjects us to the imputation of credulity or exposes
us to ridicule. Fourteen years ago, mesmerism was declared
in London to be destroyed for ever, utterly extinguished, and
sure to be never heard of again except as a tale that is told,
illustrative 6f the ignorance, weakness and folly of a few in-
dividuals who had ruined their reputation irrecoverably. But
now mesmerism is one of the chief topics of conversation,
and is alluded to as a fact in publications of every descrip-
tion: the sale of mesmeric books is very large and has in-
creased astonishingly of late, and Mr. Bailliére informs us
that the demand for the English quarterly journal of mes-


_ merism—The Zoist, far exceeds the demand of even last


year. The medical journals sneer at mesmerism and vilify us
less frequently than before, and, though they continue to
keep all our splendid facts from the eyes of their readers, to
whom it is their duty to make all these facts known, it is
evident that they are conscious of being in an awkward posi-
tion, behind the present day, and near an overwhelming
necessity of acknowledging the truth of what they have so
violently, coarsely, and obstinately denied, and of reporting
mesmeric facts as regularly as others. Although the managers
of the Royal College of Physicians, of the Royal College of
Surgeons, and of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society,
still refuse to purchase mesmeric works, it is known that the
members of the two latter bodies continually ask for The
Zoist : and the desire cannot much longer be disregarded by
those who ought to know better and to have more feeling
for the sufferings of their fellow-creatures. The spread of the
conviction of the truth of mesmerism is shewn in the addi-
tions to our list of donors and subscribers. Since the last
Annual Meeting we have had 47 new donors, besides anony-
mous contributors of mites to the donation-box ; and 38 new
subscribers. Five only of our former subscribers have re-
signed: four expressing their regret at their inability to con-
tinue their subscriptions, and the fifth complaining that a
case of St. Vitus’s dance that she sent us was not cured off
hand at a few sittings. Several of the donations were be-


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 201


stowed in consequence of mesmeric cures having been effected
in the families of the donors, without any connexion with the
Infirmary. Mr. Bailligre, whose daughter’s recovery from
typhus will, we trust, be recorded in the next Zoist, has sent
us, in consequence of it, five guineas through her hands.
Mr. Kingdom, who has related in The Zoist the great benefit
which he derived from mesmerism while recovering from a
severe accident, has sent us ten pounds. Miss Jane Preston,
who was assiduously mesmerised by Mr. Janson, has evinced
her gratitude by presenting us with fifteen pounds.

“The increased confidence of the sick and their friends in
the alleviating and remedial powers of mesmerism is mani-
fested on every side, and is strikingly shewn by the numerous
applications for admission to our Infirmary—far more nume-
rous than we have the means of satisfying. They are now
aware that mesmerism exerts a powerful influence, not over
nervous affections only, but over the diseases of every organ
and over diseases of every description,—upon inflammation,
structural as well as functional diseases, enlargement, change
of texture, ulceration, &c., and that it not only soothes, but
invigorates. Some who are believers in its blessings are still
shut out from them by the gross superstition of its satanic
nature. This preposterous absurdity will continue till educa-
tion becomes what it should be and points out to those upon
whom it is bestowed that all around us is nature,—all governed
by universal and unerring laws; and that mesmerism, like
everything else that man does, must be a natural, cannot be
a supernatural, affair. It may be worth the reflection of the


superstitious, that we have twelve divines on our lists; the |


greater part of them clergymen of the Church of England,


}


one a doctor of divinity and formerly a professor in the Uni-
versity of Oxford, and, at the head of them, an archbishop,
—His Grace the Archbishop of Dublin, who did not for a
moment hesitate to become one of our vice-presidents. An-


other anti-satanic argument is, that above fifty ladies appear |


upon our list.

“Continued proofs of the assuaging and remedial powers
of mesmerism pour upon us on all sides. The Zoist teems
with them every quarter, and numberless others are occurring
daily which are not recorded. Since the last meeting, a
hundred and fifty-four patients have been treated at the In- |
firmary. Twenty were not improved at all: but the greater
part of these attended too short a time for mesmerism to exert
its power, thirteen of them attended but two or three times:
and among them were cases of epilepsy, blindness, and con-
sumption. Nineteen were slightly improved, and the greater

VOL. x. P


|


—


202 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


part of these left us before there was any chance of a cure.
Thirty-nine were much improved,—so much that they did
not think it worth while to attend any longer, though we
should have wished them still to persevere for some weeks :
but persons in all ranks and of all ages and education are
disposed to impatience, and the poor have but too many
causes of inability to attend an institution daily for any time.
Forty-two have been cured. Thirty-four are still under treat-
ment; and of these ten are already greatly improved, and
some have not been with us long enough for benefit to be
expected. It must be remembered that the majority of our
cases are chronic: that most of them have defied medical
treatment, generally at the hands of several practitioners: and
that many are certain of receiving no amelioration from any
kind of non-mesmeric treatment.

“ We may be permitted to mention a few examples of the
rapidity with which mesmerism occasionally cures pain.

“A man, named Benjamin Dickinson, living at No. 1,
Store Street, was attacked with violent gout in his right foot
on Saturday the 14th of last June. The agony was so intense
that for eight and forty hours he could not have put his foot
to the ground had a room full of gold been offered to him,—
to use the words of a statement in our possession by one of
his friends,—Mr. Job, of No. 7, Newman Street. On the
Monday he applied at the Infirmary by the advice of his
friends, but, in the words of a statement written for us by
himself, ‘he did so with the full impression that it would do
no good.’ Inless then ten minutes after Mr. Capern had begun
to mesmerise the foot, he was free from pain; and, though
he had been conveyed to the Infirmary in a cab, he walked
home without requiring even a stick : and soon he put on his
boot. He has not had a relapse.

“ A man, named James Soars, living at No. 12, Giltspur
Street, had suffered five days from agonizing rheumatism of
the head. Having seen Mr. Capern’s book of mesmeric cures,
he applied at the Infirmary in August. A statement in his
own handwriting declares that ‘the pains were continuous,
and often inexpressible ; insomuch that, had he not called in
Bedford Street, he must have discontinued his work.’ Mes-
merism by Mr. Capern entirely and permanently removed the
pain in six or seven minutes.

“Mary Clarkson, of Gloster Street, Cambridge Heath,
has left us this statement:—‘I had pain in the limbs for
three years: the hands and feet were at times contracted and
almost useless. I applied at the Mesmeric Infirmary on the
10th of November, 1851, having severe pain at the time in


ena


ener


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 203


the arms and shoulders. Mr. Capern immediately mesmer-
ised me, and in an amazingly short time entirely relieved me
from all pain ; and I had a good night the first time for three
years.’ Mesmerism was continued; but she attended regu-
larly for a fortnight only. However, on the 9th of December
she considered herself cured. Sleep was induced the second
time of her being mesmerised, and she invariably was free
from pain during the process. She left from the necessity of
going to Dublin: and this is greatly to be regretted, as we
learnt that she had an open cancer of the breast.

“Elizabeth Reid, in the service of Miss Temple Bowdoin,
had suffered above a month with agonizing neuralgic pains of
the head. All ordinary means had failed to relieve her. Mr.
Capern was very busy when she applied and could therefore
mesmerise her for a short time only, and relieved her but
little. At the second mesmerisation, however, great benefit
was obtained; and her natural sleep returned when night
came. A third mesmerisation completed her cure. After a
month she experienced a degree of relapse. This was com-
pletely dissipated ; and the pain has never returned. Miss
Bowdoin felt a pleasure in adding her signature to that of the
patient in attestation of these facts, and in consequence of
them has become a subscriber.

* Maria Smith, of 17, Carburton Street, had suffered from
tic douloureux for five months, and been attended by different
medical men in vain. The pain sometimes prevented her
from speaking for hours: and sometimes a whole day from
eating. She applied on the 20th of December; was greatly
relieved by Mr. Capern at the first mesmerisation ; and cured
in six.

“James Umdallah, an Indian, had been agonized with
pain in his face for two days and nights, and one night did
not sleep at all. On Good Friday, Mr. Capern mesmerised
his face: and in fen minutes the pain ceased. He remained
cured. He said that in his country people are cured in the
same manner by a priest, and that the process is called jar-
phoonk. The priest, he farther mentioned, does not always
employ the hands only, but sometimes holds a feather in
each of his hands. A gentleman from India called about
this time, and told Mr. Capern that the priest pretends he is
obliged to fast, and to pray a great deal to Vishnu, before he
knows where to find the bird which furnishes the feather :
and, when he does know, that more fastings and prayers are
required before the bird will allow him to take two feathers
from its tail. He also said that the operator is not always a
priest ; and, if a layman, is called a Jadrowallah, or conjuror.
r2


204 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


“ A patient, named Samuel Gibbs, of 13, Gloster Street,
who had laboured under chronic rheumatism for two years,
lost his pains from one mesmerisation by Mr. Capern, and
had no more of them except once when he fell down.

“ Another, named Sarah Thompson, who had been tor-
mented with tic douloureux for twenty years, was admitted on
the 22nd of October, and considered herself well upon the
5th of November.

“We had a remarkable case of sudden blindness from
rigid closure of the eyelids, in a girl named Elizabeth Key,
living with her parents in Brompton Place, Hall Park, Pad-
dington. On the night of the 24th of November, at 10
o’clock, in the presence of her father and mother, and being
apparently in perfect health, she suddenly felt as it were an
electric shock in the left eye, which instantly closed firmly.
In five minutes a similar shock was felt in the right eye, and
it closed as firmly. Her father procured medical advice, and
she took a draught. But her eyes remained closed in spite
of medical treatment, and they were in great pain. The
next day she was taken to the Infirmary, and Mr. Capern
caused them to open freely in three minutes by mesmeric
passes. On a few subsequent occasions they closed ; but the
father was able to open them mesmerically, even by gazing
at the lids and willing. The surgeon who was called in, Mr.
Hammond, of Paddington, most honourably gave a certificate
that ‘the cure was an excellent proof of the good effects of
mesmerism in nervous affections.’

“ Her brother, five years of age, afterwards had a similar
seizure. Mesmerism opened his eyes in less than two mi-
nutes, and they have closed but once since.

‘“More formidable affections of the nervous system have
been subdued by mesmerism. A man, named Kilder, was
admitted June the 3rd, with palsy of the right half of his
frame and giddiness. He had been a patient at some of our
chief metropolitan hospitals for above four years, and ata
provincial hospital for three months: and had a seton in his
neck. He, no doubt, was treated in the best manner, but
without advantage. He was completely restored by mes-
merism, and returned to his business, making his first suit of
clothes for Mr. Capern to order on his recovery. He could
be rendered universally rigid at any moment.

“A patient, named James Guest, of 16, St. James’s
Buildings, Clerkenwell, had for seven years been afflicted
with intense hypochondriasis, preventing him from following
his occupation and rendering him sometimes distracted. He
had been under many practitioners, ahd in medical charities,


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 205


without deriving any benefit ; though, no doubt, like the last
patient, treated as well as the present state of medical know-
ledge permits. Eight mesmerisations restored him to health
and happiness.

“ Mary Macarthy, a woman living at No. 9, Robin Hood
Court, Tooley Street, had been subject to epileptic fits from
September, 1849, when she applied at the Infirmary on the
9th of last July. She was in Guy’s Hospital five weeks,
without benefit : and then in St. Thomas’s four months, and
improved sufficiently to leave it; but, soon becoming worse
again, she returned, and remained another four months, and
again improved, left it, and grew as bad as ever. On coming
here, she was at once mesmerised by Mr. Capern, and during
the process had a violent fit, which lasted two hours and a
half: but from that day the disease abated, and she ceased to
attend on the 8th of October, quite free from her disease,
and she remains well.

“ Before concluding, we may briefly mention two interest-
ing cases, exemplifying the power of mesmerism over diseases
of other parts than the nervous system.

“ A woman, named Hammond, resident at No. 21, Conduit
Street, Westbourne Terrace, who, after a confinement, had
suffered for five years such severe symptoms as betokened
organic disease and induced some to consider her case can-
cerous, though it was not, persevered here with mesmerism for
a year, and was completely cured: and a patient with an ova-
rian tumor, now under treatment, has already experienced a
great diminution of its bulk, and an equal improvement in
her health and strength.

‘A parallel circumstance is, that a poor blind child with
a large head, who is mesmerised regularly, is, though not
improved in his vision, experiencing a great improvement in;
the appearance of his head. Not expecting his head to dimin-|
ish, we did not measure it at his admission. But after a
time the diminution of the head struck every body, and it
was measured. On a second measurement, it was found to
have lessened an inch and a quarter in circumference, and an ,
inch over the summit.


“ We have received :—


£ «s. d.
EE See a
Annual Subscriptions ............... 224 4 0
Rent of some of Mr. Baume’s gift .... 10 0 0
Interest on five Exchequer Bills. ..... .”. 11 O11
By sale of Crystals ................. 2 0 0


Total.......... £437 9 63


206 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


“ Our expenses have amounted to £437: 10: 1, being 64d.
over our receipts.* But we have £884:3:9 in hand. We
may therefore consider ourselves very prosperous. But we
are anxious to extend the benefits of mesmerism. We are
anxious to be able to mesmerise a much larger number of pa-
tients, and to have an hospital in which patients may reside,
as the sick cannot obtain the advantage of mesmerism in the
ordinary hospitals.

“Twenty names in the list of donors and subscribers are


| those of medical men. We know the utility of ordinary me-


dical treatment : we have the same good opinion of the properties
of medicines, the abstraction of blood, counter-irritation, and
all well-established medical measures, as the medical world at
large : those of us who are medical men practise exactly as the
rest of the profession practise: but in our private practice we
employ mesmerism IN ADDITION to the means ordinarily used
by the medical profession, knowing for a certainty that mes-
merism cures diseases not at present cured by ordinary means
and assists all the established methods of cure. The general
healing power of mesmerism appears to be that of assisting
nature to throw off disease, whatever that disease may be—
to aid the vis medicatriz nature.

“ The lease of the present house will expire at Christmas,
and we are desirous of taking such further measures in that
respect as may be necessary.

“We beg to express our warmest thanks to the Ladies
who so kindly constitute the ladies’ committee. They attend
in committee weekly : and one or more visit the house every
day. Their presence, their suggestions, and general assist-
tance, are invaluable.

“Nor can we conclude without expressing our sense of
Mr. Capern’s value. His devotion to the blessings of mes-
merism—his untiring zeal—his benevolence, modesty, and
disinterestedness, are beyond all praise.”


a Zed.

* Salaries . o ateecepecevecssscccseecss Sa OS
Rent (5 quarters) .. Stee en sens ececrecnesst os Oe a
Rates and Taxes .... rer ee ee
Printing, ee and Advertisements .......... 1915 0
Sundries .... ccoe BM.
Law expenses of securing ‘and letting 3 Mr. Baume’s gift 24 8 3
Assurance of ditto ...... ; case 25 0
Carpenter, &c. . oo nd Cede teenadereceesascce Oe. eee
£437 9 1


Of this the law and carpenter’s expenses (37 : }4 : 0) will not occur again.
The only charge of treating for more patients would be in mesmerisers.


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 207


Mr. Monckton Mityzs, M.P., in moving the adoption of | ¥


the report, said he regarded mesmerism not in any professional |
or limited point of view, but as a province of the vast king-
dom of nature, demanding the interest of every intelligent
man and the appreciation of every student of nature and his-
tory. (Cheers.) He had been led long ago to take an interest
in this wonderful agent of natural power, because, by an ap-
plication to its phenomena of the true principles of evidence,
he had become convinced that there lay in it a physical truth
which it was unwise and unmanly to deny, merely because in
this, as in all other sciences, a sagacious induction of facts,
hitherto unobserved or misunderstood, must precede any
theory. He believed the Mesmeric Infirmary had been
wisely established for this very purpose, besides its utility as
a therapeutic relief of the sufferings of humanity, and he
was also sure it had been prudently conducted. It was no
easy matter to form such an institution in the state of public
feeling. He was disposed to think there were circumstances
connected with mesmerism, that might explain the great
difficulty it had to encounter in asserting itself as a science,
and establishing itself in a nation so careful of receiving evi-
dence as the English people generally were. The fact of their
not being able to lay down a rule defining the physiological
and psychological properties of mesmerism had led to mes- |
merism being incumbered with so much imposture and false- |
hood. Owing to scientific men refusing from prejudice to
receive mesmerism as a science, it had been delivered up as a
prey to the impostor, whose exaggerations and delusions had


prevented any clear and definite understanding as to the real .


character of this mysterious agent being arrived at. He was
confident the institution would do a vast deal of good, because
it was in the hands of as self-sacrificing a body of men as ever
stood forward to demand the public sympathy. (Cheers.) He
would also call attention to the circumstance, that, whatever
might be the present success of this establishment and of the
treatment there practised, they had no right to measure by
this success the real probability of the success of this agent
when it had once a fair chance and took its just place in
science. As long as mesmerism was only applied to when
every other means had failed, how much might its instances


of success and benefit be diminished. He believed it was a}


great mistake and a dangerous error to use mesmerism for
the mere purpose of experiment and amusement, and hoped


that so powerful an instrument would only be employed by |


persons well acquainted with its real effects. ‘
Mr. Avexanpver J. Exxis (of Redland, Bristol) said, in


208 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


seconding the adoption of the report,—“ Dr. Elliotson, in read-
ing the report, alluded to the fact that it was once imagined
mesmerism was dead. Indeed it is a matter of notoriety that
a certain well-known coroner thought that he had sat upon
its body, and presumed upon having dug a grave for it with
an insignificant Lancet. But, if mesmerism has died, we
cannot help regarding it this day as experiencing a most glo-
rious apotheosis. The growth of the public favour which it
experiences is well shewn in our present meeting. Last year
we assembled within the walls of the Infirmary ; this year our
ambition extended to one of the smaller rooms of this esta-
blishment, but its bounds were too small, and we now meet
in this room, certainly not in sufficient numbers to fill the whole
of it, yet next year perhaps even this room will be found too
small to contain the numerous supporters of this most bene-
volent institution. (Applause.) The progress of mesmerism
in this country has been extremely indebted to the opposition
it has experienced. That opposition has stirred up such a
spirit among its supporters, that they have investigated col-
lected evidence, and spared no exertion to disprove the asser-
tions of their opponents, and to establish as a fact the bene-
ficial and remedial agency of mesmerism. It is not opposition
—it is indifference, which is killing. (Hear, hear.) I was
very much struck, some years ago when I was in Germany,
at observing the different light in which mesmerism is regarded
in this country and in that. In Germany it is accepted;
physicians do not seem to oppose it at all; they recommend
it, and it has its regular practitioners: but these practitioners
are surprised when they hear what is done in England. The
Germans have simply treated the whole subject with indif-
ference—as a remedy to be used like a drug in a chemist’s
shop, and thought of perhaps just as little. It is by oppo-
sition that we can hope to discover and fortify all our weak
points, and to arrive at final success. Failures are more use-
ful than successes. (Applause.) The story goes that there
were three persons once commissioned to paint a camel. One
of them went, it is said, to the desert to study the animal in
its natural sphere of existence: he saw its whole character,
and presented a most faithful copy. Another went to a zoo-
logical garden, and saw the animal in a state of captivity: he
produced certainly a picture like a camel, but wanting the
spirit of the first. The third, however, who had a metaphy-
sical turn of mind, locked himself up in his study, and en-
deavoured to evolve the idea of a camel from the depths of his
inmost consciousness. (Laughter.) It is needless to say that
his picture has not yet appeared. ‘hese three persons are


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 209


the types of three different investigators. The first is one
who looks upon nature determined to accept it as it is,—to
put it under no artificial constraint, observing it as much as
he can in every possible form in which it presents itself. He
is the one to whom we must look for real results. The second
is more common: he also studies nature, but he wishes
nature to do as he orders it; he must have results answer to
his expectation, or he disbelieves them. If a man’s leg is
cut off, and the other leg doesn’t kick, he says the man is an
impostor,*—not, that his own theory is wrong, as evidently he
ought to have said. But the third class, the @ priori philoso-
phers, are unfortunately more common than all, and it is from
them that mesmerism has experienced, and is in the present
day experiencing, the strongest opposition. They are per-
sons who, having from very insufficient induction made up
their minds, declare that they do not understand how it is
possible such things as we announce could happen, and there-
fore they disbelieve them. They do not understand how it is
that one man should be able to exert power over another.
They know very well that a drug does so. ‘Ah! yes,’ they
say, ‘I can understand how mercury affects the liver; but I
do not understand how, if you just wave your hand before a
person’s face, you can produce any effect at all. I have
waved my hand before many persons’ faces, and they have
experienced nothing of the kind.’ In that way they refuse
to examine the evidence which is presented to their minds ;
but many of those persons are really not worth having the
evidence presented to them, for they are not able properly to
appreciate it. (Hear, hear.) In society, however, we find so
many who entertain similar opinions, that it is necessary to
be able to shew them at once that they are not justified in
the assertions they make. Now, the first thing they always
feel is that so great an effect cannot be produced from so
slight a cause. The fact is, as everybody knows who has
thought upon the subject, that we have not the slightest idea,
with respect to any set of conditions which have not occurred
before, what will be the set of consequences which will ensue.
The least alteration of certain conditions will entirely alter
the result; and in mesmerism, where the conditions are ex-
ceedingly complicated, and may be arranged in an almost
infinite variety of ways, we must look forward to an almost
infinite variety of results, not as being produced by the same
causes, but by really different causes. In the course of me-
dicine it is all very well to say, ‘We know that mercury does


* Dr. Marshall Hall, Sir B. Brodie, &c.—Zoist.


210 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


affect the liver ; but there is no physician who will say he
knows why it affects the liver; he simply knows the fact. As
with mercury so it is with all other drugs: we have one un-
organized substance acting upon an organized one ; the un-
organized substance is comparatively simple, the organized
substance is exceedingly complex; and every physician who
has attempted it is perfectly well aware of the great difficulty
there is in substantiating the direct action of any one medi-
cine upon the human body. But with mesmerism we have
twororganized bodies, one acting upon another. The compli-
cation of circumstances is double ; hence in the present state
of knowledge there is no person who is at all able to say a
priori what is likely to result from the action of one human
being on another. At present, mesmerism is in the stage of
observation, and we have not anything like sufficient facts to
form a theory. Unfortunately many mesmerists have been
exceedingly anxious to erect some grand theory of their own.
The injudiciousness of such a course is sufficiently shewn by
the report of the French Commissioners, which was directed
not against the facts which they saw, and which they ad-
mitted to be genuine, but against the existence of a certain
mesmeric or magnetic fluid. Now, for years and years that
decision of the Commission was supposed to be a decision
against mesmerism. Nothing could be more ridiculous, because
mesmerism in its present state and in its then state was not a
theory, but a collection of facts out of which a theory might
perhaps be built. Again, some of the facts which are re-
corded in mesmerism strike persons as being impossible be-
cause they are contrary to their notions. We say of clair-
voyants, that they ‘see’ things, that they read with their
eyes shut, and ‘see’ through a wall. Now we know by the
construction of the eye that if the eyelid closes we cannot
see. This contradiction arises from an unfortunate use of a
word. That clairvoyants have an apprehension of things be-
yond them, answering, to a certain extent, to our sight, even
when their eyes are closed, is true; but the apprehension
which they have is not sight, for it differs altogether from the
laws of sight. They see from very different parts of the body
and in different directions from what they doin sight. Hence
the word ‘seeing’ is an unfortunate one, and I would sug-
gest, from the word ‘clairvoyant’ that we use the verb ‘to
clear view,’ instead of ‘to see,’ on such occasions. We
are surprised at what is unusual; we are not surprised at
what happens every day. People are not astonished at sight,
but at clairvoyance ; but if they had seen, however, as I have,
persons going about day after day with their eyes closed, and


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 211


acting precisely in the same way as if they were opened,
moving things out of their way, and never missing anything
they wished to take up, their surprise would cease, and they
would find it such an ordinary phenomenon that they would
be much more astonished at witnessing failure than at ob-
serving success. It is very necessary to bear in mind that
mesmerism is only wonderful because it is uncommon, and
the object of such an institution as this is to do away with
that wonder by making it common to all classes of society.
It is not to be supposed for an instant that the benefits of
mesmerism are confined to the walls of the Mesmeric In-
firmary. There are hundreds and hundreds of persons who
are perpetually practising it, and to whom it is as much a
matter of course, if they feel pain in any part of the body,
to ask a person to make a few passes over it, as it would be
to ask for plaster if they had cut their fingers. (Hear, hear.)
That class of persons is increasing very greatly. It is not to
be wondered at that persons who do not bestow their attention
generally upon scientific subjects, arrive at such false conclu-
sion as those we have mentioned ; but when we see persons
whose business it is to instruct others—who have had the
education of the highest class in exactly that description of
cases in which mesmerism is effective—who have studied the
anatomy and physiology of the human body; when we see
them blindly refusing to take cognizance of mesmeric cases ;
when we see those who sit in wisdom’s chair bringing the
passions to rebel against her; when we see them heaping
abuse in order to excite angry feelings against a matter of
science ; when we see them trying all means in their power
to run down those benevolent men of their own class who
have ventured to stand out as advocates of these new and
therefore despised truths,—then indeed we are tempted to
cry out, ‘Shame against those professors! shame against
them! But may they live to repent, and to advocate that
which they now so unworthily refuse to study !’” (Applause.)

Mr. Ellis then referred to the trials which awaited mes-
merists themselves in the results of their own investigations ;
and, after alluding to the fears formerly entertained by phre-
nologists of the obloguy attached to mesmerism, so that the
Phrenological Association at first dreaded to admit the mes-
meric proofs of phrenology, and to homeopathy, continued :

“It is necessary for the investigation of mesmerism that
facts should be brought forward and should be open to public
investigation. In the majority of cases which occur in pri-
vate families it is quite impossible for investigators to have
access to them for the purposes of study. The Mesmeric


212 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


Infirmary is open to the world. We should not have ad-
vanced in the medical profession but for those large hospitals
where numberless cases are brought forward in which we are
able to see the actions of medicines upon different constitu-
tions, and under very different circumstances. Nor shall we
advance in mesmerism until we are able to collect a body of
facts which will lead us finally to a theory. The facts already
collected are sufficient to prove the truth of mesmerism. It
is no slight satisfaction to ourselves as investigators that we
stand in such a very different position to that of the investi-
gators of other sciences. When Galileo first observed the
satellites of Jupiter, he could have had no idea of the bene-
ficent result which would be produced in the saving of lives
by finding out the longitude. When Galvani observed the
quivering of a frog’s leg, and Oersted first observed the de-
flection of the magnetic needle, they had no idea of such a
result as the electric telegraph. When a person by way of a
conjuring trick first dangled a ring from his finger, he had
no idea that he had got the clue to an instrument by which
perhaps the human mind might be gauged. But here we
have a very different case. Here every experiment we make
produces the most beneficent and excellent result. Here the
soothing hand, the speaking eye, the benevolent will, act at
once to soothe, to reinvigorate, to revive. We cannot stira
step without doing good to our fellow-countrymen ; we cannot
pursue an apparently abstract science without practically
benefitting humanity. For this purpose the Infirmary should
be supported to the utmost extent. The idea mentioned in
the report of enlarging it, so as to receive more patients, in-
cluding perhaps in-patients, is one which, I think, all our
subscribers must earnestly lay to heart ; and they will, I hope,
endeavour, by the true, unmistakeable gauge of a money
support, to shew the real interest which they take in this ex-
cellent institution.”

The motion was carried unanimously.

The CuarrMan observed that Mr. M. Milnes (who had
just left the room) had said a good deal about the imposition
which was practised by means of mesmerism. Now, he
denied that imposition was possible in purely medical cases,
for they were to be judged by medical men. He supposed
the Hon. Gentleman must have alluded to those psychological
phenomena on which he had abstained from saying anything ;
for they were not, never were, and never would be, the object
of inquiry by that institution ; but, at the same time, he did
not wish to be understood as throwing any doubt on the
reality of those phenomena. >


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 213


Mr. Luxmoore rose with great pleasure to propose as an
addition to the list of vice-presidents a gentleman whose
scientific attainments were only equalled by his moral worth.
When he mentioned the name of Professor De Morgan, he
was quite sure he would have the acquiescence of all present.
He would at that late hour detain the meeting only for a
single remark. It had been said that all cases treated mes-
merically should be under the guidance of an experienced
medical practitioner; and in this, as far as severe and dan-
gerous complaints were concerned, he fully agreed: but al-
though the investigation of mesmerism and its varied pheno-
mena might and did require the most active energies of the
best developed brain, still great relief from suffering might
be afforded by the most humble peasant to his afflicted neigh-
bour. If in all cases we had waited for medical superintend-
ence, many is the sufferer who would have been deprived of
relief. In witness of which he would call their attention to
the cases of Mr. Capern, their excellent secretary, as recorded
by him in a small volume published some months since, who
had often met the lame, maimed, halt, and blind, taken them
to the nearest dwelling, and at once reduced the amount of
their sufferings and ultimately effected acure. He now begged
to move that Professor De Morgan, of University College, be
elected a vice-president of the Mesmeric Infirmary.

Mr. Asnurst Masenpie had much pleasure in seconding
the nomination proposed. He thought it of great import-
ance to their cause, that a professor of the exact sciences of
such high eminence as Mr. De Morgan should be willing to |
accept office in their institution. They already possessed
among their members many physicians of reputation who
were devoted to the cause of mesmerism. He should not, he
believed, appear to make an invidious distinction, if he ex-
pressed more especial admiration for one of them who had
risked in the cause of truth everything dear to man—his re-
putation and his fortune. It was a lamentable fact, that
while many of the leading persons in the medical world were
anxious in cases of difficulty to consult Dr. Elliotson, from
their high estimate of his talent, knowledge, and experience,
yet when the subject of mesmerism was under consideration,
treated him as one who was carried away by his imagination,
and distrusted his judgment. Yet Dr. Elliotson, from the
result of observation, was as firmly persuaded of the curative
operation of mesmerism as of any other medical appliances.
He had hopes that some of those eminent members of the
medical profession, who in the pride of science had hitherto
refused to read that page of the great book of nature which


214 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


mesmerism laid before them, might be hereafter induced to
change their conduct, when they learnt the election of that
day. They might now be informed, that such a person as
Professor De Morgan, a gentleman the bent of whose mind
has been directed to the most rigid laws of evidence in ab-
stract science, has been convinced of the truths of mesmerism,
and is willing to take an active part in its promulgation. Al-
though mesmerism may not yet have attained the dignity of
science, yet the constant recurrence of facts is tending to the
establishment of laws ; and under the auspices of the enlight-
ened patrons of our institution, it is to be hoped that the
accumulation of evidence may shortly be so complete as to
secure a general conviction of the truth and value of mes-
merism.

The motion was carried unanimously.

Mr. H. U. Janson (of Exeter) said he appeared at that
meeting in precisely the same circumstances as at the last,
having come, on both occasions, with the intention of giving
an account of the great success of the mesmeric cause in
Exeter, under the direction of Mr. Parker; but he was happy
to state that in both cases he had been forestalled by the pre-
sence of that gentleman himself; from whom the audience
would hear any such detail with much greater interest. He
should therefore merely state that the successful practice of
mesmerism in Exeter had indeed been most encouraging.
Not only had numerous and surprising cures been effected
by its means, after all others had failed, but also a great
amount of human suffering had been prevented in the way
of painless operations: and among them he had the satisfac-
tion of stating that more than fifty teeth had thus been ex-
tracted by Mr. Parker, several of which operations he him-
self had witnessed; and he could assure the audience that
those who had experienced what it was to have a large, firm,
and deeply-rooted grinder wrenched out in the usual manner,
would fully agree with him that it was a great blessing to
have the operation performed without either feeling or recol-
lecting anything of it! (Cheers and laughter.) It appeared
to him that he could not do better, under present circum-
stances, than strongly to urge all his hearers not to be con-
tent with merely hearing or reading about mesmeric cures,
&e., but to make zealous endeavours to work it, practically,
themselves. He was desirous of disabusing the public mind
of a very erroneous, but very prevalent, impression, that the
sanative power, known by the name of “ mesmerism,” is a
very rare gift, and bestowed only on very few individuals.
On the contrary, there was reason to believe that it is in the


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 215


power of any individual, with ordinary health and strength,
to effect a considerable amount of benefit; and if people
would only lay aside their diffidence, and fearlessly make a
resolute and persevering attempt, they would probably have
reason to be greatly surprised at the amount of their own
achievements. It would not become him to enlarge upon the
success of his own exertions, otherwise he could expatiate, at
great length, upon the numerous aches and pains that he had
relieved and cured. He would therefore merely repeat his
injunction, that the audience would take courage and try
their own powers: and if so, he doubted not that they would
soon have cause to rejoice that they had acted upon his advice.
At the same time, he recommended them, if possible, to ope-
rate under the supervision of a regular medical practitioner
who was favourable to the mesmeric cause. Such individuals,
he had much pleasure in stating, are not now so rare as they
were some years ago; and if we had in every town through-
out Britain a single surgeon who did his duty as Mr. Parker
of Exeter does, the mesmeric contest would be very speedily
and most completely decided. Mr. J. concluded by moving
that Dr. Ashburner and Captain Topham, who retire from
the committee by rotation, be re-elected: and that Colonel
Bagnold and Mr. Wilberforce be elected on the committee in
the room of Mr. 8. Chandler and Mr. Robertson, who are
unable to attend.

Mr. J. B. Parker (of Exeter) had much pleasure in se-
conding Mr. Janson’s resolutions, and would trespass but a
few moments on such a large and respectable audience. He
must however say that mesmerism had only shared the ob-
loquy common to all other discoveries. As the history of
man for nearly 6000 years had been written in blood, science
had but little chance, as we all well knew that war had been
an obstacle to all social, moral, and intellectual improvement.
But now a new era had dawned upon us; now we were en-
joying the blessings of peace. Its fruits we had just seen in
a neighbouring country, where the venerable Arago had
valued more the friendship of a Humboldt, a Brewster, and
a Faraday, than he dreaded the chains of a tyrant. And
had we not a noble example among us, whose zeal in the
cause of truth had laid the foundation of this institution, in
spite of the sneers and ridicule of the unthinking, money-
seeking multitude? He need scarcely tell the meeting he
alluded to Dr. Elliotson, for whose brow a diadem was
wrought, more precious than the mineral productions of the
earth, whose lustre would not be tarnished by time or space,
and on whose glory the sun would never set. The blessings


216 London Mesmeric Infirmary.


of mesmerism could not be too widely spread. Dr. Marshall
Hall had been lecturing before the College of Physicians on
epilepsy, which he well considered the direst malady which
afflicted the human race, and he was compelled to admit that
he knew no remedy for it. Would he not do well to study
honestly the curative powers of mesmerism for this dreadful
curse? He (Mr. Parker) had witnessed the entire cure of a
patient who had suffered frightfully from this malady for up-
wards of fourteen years. Mesmerism had entirely restored
her to health, thanks to the benevolent codperation of his
friend, Mr. Luxmoore ; and he would now beg the audience
to ponder on this fact, and would only ask if such a blessing
could be too extensively known ?

The motion was carried unanimously.

The Rev. George Sanpsy, on proposing the next reso-
lution, said he congratulated the friends of mesmerism upon
the success of their meeting ; he congratulated them upon
the triumphant position which they had that day attained.
They had made a great stride ; they stood that morning upon
a high vantage ground, from which their adversaries would
not be able to drive them back. It was delightful to perceive
the change in public opinion on the subject of mesmerism,
which was so plainly indicated by the large and crowded
assembly which was there gathered together to learn the
progress of their institution. That institution was thriving:
and from the report which they had heard read that morning,
they had every reason to persevere, and to thank God, and
take courage. They had reason to rejoice that the merciful
gift of a bounteous Creator was every day becoming more
prized, more appreciated, and more employed. But they
must not be content with what they had done: they must
push onward: they must hope to see mesmerism introduced
into every hospital in the kingdom: they must hope to see
an “ Elliotson Ward” in every hospital: they must hope to
see every institution throughout the land recognizing the
services of their admirable and enlightened friend: and this
he did not despair of witnessing, especially after such an
attendance as that which was before them on that occasion.
The reverend gentleman then proceeded to pass a high eulo-
gium upon the services of the ladies’ committee: and having
described the kind and unwearied exertions with which they
devoted themselves to the prosperity of the Infirmary, con-
cluded with moving, that the cordial thanks of this meeting
be offered to the ladies’ committee for their valuable services,
and that Mrs. De Morgan, Mrs. Symes, Mrs. Wm. Herring,
Miss Brine, Miss Emma Brine, Miss Wallace, and Miss


London Mesmeric Infirmary. 217


Swanneck, at present constituting the committee, be requested
to continue for another year.

Mr. C. Unperwoop said he had much pleasure in second-
ing the resolution, but would not detain the meeting at that
late hour by any lengthened remarks. He believed that a
large proportion of the supporters of the Infirmary had be-
come so from having, either in their own persons or among
their relatives and friends (as indeed was exemplified in the
report which had been read) experienced the beneficial effects
resulting from mesmerism. He had become a convert to
mesmerism from having witnessed in the case of his own
sister mesmeric phenomena produced under circumstances of
striking and peculiar interest, and he had himself experienced
its blessings in seeing her relieved through its operation from
the most intense sufferings. He concluded by seconding the
resolution.

The motion was carried by acclamation.

Mr. Joun Amor moved, and Professor M‘Dona.p se-
conded the motion, that the committee be empowered to make
arrangements for taking another house for the purposes of
the institution, or for renewing their interest in the present
house, as they shall consider it expedient. This also was
agreed to.

Dr. AsupurNER moved that the cordial thanks of the
meeting be given to Earl Stanhope for his kindness in taking
the chair.


The following note was to have been read at the meeting :


** 25th May, 1852.

“* My dear Dr. Elliotson,—I regret extremely that, as I leave town
to-morrow morning for the continent, I cannot have the pleasure of
attending the Annual Meeting of the Subscribers to the Mesmeric
Infirmary.

‘* Had I remained in town, I should most certainly have attended
the meeting, in order to testify to my firm conviction that mesmerism
is the most important subject, in its practical bearings on all forms
of human suffering, and in the prospects it affords of advancement
in psychological science, which can occupy the attention of intelli-
gent persons; and also for the purpose of emphatically declaring the
deep sense I entertain of the debt of gratitude which the cultivators
of mesmerism owe to you for the noble and effectual manner in
which you have defended the sacred cause of truth against the
attacks of self-sufficient ignorance and malignant prejudice.

**I would gladly have expressed also the conviction which I feel
sure that every one who knows anything of the state of publie opi-
nion and who can read the signs of the times will share with me,
that the day is not far distant when the universal admission of mes-

VOL. x. Q


218 Dublin Mesmeric Dispensary.


meric truth, and the constant use of mesmerism as a curative agent,
will recompense you a hundredfold for the sacrifices you have made
to the cause of truth, benevolence, and human progress.
“I beg you will make my apology to the meeting for my una-
voidable absence on this interesting occasion, and believe me,
** Yours most truly,
* Witt1aM Grecory.”


The patient with uterine disease, whose case is mentioned
at p. 205, was at the meeting in perfect health, and could
hardly be restrained from addressing the company.


NOTE BY THE ZOIST.


** Mr. Wakley says he is resolved that Mesmerism shall no longer
be employed in this or any other hospital.”—Speech of Mr. Wakley’s
Clerk to Dr. Elliotson in the ward of University College Hospital,
where he was allowed as a favour to see Elizabeth Okey, November,
1838.

Resolved—‘‘ That the Hospital Committee be instructed to take
such steps as they shall deem most advisable, to prevent the practice
of Mesmerism or Animal Magnetism in future within the Hospital.”
—Resolution of the Council of University College, December 27, 1838.


XV. Mesmeric Dispensary in Dublin.


‘* Nevertheless, there is comfort. The world is round, saith the proverb, and
all things come to an end. Pass a few short months and the delusion stands ex-
posed; the actors are declared to be deceivers or deceived; the facts so iately
boasted of are trampled upon with contempt, and the doctrines built upon them
are laughed to scorn. The fashionable crowd flock to a new prima donna or to a
watering-place doctor; and the half-converted physicians and surgeons never
mention the subject more ; for, although the folly will rise again, it will scarcely
be in their time.’”—Drs. Forbes and Conolly, British and Foreign Medical Review,
April, 1839.


LEARNING in a recent letter from the Archbishop of Dublin
that a Mesmeric Infirmary had been established in Dublin, I
requested His Grace to give me some further information re-
specting it, and received the following letter—J. E..iorson.


** Merton, Cullenswood, Dublin,
** June 10, 1852.

“‘ Dear Sir,—His Grace the Archbishop of Dublin has just in-
formed me that you were anxious to hear something about the Mes-
meric Infirmary I have got up in Dublin. I therefore now enclose
you one of our prospectuses. We are working, I am happy to say,
very well: we have two paid operators—a male and female ; both
appear to have a fair share of power. I am indeed thankful to God
to be able to say that I have been most successful in using mesmerism


Dublin Mesmeric Dispensary. 219


as a curative power, and have had some remarkable cases, which the
Archbishop of Dublin can bear testimony to. I have now two cases
of cancer of the breast, which are making eztraordinary progress:
one the Archbishop’s housekeeper. I find that sleep is quite unne-
cessary. In every.case I have had that really is worth recording, I
have not put them into a deep sleeyp—I mean, an unconscious state.
May I ask, is this your experience and opinion? I shall feel truly
grateful for any suggestions you may give me, I have more cases
than I can possibly manage. Though I mesmerise nine or ten every
day, I do not feel any ill results to myself. I never experiment: I
use the power solely as a curative agent, and, thank God, have been
most successful. With earnest prayer that the Lord may enable us
to use the valuable gift, and not abuse it,
** Believe me, dear Sir, yours very truly,

** FaLconer MILEs.

** Dr. Elliotson, 37, Conduit Street.”


** The Dublin Mesmeric Association, having for its object * The establish-
ment of the principles of Mesmerism, and their practical applica-
tion to the removal of Pain and Disease. —Yearly Subscription,
Ten Shillings.


‘* President—Fatconer Mites, Esq., Merton, Cullenswood.
Treasurer—Joun Gray, Esq., Windsor Terrace, Kingstown.


‘*The Committee of the Dublin Mesmeric Association, in ap-
pealing to their fellow-citizens in behalf of a Mesmeric Hospital,
feel themselves called on to explain the character and objects of the
Association, and to remove some misconceptions which prevail, or
might be likely to arise, on the subject. They wish it to be dis-
tinctly understood, that their object is not to maintain or to devise
any scientific theory, but simply to extend the knowledge of certain
important facts, and to facilitate the beneficial application of that
knowledge, in the relief of suffering, and the cure of disease. With
this view, they propose, not to occupy themselves with a variety of
experiments for the gratification of mere speculative curiosity, but to
seek exclusively for practically useful results.

“Without intending to disparage scientific investigation, or to
pronounce for, or against, any particular theory, they propose to
confine their attention to what is practical, and practically useful.
But they would, at the same time, remind those who are eager after
philosophical speculations, that in all departments of knowledge, the
ascertainment of facts has always come first in order, and that cor-
rect theories to account for existing phenomena, have always (when
such have been attained) appeared long after, and have been based
on those facts. The reversed procedure—that of seeking in the first
instance for a theory, and disregarding, or misrepresenting, all facts
that cannot be satisfactorily explained on such theory—this is pre-
cisely that ‘ANTICIPATION OF NATURE,’ which Bacon protested
against as the bane of true philosophy, and which it was the great
object of his life to supersede, by the ‘ INTERROGATION of nature.’


220 Dublin Mesmeric Dispensary.


“The Committee beg also to be understood, most clearly and
candidly, that they do not seek to produce Mesmerism before the
public, as an agent capable of curing all diseases, or by any means
wish it to usurp the place of the medical man; but simply put it
forward as an individual remedy, capable of controlling and exercis-
ing a powerful and beneficial influence over a vast number of ail-
ments: and more especially those called nervous and chronic affec-
tions, which medical men at all times have acknowledged as little
benefitted by the mere administration of drugs.

“The mesmeric sleep, which usually exhausts itself in a few
hours, can, if needed, and on certain conditions, be prolonged for
days and even weeks. By this prolonged me and other means, as
Phreno-Mesmerism, &c., Dr. Kean’s successful treatment, and per-
fect cure of sixty-four cases of insanity was effected; indeed, by this
sleep, an endless catalogue of varied ills have been cured, from the
needless tremor of the delicate girl, to the wild yell of the raging
maniac.

“The Committee, fully aware that Mesmerism is as yet but in
its infaney, requiring a much more extended field for the observa-
tion of its phenomena, than has been hitherto allowed it, and as
calling for an increased amount of experiment, to furnish additional
facts towards its development, before it can be enrolled in the list of
sciences; put it forward simply as an accumulation of facts, valuable
in a curative point of view, as affording a new therapeutic agent, won-
derful in its influence over health and disease, while it is more harm-
less, and more manageable than most drugs. And, therefore, the
Committee do not in any way pledge themselves, as the supporters
of this hospital, to any theory or explanation, however seemingly
correct or scientific, as to the phenomena or operative agency of Mes-
merism, intending to deal with it practically only, and rather prefer-
ring that medical men should carry out and interest themselves in its
more scientific and elaborate details and principles.

“The Committee feel it of vital importance to their own cha-
racter, to the people, and to the cause of Mesmerism itself, to dis-
claim any connection or co-operation with those who receive or
practise mesmerism, as derived from supernatural agency or miracle-
working power, independent of the laws of creation; bit, on the
contrary, would more humbly and gratefully acknowlege it as an ad-
ditional means granted by the Almighty to man, to make him more
dependent on Him, and more useful to his fellow-man; and believe
its phenomena to be solely the result of the vital force, conveyed by
the operator to the more delicate and susceptible nervous organiza-
tion of the person mesmerised ; just as light, or heat, or sound, &c.,
variously affect the animal or organic tissues they come in contact
with.

‘Lastly, the Committee would suggest to the public, and in
particular to the medical men of this city, that, when the existence
of a real and important agent has been established by facts, which
it is vain to attempt denying, and when great and increasing public
attention has been drawn to these facts, it is most important to the


More Clairvoyance in Alexis Didier. 221


well-being of society, that such an agent should not be left exclusively
in the hands of the ignorant and thoughtless, or of designing and
ill-disposed persons; but that means should be taken for affording
all candid persons an opportunity of fair investigation ; so that truth
may be distinguished from falsehood, and a beneficial from a noxious
or dangerous application of the powers which Providence has placed
within our reach.

**The Committee meet every Monday evening, at 13, Anglesea
Street, at eight o’clock, for the transaction of business, and the fur-
therance of the objects of the Association. Subscriptions and Dona-
tions will be thankfully received and acknowledged by the Treasurer,
J. Gray, Esq., or any member of the Committee.

«* By Order,
TI, Mac Donnetu, Hon. Secretary.


**The Infirmary is open daily for the attendance of patients at
13, Anglesea Street.”


XVI. More Clairvoyance in Alexis Didier. By Dr. E.u1otTson.


Ir was only in the last Number but one (January, 1852) that
I gave some conclusive and remarkable recent proofs of the
clairvoyance of Alexis Didier, with references to many other
examples of his powers recorded in former Numbers. I un-
derstand that the following also may be relied upon, and have
therefore translated and forwarded them.

“ A few days ago, a money-changer in the neighbourhood
of the Place Vendome, after he had exchanged a consider-
able sum for a person of fashionable manners, and the latter
had left the office, perceived that he had overpaid 400 francs.
Not admiring this, he began to consider how he should dis-
cover his customer, and noticed on the counter the piece of
paper in which the money brought to him had been wrapped,
and on it part of a seal which appeared to be that of a fo-
reigner. He went to all the embassies ; but in vain.

“His wife also racked her brains: and, as she had fre-
quently consulted Alexis with advantage, she went to M.
‘Marcillet with the piece of the wrapper. Alexis was thrown
into somnambulism: and, after applying the paper first to
his forehead and then to the pit of the stomach, spoke as
follows.

“«This piece of paper puts me in communication with a
tall man, who has large moustaches—is a Russian—aide de
camp to the Emperor. Stop, I perceive his residence at
Paris: if you goto the Place of the Madeleine, behind the
church, on the left, you will see it.’ ‘I know enough,’ re-
plied the lady, and departed.


222 More Clairvoyance in Alexis Didier.


“On returning home, she found her husband counting
money with a man employed at the Russian Embassy. She
told them what Alexis had said: and they laughed heartily
and joked her on her credulity. However, the man knowing
the addresses of many of the Russians in Paris, offered his
assistance in tracing out the gentleman.

“ When they reached the Russian Embassy, they learnt
that an aide de camp of the Emperor—the Count B , Was
in Paris, and living at No. 35, Rue de la Madeleine. They
went there and observed that the house was exactly opposite
the Rue Chaveau-Lagarde, which opens upon the Place de la
Madeleine. They now began to think more seriously of what
Alexis had said.

“The money-changer went up the stairs. But, oh what a
deception! he did not recognize the gentleman whom he saw
as the person for whom he was so anxiously looking, when
Count B said to him, ‘But I know you: you are the
money-changer that I was with this morning.’ Then, going
up close to the money-changer and smiling, he took off his
head an enormous chamber wig, such as many Russians wear.

“The money-changer was petrified on finding himself
face to face with his debtor. The matter was soon explained ;
and, as the noble foreigner had not yet touched the money,
they counted it over together. There were actually 400 francs
too much, and these were immediately returned to the money-
changer.”—La Patrie, March 21, 1852.


“ Madame V., living at No. 62, Rue Neuve, St. Augustin,
went last Wednesday in great distress to M. Marcillet, beg-
ging for an immediate consultation with Alexis. As soon as
she was put in communication with Alexis, she asked, ‘Do
you know what brought me here?’ ‘Yes, Madame; you
want to know if I can find 3,130 francs for you which you
have lost.’

“ Alexis then gave an incredible detail of the items of this
sum, saying that there were three bank notes of 1000 francs
each; 100 English sovereigns, each worth 25 francs; and 30
francs in five-franc pieces and small money. Madame de V.
astonished at such lucidity, begged to know who was the
thief. ‘Certainly,’ said he: ‘it is the maid-servant whom
you discharged last Monday. I see her: she has broad
shoulders, is short, and rather lame.’ ‘Go on, Alexis: that
is the exact description of my former servant!’ ‘To find
her, continued Alexis, ‘you must go to the Barriére de
Monceaux ; she is staying with one of her acquaintances in
the street which ascends—stop, it is the rve—the rue du


More Clairvoyance in Alexis Didier. 223


Rocher. I see a young man with her who seems to know
something about the matter. Go to this place, and you will
find the woman, and the money—short, however, about 300
francs, which she has spent.’

“ Madame de V. went home a moment to prepare for the
search : and, on descending the stairs, she saw her old servant
in the porter’s lodge. She went up to her on the pretence of
making some enquiry, took her up stairs, and locked her up
in the bed-room. Then, going to a police-magistrate, she
related to him the singular revelations of Alexis. The ma-
gistrate, like an enlightened man, listened attentively, took
her deposition in the kindest manner, strange as it might
appear, and offered his assistance to visit the quarter and the
street, which she pointed out, when an unexpected cir-
cumstance happened that facilitated the investigation. The
porter who had carried the portmanteau of the servant, hear-
ing what was passing, said that he had taken it to No. 11,
Rue du Rocher. The magistrate sent the servant to this ad-
dress: and Madame de V. went there herself. A careful
investigation was made, which led to nothing. The servant
then grew bolder, and threatened her late mistress with an
action for defamation.

“In the meantime, the magistrate, continuing the inves-
tigation calmly in the midst of the servant’s vociferations,
noticed a little box, locked, which he ordered to be opened.
The servant became agitated at the sight of it, but declared
that it did not belong to her. The landlady said the same.
A smith was sent for, who put an end to this strange scene
by opening the box, in which was found the exact sum stolen,
short 300 francs, as Alexis had declared: but the expenditure
of this sum was ascertained by the purchase of various articles
of dress, accompanied by their accusing bills.

“The rest may be guessed. In the midst of so many
overwhelming facts, the dishonest servant hung down her
head, and was sent to the lock-up house of the police.”—
Le Siécle, June 14, 1852.


*,* Dr. Forbes, beginning by saying that Mr. Wakley had
proved all the experiments with the Okeys to be delusions and the de-
monstrations degrading scenes and had caused a complete and melan-
choly explosion of them, and that all English practitioners were
ashamed of the name of mesmerism,—proceeded to denounce Alexis
as an impostor, and so charmed Mr. Wakley that the coroner told
the world in his Lancet that Dr. Forbes had published a complete
exposure of M. Marcillet and Alexis, and that Dr. Forbes’s report of
two of their exhibitions had caused these foreigners to leave England.
The whole of Dr. Forbes’s very sad conduct in regard to Alexis


224 Books received.


will be found in Zoist, No. VIII. (others of his doings are in Nos.
VIL, IX., X., XIL, XIII., XVI.) We trust these articles will be
consulted by those who write short sketches of Dr. Forbes after his
death as a member of different societies, according to common cus-
tom; for by the deeds recorded in those numbers will he only be
known. He is pilloried there as a dry specimen and example for all
time. ——Zoist.


BOOKS RECEIVED.


Case of Paralysis and Mania, cured by means of Animal Magnetism, in a
letter to Professor Gregory, from C. M. Friedlander, M.D., Clapham, Surrey.
Edinburgh, 1852.

The readiest way of making this interesting cure known would have been to
publish it in The Zvist, instead of making it a separate pamphlet and sending it
to Edinburgh. It occurred actually in London and would have occupied a sheet
only, which we should cheerfully have devoted to it. The mesmeriser was M.
Rousselot, the eminent performer upon the violoncello.


Letters on Mesmerism and Clairvoyance. By William Gregory, M.D., Pro-
fessor of Chemistry. Reprinted from the Edinburgh News newspaper. Edin-
burgh, 1852.

These contain an abundance of striking and satisfactory facts which Dr.
Gregory himself witnessed, and he did well to imitate Dr. Esdaile’s plan in
India and publish them first in the newspapers, thus securing the attention of
the world at large in total disregard of the medical press.


A Theory of Population deduced from the general law of animal fertility. By
Herbert Spencer, author of Social Statics. Reprinted from the Westminster
Review for April, 1852.

This demands the perusal of all. It contains profound physiological and
social views. The author urges that, the greater the development, energy, and
activity of the nervous system become, the more do those of the generative system
lessen : consequently that, the more man advances in civilization, the less will
population increase.

‘* Evidently, so long as the fertility of the race is more than sufficient to
balance the diminution by deaths, population must continue to increase: so long
as population continues to increase, there must be pressure on the means of
subsistence : and so long as there is pressure on the means of subsistence, further
mental development must go on, and further diminution of fertility must result.
Hence, the change can never cease until the rate of multiplication is just equal
to the rate of mortality ; that is—can never cease until, on the average, each
pair brings to maturity but two children. Probably this involves that each pair
will rarely produce more than two offspring ; seeing that with the greatly-increased
ability to preserve life, which the hypothesis presupposes, the amount of infant
and juvenile mortality must become very small. Be this as it may, however, it
is manifest that, in the end, pressure of population and its accompanying evils
will entirely disappear ; and will leave a state of things which will require from
each individual no more than a normal and pleasurable activity. That this last
inference is a legitimate corollary will become obvious on a little consideration.
For, a cessation in the decrease of fertility implies a cessation in the development
of the nervous system ; and this implies that the nervous system has become fully
equal to all that is demanded of it—has not to do more than is natural to it.
But that exercise of faculties which does not exceed what is natural constitutes
gratification. Consequently, in the end, the obtainment of subsistence will re-
quire just that kind and that amount of action needful to perfect health and
happiness.


-


Books received. 225


** Thus do we see how simple are the means by which the greatest and most
complex results are worked out. From the point of view now reached, it becomes
plain that the necessary antagonism of individuation and reproduction not only
fulfils with precision the @ priori law of maintenance of race, from the monad
up to man, but ensures the final attainment of the highest form of this mainte-
nance—a form in which the amount of life shall be the greatest possible, and the
births and deaths the fewest possible. In the nature of things, the antagonism
could not fail to work out the results we see it working out. The gradual dimi-
nution and ultimate disappearance of the original excess of fertility could take
place only through the process of civilization; and, at the same time, the excess
of fertility has itself rendered the process of civilization inevitable. From the
beginning, pressure of population has been the proximate cause of progress. It
produced the original diffusion of the race. It compelled men to abandon pre-
datory habits and take to agriculture. It led to the clearing of the earth’s sur-
face. It forced men into the social state; made social organization inevitable ;
and has developed the social sentiments. It has stimulated to progressive improve-
ments in production, and to increased skill and intelligence. It is daily pressing
us into closer contact and more mutually-dependent relationships. And after
having caused, as it ultimately must, the due peopling of the globe, and the
bringing of all its habitable parts into the highest state of culture—after having
brought all processes for the satisfaction of human wants to the greatest perfec-
tion—after having, at the same time, developed the intellect into complete com-
petency for its work, and the feelings into complete fitness for social life—after
having done all this, we see that the pressure of population, as it gradually
finishes its work, must gradually bring itself to an end.”’

Papers by Mr. Herbert Spencer will be found in Zoist, No. IV., Imitation
and Benevolence; VI., Situation of organ of Amativeness ; VII., a Theory con-
cerning the organ of Wonder.


The Magnetoscope. A Philosophical Essay on the Magnetoid characteristics
of Elementary Principles, and their relations to the Organization of Man. By
T. Leger, Doctor of the Medical Faculty of Paris ; late Professor of Anatomy at
the Practical School ; Fellow of the Society of Sciences and Arts of the Depart-
ment of the Marne; late Professor of the Medical College of Mexico, &c., &c.
London: Bailliére, 219, Regent Street. 1852.

We have not been able to repeat Dr. Leger’s experiments any more than
those of Mr. Rutter: but great numbers of the most distinguished men go
to witness them.


The Introduction of Mesmerism as an anesthetic and curative agent into
the Hospitals of India. By James Esdaile, M.D., late Presidency Surgeon, Cal-
cutta, author of Mesmerism in India. Dedicated to the Medical Profession.
Perth, 1852.

A shilling will be well spent upon this pamphlet.


Natural and Mesmeric Clairvoyance, with the practical application of Mes-
merism in Surgery and Medicine. By James Esdaile, M.D., &c. Bailliére,
London. 1852. .

Every person should read this little book, full of wonderful truths and exqui-
sitely interesting in many respects. Every friend of mesmerism should purchase
a copy, and lend to those of his acquaintances who are still uninformed. It is
the finishing stroke to all antimesmerists. It gives a view of all Dr. Esdaile’s
gigantic surgical doings in India and of his medical experience of its power, and
exhibits the ordinary phenomena of mesmerism in very strong points of view: it
gives the proofs of clairvoyance which he observed in India, and details the oppo-
sition he met with and the miserable littleness of his medical opponents, each the
analogue of a medical man in Great Britain. He met with a Wakley, a Bushnan,
an Alfred Taylor, University College medical professors, &c.; and, after beating
them all, he has exposed them in the most facetious, charming manner. The
book, to say nothing of its solid, scientific information, is as amusing as any work
VOL. X. R


i
|
|
{
|
\


226 Books received, Notices to Correspondents, &c.


of fiction. He does not spare those delightful persons, Messrs. Wakley and
Bushnan, the latter at present employed by Mr. Churchill, we lament to say, as
editor of his Medical Times. The work is gracefully and in manly language de-
dicated to Lord Dalhousie: not for favours to come, for Dr. Esdaile has left India
for good and retired from the profession ; nor because Lord Dalhousie is a Lord ;
but because of the Governor-General’s natural nobility,—of his carefully examin-
ing into the truth of mesmerism, and, when satisfied, of openly declaring that of
Dr. Esdaile’s facts ‘‘ there could be no doubt whatever,’’—of his giving Dr.
Esdaile an hospital for the application of nmiesmerism,—and then spontaneously
making Dr. Esdaile Presidency Surgeon, and saying to him, ‘‘ You have nothing
to thank me for, Dr. Esdaile; you have only to thank yourself; I have only
done an act of justice.’’ Dr. Esdaile is evidently a remarkable man ; remarkable
for intelligence, integrity, independence, courage, energy, and unworldliness. He
was just fitted for the mighty work to be done in the East, and he did it glori-
ously, and has gained himself an imperishable name in the annals of his profession
and humanity.

We have given an extensive view of Dr. Esdaile’s labours in India. No
fewer than seventeen of our numbers teem with them, from No. XI. to XXXIV:
and they occupy 356 of our pages.—The Jury Magnétique of Paris has just
awarded him their silver medal.


Mesmeric Phenomena; their reality and importance, attested by Dr. Mait-
land, The Edinburgh Review, and others. Bailliére, London.

We recommend this pamphlet again as an antidote to Dr. Maitland’s pam-
phlet, which has done much harm in some quarters to the sacred cause of mes-
merism.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


Mr. Janson.—We offer our best thanks to this gentleman for advertising The
Zoist at his own cost in the Western Luminary, the Devonshire Chronicle,
Woolmer’s Exeter and Plymouth Gazette, the Western Times (twice), and
Freeman's Exeter Flying Post.

Mr. Mansfield.—We have received a letter from Mr. Mansfield referring to a
remark made by Dr. Elliotson at p. 420 of our Ninth Volume, viz., that the
discovery that the organs of the brain could be excited by mesmerism was made
by Mr. Mansfield “‘ guite accidentally.’’ Mr. Mansfield says: ‘‘The circumstances
under which the fact was presented to me were as follows. In the autumn of
1841 I met, for the first time, with an opportunity, long desired, of prosecuting
an experimental enquiry into the effects of the magnetic processes on the human
system: and I was then for some time engaged in observing the results mani-
fested during the trance by some persons operated on by a gentleman, then very
ardent in the pursuit of this branch of physiology. On the 7th of October in
that year one of these persons, a young lady, was put into the trance; the mag-
netizer was playing an accordion. She, being apparently unable to hear any
sounds but such as proceeded from her magnetizer, or from things in contact
with him, was listening to the music with evident satisfaction. I was watching
her. Suddenly the musician produced purposely a fearful discord, upon which
her countenance assumed an expression of great pain. I immediately suspected
that, in her peculiar state of consciousness, she would not improbably be sensible
of annoyance in some particular part of the brain, if any such were specially
cognizant of the musical relations of sound. I requested the performer to repeat
this experiment; he did so. Again the same indications of suffering followed
the discordant note. I now requested him to enquire of her where she felt pain ;
she immediately placed a finger of her left hand on that part of the left side of
her forehead on which craniologists mark the position of the underlying organ of
‘Sense of Melody.’’ At my request, her posjtion, which happened to be such
as to confine the right arm, was changed, and the experiment repeated. She
now, on being asked where she felt the pain which she again expressed, placed a


Notices to Correspondents, &c. 227


finger of her right hand on the corresponding point of the right side of her head.
She was then asked if she felt any pain in her ears; she answered that she did
not. I knew that this lady was ignorant of phrenology, and I felt satisfied that
we had received a hint of great physiological interest, which was to be earnestly
followed up.”’

Mr. Mansfield then relates another interesting case, and concludes thus:
‘* Not only then was this fact in nature not discovered accidentally by me in any
sense of being stumbled on, but I was led to it through a regular, though very
simple, process of induction, and went purposely to look for it.” -

Mr. Mansfield has never published on the subject; and it has been supposed
that the discovery was accidental—That a patient under disturbance of a cere-
bral organ complained of a pain in it; and that Mr. Mansfield, endeavouring to
take away the pain mesmerically, as any mesmerist would, accidentally found to
his surprise that the organ was set right mesmerically.

Mesmeric Susceptibility near Death—‘ AN EnquireR”’ is informed that
Mr. Saunders of Clifton lately sent a sinking and suffering patient into mesmeric
sleep about a quarter of an hour before death.

Choice of a Mesmeriser.—A Patient is assured that we feel as much as he
does the difficulty of procuring good mesmerisers.—A mesmeriser should be dis-
charged who talks while he is mesmerising, for he must be very ignorant and will
excite rather than soothe. The process should be conducted both in silence and
without any display or pretence.—The passes should be made very slowly :
the mesmeriser who makes them quickly is not worth employing ; he will excite
rather than soothe. In breathing on parts, this also should be done very slowly.
—The mesmeriser should never take his eyes off the patient, or allow his thoughts
to wander; he should be in earnest all the time. A listless, inert, mesmeriser
should be exchanged without loss of time for one attentive to his business. There
is no occasion for muscular effort: but great occasion for close attention and
earnestness.—A mesmeriser with a fleshy, soft, warm, hand is usually the best.
The room also should be warm. A cold hand, or a cold room, is most adverse
to mesmeric effect.—The mesmeriser should always be in an easy position.—Ges-
ticulations, snapping the fingers at the end of a pass, flourishes, everything re-
moved from a quiet, slow, steady, simple procedure, are to be reprobated.—As
the eyes are a very susceptible part, and communicate mesmerism well to the rest
of the system, it is better that they be open and that the mesmeriser fix his own
eyes upon them: unless it is irksome or irritating to the patient to keep them
open, or he is not able with them open to abstain from looking about instead of
fixing them and his thoughts upon the mesmeriser.

On the other hand, mesmerism is often thought to fail when the fault all rests
with the patient or the friends. It is too often not allowed to be performed
sedately enough, long enough at a time, often enough, or through a sufficiently long
period.


Having again exceeded our limits, we must postpone old communications from
Mr. H.S. Thompson and Dr, Elliotson, as well as new ones from Dr. Ashburner,
Mr. Rawe of Cornwall, and some others. The report of the great London
meeting has necessarily occupied much of our space.


Mesmeric Baptism.


Mr. Tubbs prevailed upon the parents of a baby to have it christened Mesmer.

‘* This is to certify that Mesmer, son of John and Elizabeth Tuck, of Outwell,
in the parish of Outwell, in the county of Norfolk, was born Dec. 18, 1850, and
baptized Feb. 3, 1851, by Thomas Charlton, minister of the Gospel.

‘* Given under my hand this 4th day of February, 1851.”


Obituary.


We have to lament the sudden death of a valued contributor, Lieut.-Colonel
Davidson, Bengal Engineers. He furnished us with several interesting commu-


228 Notices to Correspondents, &c.


nications in Nos. XVIII., XXVIII., XXXI., and XXXIII., and was the author
of A Diary of Travels and Adventures in Upper India, and very recently of an
Indian Drama in five acts, entitled Tara, the Suttee, with copious notes, explana-
tory, original, and selected. He was a little eccentric, but a man of great energy,
intelligence, honesty, information, facetiousness, and intrepidity, and had spent
his life in the Indian service. He was well acquainted with Dr. Mouatt, whom
Dr. Esdaile has so pitilessly and amusingly just shown up in his Letters on
Clairvoyance, &c., and not long before his death expressed himself in terms of
disgust at Dr. Mouatt’s pitiful tergiversation.*

He wrote to Mr. M‘Neile to know if the satanic sermon was reported truly,
and was disgusted with that superficial preacher’s contemptibly evasive reply.


* Dr. Mouatt’s strong testimony in favour of mesmerism will be found in
No. XV., p. 412.


LONDON MESMERIC INFIRMARY.
9, BEDFORD STREET, BEDFORD SQUARE.


DONORS SINCE MARCH.


£ad

Amor, John, Esq. (donation of ante eninge 7 him in Mr. Baume’s
affair) . 312 6
Black, Dr., Surrey-street, Strand . -00'ees 40 0
Black, Mrs., ditto ditto . 40 0
Bailliére, H., Esq., by his daughter, who recovered under Mesmerism 5 5 0
Coombe, J., "Esq. ° 3, a emma Lanett i csace 2 G-O
Ellis, A. J., Esq., a Friend of . 100
Treyer, Evans, Esq., Notting- hill 2.64

SUBSCRIBERS SINCE MARCH.

D’ Aguilar, Lt.-Colonel, Albany ...... cenneeoes 1 0 0
Downshire, the Marchioness of, Hanover-square. Know ae i
Duke, Miss, Dover. . » 2.6
Gibbs, D. A., Esq., Pembury Villas, Hackney Downs | 1 1 0
Gill, W., Esq., 42, Inverness-road, Bayswater a oe.
Halse, Ww. H., Esq., 22, - en ar 2460
Fitzgerald, Mrs., 26, Euston-square. . 1 0 0
Mc Donald, Professor, St. Andrew’s .... 110
Park, Mrs., 1, Westbourne-park-terrace, Paddington. . 22
Preston, Miss Jane, Exeter . Lipvadvetes ie See
Saunders, S. D., Esq., 1, Upper Portland-place, ( EE is cecivens SR ©
Scripps, Miss. Bromley . . 3 re Pes 5. 88
Swanneck, Miss, 27, Woburn-square ‘ eee ee ee Pa
Walenn, W. H., Esq., 6, Lodge-road, St. John’s Wood............ 1 1 0


Those Subscribers whose subscriptions are still due are requested to forward
them to the Secretary.
Fine Crystals may be purchased at the Infirmary at a moderate price.


We ANG. had v¢ r
‘ ut away during the


MUSNAIC TAPE WhO . w Dh
Oe ana fe Wde Abs


harata: whl at thé a

==============================================================================

se


THE ZOIST.


No. XXXIX.


OCTOBER, 1852.


I. Nervous Affections. Metallo-therapia, or Metal-cure: new
properties of Metals illustrated through Mesmerism, by
Dr. Burg, of Paris. Translated, communicated, and
supplied with a note, by Dr. Elliotson.


(Concluded from p. 140.)


‘*MESMERISM IN ‘THE ZOIST.’
‘* To the Editor of the Provincial Medical and Surgical Journal.


“‘Sir,—The April number of The Zoist contains some amusing romances,
and also some challenges to the common sense members of the medical profession ;
there is also a long letter from Professor Gregory, in which the celebrated bank-
note development is mentioned, and its failure—very consistently with mesmerism,
evaded. Now, to this gentleman I wrote some time back a very civil note, en-
closing my card in an envelope, and requesting it might be read by some member
of his Reichenbach Institute, but no notice has been taken of it, and no current
of Odyle has flowed from the north to the south. I regret this, for I think it is
high time to test this infirmity of the human brain, ‘mind’ I cannot call it; and
I reside in a part of the world where there are several magniloquent mesmerists,
but I cannot put faith either in their doctrines or experiments. I have seen the
same performed by professed conjurors, who tell you at once they mean to cheat
you.

‘* Yours obediently,
“KE. B.”
Provincial Medical and Surgical Journal, May 26, 1852. Joint Editors,
W. H. Rankine, M.D., Norwich, & J. H. Watsue, Esq., F.R.C.S., Worcester.*


* No wonder that this twaddling correspondent is ashamed of disclosing his
name. What must be his moral sense when, without a shadow of proof, he
anonymously accuses men of character, who boldly declare their names, of ro-
mancing, in other words, lying, and of cheating, and as much as pronounces them
imbecile or mad. I never heard of the Reichenbach Institute. Dr. Gregory
could not condescend to notice his ‘‘ very civil note :’’ and it would have been to
the credit of Dr. Ranking and Mr. Walshe if they had not inserted his anony-
mous ‘‘ very civil’? communication.

The April Number contains facts of as high importance and as well veri-
fied as any in the annals of medicine and surgery,—cures which abundant ordi-


VOL, X. s


Sensibility of Touch


SECOND PART.


Of Anesthesia (absence of feeling) and Amyosthenia (absence
of motility) in Nervous Affections.


INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.


SENSIBILITY: ANZsTHESIA.—When we strike any very
remote part, as the sole of the foot, with a rule or other hard
substance, there is instantly a sensation of the contact of the
instrument : but any pain which may be produced does not
occur till a moment afterwards. The interval between the
two sensations of touch and pain is much more marked if the
temperature of the foot happens to be below the ordinary
degree. Many have experienced this double sensation when
they have cut a finger with a penknife: and many are able to
recollect that the sensation of the cold of the instrument
was felt distinctly before the pain. This would sufficiently
prove the propriety of the distinction between the sense of
touch and that of pain, did not numerous morbid pheno-
mena, some of which will hereafter be mentioned, also esta-
blish it.* Thus general sensibility is composed of two kinds
of sensibility, perfectly distinct in both health and disease.


Sensibility of touch : sensibility of pain.

General sensibility is natural when both these are unim-
paired. Anesthesia occurs when, through some alteration in
them, impressions either do not reach the brain or produce
incomplete sensations in it.

Anesthesia (negation of sensibility) either may occur in
one only of these two sensibilities, and then it always occurs
in the sensibility of pain; or, what is less usual, may affect
them both at once. In the first case it is termed analgesia
(negation of pain), and in the latter, anesthesia (negation of
sensation). Analgesia, or negation of pain, may vary from
dulness of the sense of pain under one of the two stimula-
tions commonly employed to ascertain it,—pricking, pinch-
ing,—to its complete extinction under the most severe sur-
gical operations: but, when the sense of pain is extinguished,
the sense of touch is seldom, if ever, unimpaired. Anzs-


nary measures had failed to effect, and which we should be proud of, were we
not thankful for them. Dr. Motherwell, Mr. Mayhew, Mr. H. S. Thompson,
Mr. Parker, Mr. Clement, a Clergyman of the Church of England, and Dr.
Elliotson, are not ashamed of their ‘‘ romances:” and the world will estimate
these, though the anonymous correspondent and the editors of the Provincial
Journal prefer darkness and dark conduct.—Joun ELLiorson.

* This phenomenon was explained and detailed at full length in the Archives
Générales de Médecine of 1848, by Dr. Beau, Associated Professor of Medicine
of the Faculty of Paris. R


and of Pain are distinct. 231


thesia always follows analgesia, of which it is only the second
degree ; unless, what is very uncommon, it takes place at the
same time. It comprises, therefore, an appreciable diminu-
tion of both the sensibility of pain and the sensibility of touch
up to a complete extinction of general sensibility: so that
a limb, for example, may become in this respect like a com-
pletely foreign, and in some measure a superadded, substance,
which may be burnt, torn, and deeply wounded without the
patient being aware of it except by his sight ; and, if his eyes
are bandaged, and the insensible limb is removed from its
previous position, he would have the greatest difficulty in
finding it with one of his hands that was free.

Analgesia and anesthesia invariably proceed almost uni-
formly in the same region from the superficial to the deep
parts. Instead of diffusing themselves and spreading con-
tinuously like an inflammation, they leave, unless they have
become general, not only surfaces completely sensible be-
tween the insensible portions, but points even extremely
sensible by the side of others which are insensible.

They affect every part of the body that is accessible to our
examination ; and, no doubt, may penetrate to every organ
which receives nerves of sensation. They are observed first
in the upper extremities, on the outer part of the fore-arm ;
much less frequently in the legs; and still less frequently in
the trunk: we have never seen them commence in the mu-
cous membranes.

Either may exist in a vertical (right or left) half of the
system, or one may exist in each half (hemi-analgesia, or
hemi-anesthesia, simple or crossed) : and either may exist in
a transverse (upper or lower) half of the system (paranalgesia,
or paranesthesia) : but the most common occurrence is an
analgesia or anesthesia of the two arms, and it is usually
greater in the left. From the arms the insensibility extends
to the legs, especially to the right: but then, if the trunk
and mucous membranes had escaped, these soon become
affected. The face is generally implicated still later. There
is sensibility of pain or of touch at the second time of prick-
ing,—when the pin, after having been introduced vertically, is
pushed onwards horizontally till its point is driven out at the
skin and gives evidence of one or the other of these two
sensibilities, although, at the beginning of the trial, in pass-
ing progressively from anesthesia to some remains of sensi-
bility, it had not given any such evidence.

Anesthesia has a tendency to become general ; but does
not spread to certain spots till the nervous disease which gave
rise to it has steadily increased for a length of time. These
s2


232 Anesthesia and Analgesia.


spots are, 1. The pit of the stomach: 2. The lower angles of
the shoulder-blades : 3. The soles and palms.

The ESSENTIAL CHARACTERS OF ANESTHESIA are :—an eX-
treme mobility, which is equalled by the disease only,—hys-
teria, hypochondriasis, &c.,—of which it is a symptom ; to
proceed from different portions of the surface to the centre ;
to affect most frequently but one division of sensibility ; usually
to present deficiencies or anomalies which prevent us from
referring it to any organic affection ; to coexist with a collec-
tion of symptoms the course of which, as we shall presently
see, it measures and regulates in conjunction with another
sign—amyosthenia (absence of muscular power), and to par-
ticipate with amyosthenia in the very remarkable property of
disappearing entirely under the influence of the repeated ap-
plication of certain metals.


Physiological consequences of analgesia and anesthesia.

Notwithstanding some exceptions which are cited and
appear of little value or to be ill-founded, it is the general
rule that the complete analgesia of an organ appears almost
entirely to destroy its impressibility and to deprive it of all
sensibility of the quality of agents, mechanical and natural,
capable of producing pleasure and pain in it. Thus in the mu-
cous and other membranes, the various senses of taste, smell,
sight, and hearing, even the feeling of the natural wants,—
micturition, defecation, &c.,—which reside in it, cease: and
thus in the skin, mechanical stimulants of all kinds, and che-
mical stimulants of all kinds, such as electricity, heat, cold,
dryness, moisture, &c., have no longer any influence upon
the brain. There remains only a very vague sense of contact,
giving nearly the same sensation from all bodies with the
same extent of surface in contact, which sensation serves no
other purpose, if we may so speak, than to warm the eyes,
and disappears, in its turn, into complete anesthesia, after
which nothing remains. The loss or alteration of certain
functions, those of the uterus, for instance, ordinarily arises
from no other cause.


Pathological consequences.

Every part in which there is very decided anesthesia ge-
nerally presents a considerable reduction of temperature and
a very considerable diminution of the superficial circulation,
so that even deep punctures cause in most instances little or
no blood to escape, or even remain white instead of becoming
red: sometimes a complete suppression of transpiration that
in nervous patients occasions abundant renal secretion: and


Motility and Amyosthenia. 233


excessive sweating, frequently noticed in the extremities and
other parts which still retain their sensibility.


Precautions to be observed in examining the sensibility.

Every examination ought to be made, as far as possible,
without the patient’s notice; and, before the pin is em-
ployed, it is prudent to give the patient a little lesson upon
the difference between the sensibility of pain and the sensi-
bility of touch, with the view of preventing him, and espe-
cially females, from crying out, through habit or the desire of
exciting attention, when in simple analgesia they find them-
selves pricked.

Generally, in delicate examinations, not to employ metallic
plates and wires, excepting, however, the pin, and we prefer
one of platinum ; and to take care that the spot to be examined
has not been in contact, a few moments previously, with any
metallic surface, as a bath, a bar of iron, &c. ;—always to
remember that an analgesia, or even a slight anesthesia, may
be suspended for a moment under strong excitement, and
therefore to regulate the pin according to the presumed depth
of the anzsthesia ;—to examine the superficial parts first, be-
cause, if the skin outside, for example, is sensible, the other
parts are equally so;—in all cases to employ both pinching
and pricking, since many facts have proved that both are
necessary to enable us to ascertain whether the sensibility is
natural ;—never, unless in exceptional cases and for the pur-
pose of farther information, to employ agents, such as heat
or cold, the action of which we cannot limit ;—never to pro-
nounce anzsthesia to be complete till there is no longer any
sensation of pain or touch, either on sharply pinching the
skin which lies, in the form of a wedge, between the thumb
and forefinger, or on pricking, whether at the second period
of the puncture or when long acupuncture needles are plunged
into the substance of muscles. In the case of mucous mem-
branes, to employ both pricking and tickling alternatively,
and then to employ irritants capable of exciting both pain
and the peculiar sense which is supposed to be affected.


Mori.ity: AMyosTHENIA.—Motility (the power of moving)
also undergoes in some nervous affections changes which are
not less frequent and not less important to be known than
those of sensibility, and which the metallo-therapia (metal-
cure) requires us to examine with accuracy. For this purpose,
and to avoid all the very imperfect modes of estimating mus-
cular force, Dr. Burq has constructed the following dynamo-
meter :—


The Dynamometer.


Quatro


The instrument is represented of its true size. CC isa
steel circle 6 centimetres in diameter, and 1 centimetre
broad, formed of seven or eight turns of good watch-spring.
PP, steel handles with a surface calculated for the easy appli-
cation of the’ hand, and hollowed below sufficiently to receive
the greater part of the turns of the spring accurately. A
channel is formed by this groove and a steel neck, against
which on one side ends a supporting stem F, and on the other
a rack M: and all is rendered firm by two strong screws
VV at the extremities of one of the diameters of the in-
strument.

The mechanism is rendered perfect, 1. By a pinion with
very fine teeth, its circumference being exactly equal to the dif-
ference of the two internal diameters MF of the circle, as at
rest or subjected to the strongest pressure—80 kilogr.—which
it is able to measure. 2. Bya dial, divided into eighty parts,
and fixed, as well as the cog, upon a part of the diameter
VV, but at such a distance from the centre of the larger
circle that its rim on the side M can never touch the spring.
3. By two indices: one, A, always returning to the point O,
and the other, B, or the slider, always moving with the former,
and remaining where it was drawn, to leave the degree of
pressure notified.

The instrument is grasped at the handles as forcibly as


The Dynamometer. 235


possible: and, if the full expression of the muscular power is
not obtained at the first trial, a second, or at any rate a third,
is sure to give it, if a few minutes rest is allowed between
them.

The muscular power measured in healthy men with this
instrument gives a mean of from 55 to 60 kilogrames for the
right hand; and of from 45 to 50 for the left: in women of
from 35 to 40 for the right hand, and of from 25 to 30 for
the left. (A French kilograme is about 2 English pounds.)
These figures, however, not being absolute, the true indica-
tions of the dynamometer cannot be thoroughly appreciated
before some practice with the instrument. Besides, we must
remember that, in almost every case where the motility was
natural, whatever the numbers of kilogrames furnished by
the right or left hand respectively with as strong an effort
as possible, there was constantly a difference of about 8 in
favour of the right hand. Whenever, therefore, in the exa-
mination there is nearly equality between the two, this
is almost a certain sign of amyosthenia. This equality will
be certain whenever the motility, as ascertained by the dyna-
mometer, is below the power presumed from the volume of
the muscles, their rigidity, habitual exercise, the moment
(position of the arm) of their action, and the general condi-
tion of the individual. We shall apply this expression equally
to all the diminutions of visceral contraction that are so
frequent and often so obstinate in nervous diseases, and
shall reserve the term paralysis for all the cases in which
amyosthenia, wherever situated, becomes the dominant symp-
tom of the disease from its fixedness, its depth, and its im-
mediate combinations.

Amyosthenia varies, according to a number of circum-
stances the effects of which are appreciable with the dynamo-
meter, from some kilogrames to 30, 40, or even 50. Thus
motility may descend to 0 kilograme, and complete paralysis
exist: or it may experience so slight a diminution—5 or 10
kilogrames, that this may not have been noticed before the
cure.

Amyosthenia is observed in the same conditions and quite
as often as anesthesia. Like the latter, it may be absent or
may attack one limb only. When the two are combined,
amyosthenia generally begins the first. It begins in the
lower extremities more frequently than anzsthesia: and, in
a certain number of cases, it attacks them more than the
upper extremities. Contrarily to anesthesia, it is greater 70
or 80 times out of 100 in the right arm than in the left; and
afterwards attacks the left leg (cross hemi-amyosthenia).


236 Dr. Burg’s doctrine
Its essential characteristics are nearly the same as those of
anesthesia. But it is less fugitive, and has a tendency to
permanence, from which there may be some difficulty in
the diagnosis and more or less resistance to the metallic
treatment.


DR. BURQ’S DOCTRINE OF NERVOUS AFFECTIONS.


“ All nervous diseases, we do not say,” writes Dr. Burg,
“all nervous symptoms, as for instance the cramps of cholera,
viewed in reference to sensibility and motility, may be ar-
ranged in two very distinct classes :—

“1. Nervous diseases, which, like epilepsy and chorea,”
(St. Vitus’s dance,) “ appear never to present of themselves the
continued phenomena of anesthesia and-amyosthenia.

“2. Nervous affections, which, like hysteria, hypochon-
driasis, the greater part of spasms and neuralgias (gastro-
dynia, migraine),” (sick or nervous head-ache,) “ sciatica, &c.,
palpitation of the heart, fits of nervous asthma, habitual
cramps of the limbs, &c., present almost always, if not al-
ways, one or other of these symptoms, and most frequently both,
continuously.*

“On the other hand, if we carefully examine the symp-
toms of the latter class of nervous diseases, those alone which
we are desirous of considering at present, we shall find that,
in spite of their inexhaustible variety, they may all be ar-
ranged in two very distinct groups.

“1. Symptoms referrible to a simple increase or exaggera-
tion of the sensuous, motor, circulatory, calorific, secretory,
functions or properties of an organ, and which, on this ac-
count, we will call positive, sthenic,” (with strength.) “Spasm
and neuralgia hold the first rank.

“2. Symptoms referrible, on the contrary, to a diminution
or even an annihilation of the same functions or properties,
and which, in opposition to the preceding, we will term nega-
tive or asthenic” (without strength).

“In the first rank of the second group are anzesthesia
and amyosthenia. The symptoms which result from a dis-
turbance of the circulatory and other functions, such as ame-
norrhea, take place subsequently.

“ All the diseases of the second class appear to us to be
but one affection, varying in degree and form according to
certain circumstances, but springing from a common source,
and requiring fundamentally the same treatment: and, on in-


* ** Almost all that we have written of the second class of nervous diseases
is equally applicable to a great number of the forms of curable insanity.”


of Nervous Affections. 237


specting our registers, the following are the laws which we
have learnt from scrupulous and multiplied observation.

“ Whatever be the cause and commencement of the nerv-
ous affection, disturbances of sensibility and motility appear
almost as soon as any of the positive symptoms take place.

“ Considered separately, anesthesia” (loss of feeling) “and
amyosthenia” (loss of muscular power) “ are neither constant
nor continuous, but become so when regarded as only one
symptom.

“More than 150 patients have furnished scarcely an ex-
ception to this law. However, an exception may occur: but
such a case will generally be of short duration and the result
of a negative condition of the uterus or some other important
organ, unless it be a fugitive effect of a highly nervous tem-
perament.

“There is a constant proportion between the degree of
this symptom and the intensity, frequency, and continuous-
ness of the positive or sthenic phenomena. The exceptions
are as rare as even its absence: but the sum of these is in-
dicated by the sum only of all the negative or asthenic
symptoms wherever they be situated.

“There is, perhaps, in all disease no other symptom of
such importance as anesthesia and amyosthenia. Whether
they be the cause or effect of positive phenomena, they never
take place with impunity. They follow all the phases of the
disease, increase or diminish in the same proportion with it,
do not disappear before its last symptom, and remain absent
as long only as the cure continues. In this respect, as well
as in respect of all the information and indications which it
furnishes, there is so much resemblance between this symp-
tom and the pulse of inflammation that we do not hesitate
to regard it figuratively as the true pulse of all nervous dis-
eases of the second class, that every prudent practitioner will
examine as often as the pulse itself. The information which
it furnishes is very accurate, and sometimes more to be de-
pended upon than the answers of the patient that it really
makes unnecessary. Thus, if the anesthesia or amyosthenia
is increased, though the patient may perhaps be conscious
of no change, we may expect some fresh attack: unless, what
seldom happens, the increase arises from the cessation only
of some negative symptoms which it will take the place of.

“Tt is absolutely impossible in the treatment of nervous
diseases of the second class to treat one or other of the symp-
toms efficaciously without operating equally upon the others :
and all curative measures, whether by medicines, regimen, or
of other kinds, must, in order to cure the disease, have a


238 Dr. Burgq’s doctrine


direct, or remote, but certain, action upon the anesthesia or
amyosthenia, or they will be of no use, though they may not
prevent the spontaneous cure.’’*

But how do anesthesia and amyosthenia play so important
a part,—a part completely unnoticed hitherto, in those affec-
tions which are so varied, so obstinate, so often regarded as
hopeless by both patient and physician, and which Dr. Burg
has placed in his second class of nervous diseases ?+

After having stated that nervous affections are the sad lot
of persons especially who move in the world, that is to say,
of persons who exercise their motility and external sensibility
the least; and after having endeavoured to prove that the
greater number of circumstances which have been justly con-
sidered to produce them are precisely all those which usually
have the greatest tendency to weaken these two properties, and
unfortunately to displace the nervous principle which presides
over their action and to remove it to other organs in which,
after the period of excitement, it speedily becomes a cause
of disorder,—Dr. Burg reviews the different opinions respect-
ing a nervous force or fluid circulating in the nerves almost
in the same manner as the blood circulates in the blood-
vessels. Then, fortified with the authority given to the, at
any rate reasonable, supposition of this circulation by the
names of Galvani, Cuvier, Matteuci, Dubois Raymond, &c.,
&c., he fully adopts the definition of anzsthesia given in the
great Dictionary of the Medical Sciences (60 vol.) in the fol-
lowing words :—

“ Anesthesia is commonly the result of a suspension of
the action of the nervous fluid which goes to different parts


* In a recent letter read to the Academies (Gazette Médicale, July, 1852,
New Application of the Metals to the study and treatment of Chlorosis), Dr.
Burq has endeavoured to shew that preparations of iron which might throw the
greatest doubt upon his view act precisely in this manner and on this account
only in chlorosis (the pale disease of young women) and the numerous nervous
affections which it accompanies, whereas their direct action upon hematosine (in
improving the quality of the blood) is purely imaginary.

We know also that Dr. Burg is writing a fresh work, with the last passages
from his Thesis as an epigraph: ‘‘ In reviewing all the various external and in-
ternal means employed with unquestionable success from the time of Hippocrates
in nervous affections, he will endeavour to prove that all, without excepting mes-
merism, have succeeded solely through their action upon the negative symptoms.”

+ On the pIrFERENTIAL DIAGNosIs (method of distinguishing) of nervous
diseases, he remarks also, ‘‘ The constancy and continuousness of anzsthesia or
amyosthenia, their erratic character and anomalies, the invasion of analgesia
first and then of anesthesia on the surface and in portions of it, the constant
relation between these two symptoms and all the positive phenomena of the nerv-
ous affection, the possibility of generally removing them by the application of
metals, and still more the antecedents and the external circumstances of the
patient, are almost always sufficient to distinguish these affections of the second
class from all others which might be confounded*with them.’’


of Nervous Affections. 239


of the body.” This definition of anesthesia the author na-
turally extends to amyosthenia, and to all the other asthenic
(without strength) phenomena ; and afterwards thus expresses
himself :—‘‘ The nerves, being unable to act of themselves,
or mechanically, as Cuvier says, draw from the vast reservoir
from which they spring a power, a subtle fluid, nervous or
whatever else, no matter what name we give it, probably a
modification of electricity, collected, no doubt, by the gan-
glionic nerves at every point where the chemical and physical
phenomena take place which support life,* elaborated perhaps
in the ganglions, and transported from them along the same
ways by which it had reached them, in the centre of the ence-
phalo-spinal canal,” (the canal in the brain and spinal
marrow,) “for the purpose of being distributed automatically
by the nerves of emotion,—of the great sympathetic, and by
the brain itself, and voluntarily by the nerves of motion.

“The production of this fluid may slacken without serious
inconvenience. But, for the maintenance of the harmony of
the functions, its production must never exceed its expendi-
ture, that is, the natural expenditure ; for, as soon as from
any cause, from the nerves of emotion, or those of the uterus,
stomach, or some other important organ, having lost in part
or altogether their conducting power, it becomes excessive,
there presently takes place a nervous plethora, which from its
intensity and the infinite number of nerves becomes the source
of numerous and serious disturbances.

** At first there is a mere head-ache returning periodically :
one or several spots are attacked with neuralgia: palpitations
occur by day or cramps in the evening, and, being both cause
and effect, they soon occasion farther derangement in the
distribution of the nervous fluid, and accustom it to distri-
bute itself more among certain nerves than others.

“ Next, when the asthenic” (without strength) “phenomena
have made fresh progress, cramps and head-aches are not suf-
ficient for compensation, and therefore more serious disorders
arise. Then the intensity of the first constantly increases, and
at length, the sthenic” (with strength) “derivation, after having
attacked several parts successfully, being no longer sufficient,
the slightest cause, the slightest pretext, (and even sometimes
we can discover no cause or pretext at all), is capable of
making it rush violently upon all the nerves at once, and pro-
duce one of those violent attacks which may last from one
to several days.


* “When a drop of water on the surface of the earth evaporates, when the
sap ascends and circulates in a vegetable, electricity occurs: is it possible that
this is not the case also in all the complicated operations of our existence ?’’


240 Accumulations of the Nervous Force.


“In this state, if you have not an armature at hand, or
some other agent capable of acting directly upon and drawing
off from the nervous system, do not attempt to arrest the
symptoms by palliative measures. This would be a loss of
time. What would be the use of attacking the affection if
you leave the causes untouched ?

“On the contrary, allow the patient to plunge and con-
tort herself to the utmost; allow the pelvis to make all the
expulsory movements which are rendered necessary by the
great nervous afflux to the uterus ; allow the play of the lungs
and of all their muscles to disperse the enormous quantity of
nervous influence accumulated in them ;—and all will soon
be over.

“ When the attack is over, employ the best means in your
power, metallic plates, baths, gymnastic exercises, &c., to
bring back the sensibility which has been diminished or de-
stroyed, and to re-establish the functions of the uterus and
stomach, intestines, bladder, organs of the senses, respiration
and voice.

“Tn short, put an end as quickly as possible to all the
negative symptoms ; and, when you have accomplished what
was nature’s object in these disturbances,—have re-established,
so to speak, the equilibrium between the receipts and expen-
diture of innervation,—you will have done almost all that is
necessary for the cure.

“ Sydenham was quite right when he said in his Treatise
upon Hysteria : ‘1 think that what is termed hysterical affec-
tion in women and hypochondriasis in men, and in general
the vapors, proceed from a disorder or irregular movement of
the animal spirits, which, streaming impetuously and in exces-
sive quantity to one part or other, produces spasms or even pain
when the part happens to be endued with exquisite sensibility,
and disturbs the functions of the organs, both those which they
leave and those to which they flow, each being of necessity much
injured by this unequal distribution of the animal spirits that
is contrary to the laws of the animal economy.’

“Tf Galvani had lived a century earlier, Sydenham would
have expressed himself differently, and this illustrious physi-
cian, who understood hysteria so well, would have left little
room for improvement in its treatment.


“CONCLUSIONS AND TREATMENT (metallo-therapia).


“T. Hysteria, hypochondriasis, the majority of spasms
and neuralgias, or visceralgias, and, we may add by antici-
pation, even a certain number of forms of insanity, are only


Metallic treatment. 241


one and the same affection differently manifested, but every
form of which, however diversified, arises from a defect of
equilibrium between the healthy production and expenditure
of the nervous influence.

“TI. Only two kinds of symptoms constitute them; 1.
Negative symptoms. We should like to call them anervous,
arising from the more or less complete absence of the nervous
element in the organs which display them. 2. Positive symp-
toms (hypernervous), which result on the contrary from an
excessive nervous afflux. Each has a necessary effect upon
the other, and reason and experience agree in shewing that
it is impossible to act successfully upon the second without
exerting the same action upon the first. 3. Anesthesia and
amyosthenia, occupying the highest place among the negative
symptoms, may consequently be regarded as a sort of touch-
stone of the disease calculated to point out the most suitable
means of cure. Hence-we arrive at this conclusion, extreme
in every point of view,—

“That, a nervous affection with anesthesia and amyosthenia
being given, all the treatment consists in discovering an agent
or means, whatever they may be, (mesmerism, baths, gym-
nastic exercises, metals employed internally or externally,
&e.,) capable of bringing back the sensibility and motility to
the healthy state.

“4. The best agent known, the action of which almost
never fails, is a metal which is a good conductor of electri-
city ; and that, according to certain affinities still a mystery
to us, is in some cases copper, in others steel, in others
silver, gold, &c.


“ Selection of the Metal.

“To select the metal proper in an individual case, we
must be provided with an exploring box, containing,

“1, A dynamometer :

“2. From twenty-four to forty little plates of all sorts of
metals, pure or alloyed :

“3. Some pins of platinum and steel.

“ On visiting the patient, we must first carefully ascertain
the state of the sensibility and motility: then apply succes-
sively one or more of the little plates, beginning with those
of copper or steel, upon the parts where the sensibility is
most defective, and, what is still better, around the fingers
if their sensibility is at all impaired, till we arrive at a metal
which restores it: next put on a ring of this metal ten or fif-
teen centimetres* broad, large enough to surround one of the


* A centimetre is rather more than the third of an inch.


242 Apparatus and its application.


limbs which is both anesthetic and amyosthenic : and if, after
it has been applied some hours (an hour or two is generally
sufficient), all the phenomena,* except fatigue which certainly
cannot result from so small a surface, that we ought to expect,
take place, and if the sensibility and motility have decidedly
come back, we have only to construct a general armature com-


Qa


y
ji


* Dr. Burg has fully detailed these phenomena in his letter to the Academy of
Sciences (February 4th, 1850), Upon the Physiological and Therapeutic Effects
of Metallic Armatures. They are a sense of TiNGLING on the anesthetic sur-
face, Heat, SweatinG, and lastly a very remarkable sense of FATIGUE,—a
symptom more than sufficient to prove the subtraction of nervous energy, and
always proportionate to the degree of the employment of the metal,—of its sur-
face and the duration of its application.— Gazette Médicale, Fevrier, 1850.


Apparatus and its application. 243


posed of two large rings for each limb and of two large plates
for the trunk, and a crown for the forehead if it is desirable
to act upon the head.*

“The patient should put them on at bed-time, and remain
thus armed for two, four, eight or ten hours, according to
the intensity of the effects desired.

“If the catamenia do not appear at their proper period,
and have been long absent, a few partial applications of the
metals should first of all be made upon the abdomen and
lower extremities, and repeated almost invariably afterwards ;
with the simple precaution, necessary for cases in which a
mistake has been made as to the proper metals rather than
for those in which the proper metal has been selected, of
warming the plates before they are used, by putting them
either under the bed-clothes or before a fire.

“This treatment alone, aided by some additional advice
as to the general management of the health by frequent
exercise, even of a gymnastic kind if this is rendered ne-
cessary to maintain the sensibility and strength which are
artificially produced by the metal; and, likewise, be it not
forgotten, by the removal of the causes which gave rise to
the disturbance of the distribution of nervous influence, will
be sufficient, almost always, we dare not say more, to put a
speedy termination to the present nervous disease, unless, what
seldom happens, the metal loses its power.

“ Tf at a later period a relapse occurs, the patients, warned
this time by the state of the sensibility and motility that they
have learnt how to recognize, must at once repress the fresh
symptoms with the re-application of the same armature which
cured them before, or with the application of another metal
should the first have lost its power in the interval.”

After Dr. Burq had written these observations, slight
inconveniences or difficulties sometimes happened in the ap-
plication of the armatures.t To avoid these and obtain as


* On the left limbs, in the cut, the rings are single and their edges united by
any simple means. On the right, they are in two pieces, united by steel springs,
which allow them to be opened and closed, and therefore to be applied very readily.

+ The greatest inconvenience arising from the metal being applied for a length
of time is a slight eruption, although in reality this is frequently a favourable
sign. We should endeavour to avoid it by wiping the metal of the armature
whenever it is soiled, just as is done with the most common utensils; by taking
care not to apply the metals too long at a time, especially on persons of a very
delicate skin; or by applying but one ring to every limb, sometimes that of the
arm and leg, sometimes that of the fore-arm and thigh. If, in spite of these pre-
cautions, a few pimples appear, the skin must be protected from the metal by a
littled gummed taffeta or diachylon spread upon r cloth, or by not applying the
metal on the same part for two or three days. These precautions are especially
necessary in females when the parts of application are those habitually covered.


244 Cure of Neuralgia.


much perfection as possible, he resolved to employ his system
under the form of corset-busks, elegant bracelets, collars and
chains for children, strigils, and rods for friction and kneading,
metallic poultices or wadding, and lastly of bathing vessels,
or of baths made with filings of copper or steel; and the
latter have the advantage of being conveniently applied with-
out in general at all changing the habits of the patients.
All these objects are so arranged that the patients may employ
them in perfect safety, and without the necessity of previous
examination of the effects of metals.


It now remains only for us to give proofs of the truth
and practical importance of the discovery which Mesmer ena-
bled Dr. Burq to make. They are so abundant that we
hardly know which to select. Different Parisian medical jour-
nals have published a large number of cases. But, in order
not to borrow more than a very few from Dr. Burq himself,
we will limit ourselves to those which have been collected in
the great hospitals by the house-pupils: many of the cases
having been treated under the eyes of the committee of the
Academy, which, we have already said, was entrusted with
the examination of Dr. Burgq’s doctrine and treatment, and
which affirmed that no medical novelty was ever made known
with greater authenticity and proofs.


VARIOUS NEURALGIAS.


1. Violent Neuralgia of the back of the head and temple ; cured
with English steel.

[From the Gazette Médicale of Paris, March, 1852.

Salneuve, house-pupil of the hospital.

M. B., a merchant of Genoa, was admitted on the first of
April, 1851, into the Maison Nationale de Santé, under M.
Monod. He is 48 years old, of a constitution which would
have been perfect but for long habits of intemperance, and
has never suffered from any severe disease. The only one
worth mentioning was a neuralgia similar to that under which
he labours at present, and under which four years since he
laboured for four months in a town of Transylvania.

A fews days ago, perhaps under the influence of an un-
usual excess in living, he was seized with violent pains at the
surface of the left occipital region, darting to the front and
sides of the head. At first they were intermittent and tran-
sient, but to day have become very acute, and extend to all
the nerves of the occiput, forehead, and temples, and to the
left ear. The attack returns every evening about 8 o’clock,


with English steel. 245


rapidly reaching its height, and continuing a great part of
the night, often till the physician’s visit the next day. The
pain is constant, but aggravated from time to time. Pressure
relieves it. If, what is unusual, it begins in the day, it
seldom lasts long.

Antiperiodic medicines, opium, chloroform, even the
catheterism of the tympanum, having done no good, Dr.
Monod* turned the patient over to Dr. Burg on the 2nd of
April.

Exploration.—Complete analgesia of both the fore-arms
under the pin,—a transverse puncture at the base of a large
fold of the skin is decidedly felt, yet causes but little pain:
on the contrary, these several parts are very sensible to the
least pinching. Sensibility natural in the palms and the
inner parts of the ends of the fingers. The lower extremities
and the trunk are also analgesic under the pin, but less than
the arm.

The compressing force exercised by the right arm is 26
kilogrames: by the left, 25 kilogr.

A large ring of English steel is put upon the right fore-
arm, one of copper upon the left fore-arm, and one of brass
upon the left calf.

After some minutes, tinglings, heat and perspiration under
the right bracelet : none under the others.

In half an hour, the sensibility was nearly natural, and
the compression amounted to 37 kilogr., on the side where the
steel was placed: at the edge of the copper and brass the
sensibility was the same as before, and compression on the
left side was 26 kilogr.

On the 23rd of April, at five in the morning, the same
exploring rings were put on the same places as the day before.
At the hour of the visit (8 a.m.) we found the sensibility
natural in the right arm: the compression of the right side
was 28 kilogr; a little later 33:+ on the left it remained at
27; then at 28.


* Dr. Monod, whose name frequently appears in these cases of metallic
treatment, has adopted it for all his private patients and those in the hospital.
This is the more flattering to Dr. Burq, because Dr. Monod has an exceed-
ingly large practice and is one of the most respected physicians of Paris, and a
member of the Superior Council of Hospitals, in which he represents the inte-
rests of his colleagues.

+ It may appear strange that the muscular force, which the day before was
37 kilogr. after half an hour’s application of English steel, amounted the next day
to only 28 kilogr. after the application of the same metal for five hours. But in
truth a period sometimes arrives when the metal which really acts causes a de-
pression of the force after having elevated it, so that, on a subsequent examination,
this may be found greatly diminished. Nothing, says Dr. Burq, is more easy to
understand than this. We have only to consider for a moment the probable, if

VOL. X. T


246 Neuralgia and Hypochondriasis


24th, 25th. While a steel armature was arranging, Dr.
Burg, wishing to shew us that the success of the armature
was ascribable to the metal itself only, not, for example, to
imagination, applied a brass armature every night, taking
care to make promises to the patient that he informed us
privately would not be realized. The patient assured us every
day that he had suffered as much as on the previous nights,
and wished to have no more of a remedy which he said was
only an additional misery.

27th. This morning sensibility and muscular power have
declined to what they were before the examination. There
has been much pain in the night. The armature of English
steel was given to him in the day, and in the evening, the pain
becoming as severe as ever, he applied it. The pains lessened
rapidly: at the end of half an hour they had nearly ceased,
and in an hour he was asleep.

28th. The patient was again examined with the rings on.
The part on which they were is all stained with rust. The
sensibility has returned everywhere, except on the right side
where it is still a little dull. After the application yesterday
he felt a general tingling, a great heat, considerable perspira-
tion, and something like cramps in all his limbs. A feeling
of weariness this morning. The power is 28 kilogr. in the
right hand, and 26 in the left.

29th. A fresh application with the same success.

May lst. This morning perfect sensibility ; good sleep.
Power, 41 kilogr. in the right hand; 38 in the left.

3rd. M. B. has had no pain: sensibility is natural: his
power has risen to 45 kilogr. on the right side, and 40 on the
left. He returns home.

Sa.nevve, house-pupil to Dr. Monod.


NEURALGIA, HYPOCHONDRIASIS: CURED WITH COPPER.


[Gazette Médicale, March, 1852. Dr. Coffin, formerly
house-pupil of the hospital.


M. T., 48 years old, apparently of a sound constitution,
the possessor of a large fortune made in America, having
grown idle after a very active life, became the subject of indi-


not certain, action of the metal upon the nervous energy, to understand that the
latter, being exhausted at the end of a certain time of its application, as the
patient’s sense of fatigue shews, becomes insufficient to make the muscles con-
tract with all their energy. We have heard the author quote, as one of the most
remarkable instances of this, the case of an artillery man under the care of Dr.
Boudin at the Hépital du Roule, and upon whom a copper armature, applied
for an intermittent fever, had been left a whole night, and who the next
morning had scarcely strength enough to stand. Hence the diminution of strength
that is otherwise but momentary was as instructive as its increase.


t-


cured with copper. 247


gestion and debility. Visiting Europe for amusement, he
had several attacks of neuralgia in his abdominal organs every
time he was in Paris, for which Dr. Monod was ultimately
consulted.

Sept. 20th. Various measures having failed, Dr. Monod
thought it right to apply the metals, and invited me in the
absence of Dr. Burq to assist him in the metallic examina-
tion. The symptoms were indigestion ; constipation ; inter-
mittent pains at the pit of the stomach, shooting around the
trunk, and especially in the left iliac hollow; with a feeling
of constriction at the lower part of the chest : also constant
pain at the back of the head, especially in the morning ; al-
most incessant restlessness; strong melancholy views of his
own state of health. The sensibility of contact is perfect,
yet the external surface of the two arms is but little sensible
to pricking ; the internal surface, especially of the left arm,
is more sensible: all the parts to which the sciatic nerve is
distributed are almost quite insensible on the left side; the
sensibility is only dull on the right side. The sensibility of
the whole trunk is unimpaired.

The patient complains of a great loss of strength: and, in
fact, the dynamometer shows 24 kilogr. on the left side, and
42 on the right.

Different metals are tried: copper seems to act the most.
To make the selection with more accuracy, different varieties
of it are placed upon each of his limbs. In two hours, all
the rings had restored the sensibility in different degrees :
but in the right leg, where pure copper with no mixture of
zinc was applied, the sensibility seemed absolutely heightened.

21st. The experiment is repeated: but this time the ring
of pure copper is put upon the left leg. In a few moments
sensibility returns under all the rings, and on the left there
is almost an excess of sensibility, just as there was yesterday
on the right.

25th. A complete armature of pure copper is applied to-
night from 11 p.m. to 5 a.m.

26th. Sensibility is increased all over the body : there is
vee ig any pain at the pit of the stomach or back of the

ead.

The dynamometer gives 52 kilogr. in the right hand, and
48 kilogr. in the left.

The armature is applied every night.

27th. Sensibility has returned everywhere: there is no
pain. The patient being in bed, the right hand gives 45
kilogr., the left 42 kilogr.

28th. State excellent ; vigour returned ; digestion perfect :
tT 2


248 Hypochondriasis


a wish to go out of doors. The right hand gives 80 kilogr. :
the left 50 kilogr.

Oct. 7th. At his departure, he had never been better in
his life.


Dr. Corrin.*


HYPOCHONDRIASIS CURED WITH BRASS IN PLATES.
[Gaz. Méd., Paris, March, 1852. Dr. Liendon, house-
pupil of the hospital.

March 16, 1851. M.S., a merchant, 38 years old, was
received into the Maison de Santé. He appeared strong and
healthy ; rather below mediocrity in intellect, and of a dry
nervous temperament. His countenance, though very sharp,
expressed reserve, and strong passions, especially the lower
instincts—animal. He had been generally healthy and sub-
ject to piles only; and had never suffered from any other
disease than an inflammation of the lungs in 1845.

Last August, his chest had been struck by the pole of a
carriage, and he was confined to his bed for a fortnight.
During his convalescence he fell violently in love with a
woman who had nursed him. Becoming dreadfully jealous,
he experienced first moral and then physical sufferings, which
have never left him. On each quarrel, each fresh fit of jea-
lousy, he had a violent oppression at his heart, with a sense
of heat at the pit of his stomach, where also there was occa-
sionally a sense of agitation, occasionally of constriction. At
the same time there came on gradually towards the end of
December a degree of head-ache and some loss of sleep. The
head-ache grew very intense, but was unaccompanied by vo-
miting, and by degrees was substituted for his sufferings at
the pit of the stomach. Every week or fortnight it returned
with shootings and pulsations at the right side of the head
for eight or ten hours, and did not cease till sleep came on.
About a month before his admission the head-ache gave place
to a violent pain below the left breast. This pain was inter-
mittent, as that at the pit of the stomach had been, and
ceased and returned just as he happened to be jealous or con-
tented. Soon afterwards cough and a little oppression came
on: then shiverings: and he took to his bed on the 4th of
March.

To-day, March 24th, his sleep is impaired: his appetite


* This physician, when house-pupil at Ourcine, had already cured a nun
of the hospital, who had been under the care of Dr. Cullerier without any benefit
for two years on account of an hysterical affection and an incipient palsy, with
brass rings. The case was published by Dr. Coffin himself in Dr. Burq’s /nau-
gural Thesis, p. 53.


cured with copper. 249


also, which inclines to vegetables only. He sweats copiously,
especially in the head. The cough continues with a very
abundant thin expectoration ; but neither percussion nor aus-
cultation points out anything serious. The pulse is 130, small
and irregular: the inspirations 28. His countenance is un-
easy: discharges insipid and inodorous gas from the stomach
and bowels: he has no tenderness of the pit of the stomach
or any other part of the trunk.

Exzploration.— March 24th. Dr. Burg, who kindly assisted
us in the examination, and afterwards in the treatment, cer-
tifies with us that the upper extremities, although perfectly
sensible to the touch, are almost quite insensible to pricking
and pinching; and that the force of pressure, ascertained
frequently by the dynamometer, varies according to the state
of the patient from 35 to 45 kilogr. in the right hand, and
from 30 to 40 in the left. Various small exploring rings are
applied upon the fingers in our presence, and give results
which are doubtful between brass and English steel, both
which appear to restore sensibility at the spot of their appli-
cation.

25th, morning. A large ring of English steel is put upon
the right arm, and a large one of brass upon the left. The
steel produced no effect: the brass increased the sensibility
and motility. The following day, as a second examination
of the right side with the brass gave the same result, a com-
plete armature of this metal was prepared.

March 31st. The treatment, which had hitherto consisted
of pectoral drinks, opiate potions, and narcotic pills, has not
yet been productive of any benefit.

At 5 a.m. a general application of brass rings was made.
In a few hours there was heat, copious perspiration, but a
very little tingling, and complete freedom of the chest from
suffering.

At 10 a.m. an examination made before M. Dumeril gave
perfect sensibility in the upper extremities; a power of 50
kilogr. for the right hand, and 45 for the left.

This morning there was a little fatigue, and an unusual
appetite.

April Ist, 2nd, 3rd. Every morning for four or five hours
the metal was applied all over the patient, except his arms,
the rings of which were repairing. The same effects resulted
except the tingling. The symptoms of the disease are disap-
pearing, and sleep is returning to its natural amount.

2nd. Strength enough: excellent appetite, and a return
of the desire for meat. The patient was able to go out about
his affairs the whole day. On returning in the evening with


250 Utility of gold


a severe head-ache, he got rid of it in a few moments by
means of an armature which he himself thought of applying.
He has no sense of constriction; his chest is quite free; his
pulse has fallen to below 80; the perspiration below the rings
is less, and scarcely any fatigue is felt from their application.

4th. Perfect sensibility: the same force of pressure as
before. Still a little want of sleep; but a great improvement
which the patient is delighted to perceive. He breathes more
easily, without the least oppression. The metal is applied
again ; a little heat and perspiration, but only slight tinglings ;
less fatigue than on previous days. A few wandering pains
at different parts, but these are almost at once removed by
the application of the armature. Sensibility perfect : pressure
55 kilogr. on the right ; 41 on the left.

5th. Still a little cough: but no expectoration.

7th. M. S. leaves the establishment in a satisfactory state
of health: has recovered his strength, his appetite, and even
a degree of cheerfulness. Strength, 55 kilogr. on the right ;
50 on the left.*


ENGLISH STEEL.—GOLD. (GOLD, 4 OUNCES: COPPER, 1 OUNCE.)


Two other patients, also under Professor Dumeril, were
examined at the same period by Dr. Burg. The general in-
fluence of the metallic treatment could not be so well esta-
blished in them on account of both the short time that one
remained in the house and the impossibility from the want of
the metal for Dr. Burg to put his plan in execution upon the
other.

But it is not less true that in each a metal excited the
happiest influence upon sensibility and motility, which, as in
the former patient, had been gvéatly impaired.

The following facts were ascertained.

The first patient was a lady, 38 years old, who suffered
from violent sciatica of the right side. She had been treated
two years before for gastralgia, which still plagued her a little,
and had remained subject to violent head-aches, which ceased
on the appearance of the sciatica. Dr. Dumeril in vain em-
ployed opium in large quantities, internally and externally,
flying blisters along the sciatic nerve, vapour baths, &. The
neuralgia was still excruciating, occasionally abating for only
a few instants. She was always in bed, and had not slept for
twenty days.

March 20. Sensibility as well as motility greatly impaired


* Dr. Burq saw him, Nov. 14, and found sensibility and motility perfect and
not a trace of nervousness left.


in Sciatica. 251
in the upper extremities : a long needle plunged through the
base of a fold of skin occasions no pain. Many metals were
applied, but English steel only produced a satisfactory result.
Rings of this metal, therefore, were applied one evening
upon the arms and legs. On the very same night the pains
abated so much that she slept.

The next day, the force of pressure and the sensibility
were much increased. The applications of the same metal
were continued; and, in about a fortnight, she was able to
leave the institution much improved.

Unfortunately we have known nothing about her since.


The second patient, Mrs. B., 59 years of age (a dresser
at the theatre), was admitted March 4. Her temperament
was very nervous: she had formerly suffered various pains,
and especially severe head-aches. She has now a sciatica on
the right side, and has tried all the receipts in the town for it.

Various frictions, blisters, chloroform, &c., under my di-
rection, were just as useless. As she lay in a double-bedded
room near the former patient, the examination of both was
made upon the same day. The sensibility was found very
much: lessened in the upper extremities, and the muscular
power to be nearly gone. One spot only of the left hand
preserved its natural sensibility. Jt was the ring-finger of this
hand, and on it a ring of gold alloy had been worn for many
years. The sensibility was very acute under this metal, and
much less so around. Struck with this coincidence, we
removed the ring to other fingers, and at the same time
put rings of common metals upon the adjoining fingers.
Sensibility returned every time under the gold alloy, but,
under the other metals, remained just as before their applica-
tion. The patient, at length convinced by what happened to
her neighbour that nothing but gold would cure her, left the
establishment to borrow bracelets of this metal of the ac-
tresses whom she had dressed.

L. Lienpvon, house-pupil to Dr. Dumeril
in the Maison de Santé de Dubois.


* COPPER.

Hdtel Dieu, St. Magdalen Ward, No. 39.

Bertambois, a sailor, 22 years old, admitted November
12, 1850, was born of an hysterical mother; lost a brother
in convulsions ; has been subject to nervous affections from
infancy ; went into the navy of his own accord at thirteen
years of age; was seized with typhoid on board the Pheton
at seventeen ; on his convalescence had anesthesia and amyos-


-


252 Palsy cured with copper.


thenia, indigestion, increase of head-aches, cramps, &. On his
going to the North Seas soon afterwards his insensibility was
such that, to the astonishment of the crew, he went up and
down among the rigging when it was all covered with ice
without feeling the cold. Being invalided in 1827 on account
of weakness, he returned to Paris, where, from various cir-
cumstances, he soon grew worse. In two months he two or
three times a week experienced symptoms like hysterical choak-
ing, that still exist in conjunction with other symptoms of
the same kind, but without any loss of consciousness. He
also frequently shed tears, became gloomy and taciturn, and
his nights were disturbed by melancholy and frightful dreams.
He went under Dr. Rostan, in the ward Sainte Jeanne, No.
4. We demonstrated to M. Vigla and the numerous pupils
of the teacher whose place he then occupied that this patient’s
sensibility and motility, both which were seriously impaired,
returned quickly under applications of copper.

Having quitted before his treatment had commenced, he
was afterwards admitted into the wards of M. Tardieu. At
this time, says M. Pierre, there was analgesia of the upper
limbs, and superficial anesthesia. Pressure by the right hand
was 26 kilogr. ; by the left 30 kilogr. There was indigestion,
partial loss of smell and taste; insensibility of the mucous
membranes of the eye and nose to irritating vapours; various
disorders of the nervous system, and particularly attacks of
hysterical choaking, occasionally of long duration.

On the 16th and 17th we ascertained that sensibility and
motility had been almost perfectly restored in the left arm
with partial applications of copper. From the 18th to the 26th
inclusively the copper armature was worn all night upon the
limbs only: tingling, heat, sweating and fatigue, especially
during the first days, and a gradual disappearance of all the
symptoms.

26th. General and special sensibility natural. Pressure
on the right 70 kilogr. ; on the left 55 kilogr. Good appetite,
digestion and sleep. S. P.


Let us now pass to Hysteria, with amenorrhea, chlorosis,
&c., and its various forms of spasm and neuralgia in the
female; and study the action of the metals in this usually
obstinate disease. Dr. Burg does not pretend that these means
are a panacea for nervous affections, since he gives many in-
stances of their failure, and moreover is aware of all the power
of MESMERISM over them: but he believes, and almost proves,
that the metal cure alone may become one of the most useful
and certain remedies in medicine. ~


=


=


a —- +


ae


Daily Vomiting, &c., cured with brass. 253


On another occasion he will inform us of the immense
advantage of the metals when combined with their fruitful
parent.


I. HYSTERIA, CHLOROSIS, DAILY VOMITING FOR MANY
MONTHS: RAPID CURE WITH BRASS RINGS.


In his last paper on chlorosis (see the recapitulation at the
end) Dr. Burg, addressing the National Academy of Medicine,
publicly read the following case.

In June, 1850, a young hysterical and chlorotic girl,
affected also with anesthesia, amyosthenia, amenorrhoea and
dyspepsia, was two months in one of Dr. Rostan’s wards,
vomiting every day almost all the solids and fluids which she
was prevailed upon to swallow. Jron, it is remarkable, had
been prescribed in vain, as well as many other substances: and
only pills of oxide of zinc had appeared to do a little good.

Chance having led me to examine this patient, the emi-
nent professor of the Hétel Dieu kindly allowed me to try my
treatment. I began by ascertaining the suitable metal, and
it proved to be brass in plates. Afterwards the committee
of the Academy, many distinguished physicians, Drs. Jobert
(of Lamballe), Horteloup, Pasquier, Beau, Tardieu, and Gos-
selin, whom I had assembled to witness the power of the
metals upon sensibility and motility, and Dr. Rostan himself
and his numerous clinical pupils, had satisfied themselves that
this metal, applied experimentally, removed the anesthesia
and analgesia at the spot of its application and nowhere else,

On the 6th of June, in the evening, I made a general
application of brass, The next day, general and special sen-
sibility had returned to three quarters of the surface, and the
muscular power had mounted to from 10 to 16 kilogr. on the
right side. The patient was greatly fatigued by the spoliation
which the metal had effected, and, even in the morning, asked
for food and took it with pleasure, and digested it properly.

In the evening and on the following days a fresh applica-
tion of the brass armature was made at night: and after the
second day of the treatment, sensibility and motility having
become almost natural, the patient, who has not vomited
subsequently to the 6th, has no longer enough of the full
diet (four portions), and does all sorts of little jobs for the
sister of the ward to gain additional allowance.

Five or six days more pass during which the colour of the
skin shews a tendency to become natural, and the bellows-
sound lessens more and more in the two carotids.

On the 16th and 17th the catamenia, which had been
absent several months, return so abundantly under the


254 Hysteria cured


influence of the metal applied to the stomach and lower extre-
mities that the patient fancied she was flooding.

On the 18th, sensibility natural; pressure 40 kilogr.: we
suspend the use of the metal, and gradually, first, the anes-
thesia and amyosthenia, then the attacks, the indigestion and
vomiting, returned, and with the latter all the symptoms of
chlorosis.

June 26th, Analgesia of the upper extremities: diminu-
tion of taste and smell: pressure by the right hand 20 kilogr.
instead of 40 kilogr.: weakness of the legs.

I resumed the metals permanently, and the return of sen-
sibility and motility again preceded the re-establishment of
the digestive functions and the return of the healthy compo-
sition of the blood.

At the end of two months, the patient, being perfectly
cured, left the Hétel Dieu, after having acted as a servant in
the wards for six weeks.


SLIGHT HYSTERIA: CURED WITH PLATES OF BELL-METAL.
[Gazette Médicale, March, 1852. Salneuve.


June 16th, 1851, Miss O. was admitted into No. 13, of
the ward No. 2, of the Maison Nationale de Santé, under
Dr. Monod. This young women, 16 years old, born and
brought up in the country, tanned, was of small figure, but
robust complexion, firm substance, and well-developed muscles.

Two years previously, without ever having had pain in
the head, or any nervous symptom, she began to suffer from
palpitation and suffocation, sometimes accompanied by faint-
ness, and more seldom by fainting. Three or four months
later, menstruation became established, and these symptoms
in part disappeared till September, 1850, at which period,
without any assignable reason, fresh nervous disturbances
began.

One day, after a fainting, leeches were applied to the
thighs: and then a fresh fainting took place, and in the even-
ing a violent fit which lasted four hours. This first attack
was followed by several others, especially at the periods of the
catamenia, which however were undisturbed. At the end of
a month, the attacks, which had not appeared again, returned
with fresh intensity, daily and even three or four times a day.

They were preceded by no warning ; and commonly lasted
for four or five minutes. They began suddenly with violent
palpitations, after which the neck swelled greatly, the head
was drawn backwards, the breathing grew quick, and then
there was suffocation and a kind of strangulation. All this


with bell-metal. 255


time, the patient uttered no cry, did not lose her conscious-
ness, and the upper extremities alone were slightly convulsed.

Her general health remained unaffected except that the
appetite fell off, her taste was a little depraved, and the
bowels torpid.

June 17th. The day after her arrival, Dr. Monod, who
had tried many plans of treatment with her out of the hos-
pital in vain, put her under the care of Dr. Burg.

Ezxploration.—A careful examination detected at the fore-
arms only a superficial anesthesia, but very great analgesia ;
pricking and pinching, although perfectly felt, gave no pain
except at the palm and the under part of the finger ends:
everywhere else the sensibility was natural.

The dynamometer shewed the muscular power of the fore-
arm to be much less than it ought to have been in a person
of such firm and large muscles. The right hand gave a pres-
sure of 22 kilogr.: the left one of 20. The lower extremities
had lost nothing of their muscular power and sensibility, and
thus these properties were impaired in the upper only. Dr.
Burg, considering this to be the sole cause of the disease,
thought he could remove it if he found a metal capable of
restoring the sensibility and muscular power. The examina-
tion was long and difficult. Many of the usual metals, many
kinds of copper and steel, produced no effect: and the fre-
quency and severity of the attacks continued all this time.
At last, on June 26th, no change had occurred, and two
small plates of dell-metal were tried. As they appeared to
have some effect, a ring of this alloy was put upon each fore-
arm on the evening of the 26th, and allowed to remain till
the morning.

27th. Miss O. said she felt heat and tingling under the
rings, had slept better, passed a calmer night. The sen-
sibility was nearly natural to-day in both arms, and the pres-
sure amounted to 30 kilogr. in the right hand and 25 in the
left. No attack during the day.

28th. The metal has remained on till now. Sensibility
is perfect on both sides. The right hand gives 32 kilogr. ;
the left 26.

The treatment was continued every day, and the patient
who, the day before the first application, had three attacks,
had not experienced one since.

July 8th. Miss O. leaves the establishment to-day in a
very satisfactory condition : the sensibility is perfect ; pressure
gives 38 kilogr. on the right side and 27 on the left.

On enquiry at her house (Rue Faubourg-Poissonniére,
No. 162),-Aug. 10th, 1851, we found that on the 14th of


256 Hysteria, very old Amenorrhea,


July she fainted for a few moments, and that ever since her
return home she had neglected to use the rings. They were
applied again the next night, and Miss O., having ever after-
wards put them on from time to time, has enjoyed uninter-
rupted good health.


SALNEUVE.


Dr. Salneuve gives a second very curious case, which oc-
curred in another hysterical female under the care of Dr.
Monod, and in which Dr. Burg could find but one metal
(virgin gold) capable of acting upon her sensibility. This
unfortunate circumstance rendered the treatment impossible,
not through the difficulty of procuring the metal, for this
was easy, but because, in the midst of the most evident
effects of the gold upon the anesthesia, the amyosthenia,
which was equally intense, would not yield at all; and we
have already said, in the words of the author, that the metal,
to be efficacious, must act equally upon the motility and the
sensibility.


HYSTERIA, AMENORRH@A OF FIVE YEARS, AND CHLOROSIS,
CURED wiTH BRASS. AHétel Dieu at Paris.


The first and following cases were communicated to the Academy
of Medicine by Dr. S. Pierre, formerly house-pupil of the
hospital.

(Dr. Burq’s Inaugural Thesis, p. 40.


Aug. 23rd, 1850, an unmarried woman, 26 years of age,
was admitted into the Hétel Dieu, No. 29, St. Ann’s Ward,
under Dr. Tardien. She had enjoyed good health till her
21st year, at which age she had typhoid fever, which she had
scarcely recovered from before she was attacked with inflam-
mation of the lungs. Active, perhaps too active, anti-inflam-
matory treatment was adopted. A mere fright was afterwards
sufficient to produce a most wretched nervous condition. Ever
afterwards she was constantly liable, in spite of everything,
to violent attacks of hysteria and to all kinds of nervous |
symptoms. The catamenia being completely suppressed at
the very commencement of the attacks, and having returned
but once during the five years, frequent vicarious discharges
of blood took place, sometimes from the nose, sometimes
from the stomach, sometimes from the urinary organs, and
twice from the eyes.

At the beginning of June, ten weeks before her admission
into the hospital on the 23rd of August, there happened,
whether spontaneously or from mechanical injury, a profuse
flooding which lasted the whole day. “At the time there was


and Chlorosis, cured with brass. 257


strongly-marked anzmia or rather chlorosis, and in the even-

ing a violent hysterical fit with precursory symptoms in the

chest. On the next day,—24th, a second, and on the 27th

: third, hysterical attack took place, and the latter lasted five
ours.

30th. A careful examination gives the following results:
motility a little lessened, pressure with each hand 50 kilogr.;
sensibility to touch perfect everywhere ; but general analgesia
of the skin and mucous membrane,—the severest pinch and
the deepest prick giving no pain. The special senses of sight
and hearing are unimpaired, but all the rest are more or less
affected: there is hardly any excess of sensibility: constant
head-ache with shooting: gastralgic pains: violent choaking:
frequent cramps of the lower extremities: indigestion: arte-
rial bellows-sound: face pale and bloodless: very copious
catamenia, and, notwithstanding this, occasional epistaxis.

Metallic examination.—Sept. 2, morning, and in the pre-
sence of Dr. Tardieu and myself. A first examination made
on the right side by Dr. Burq shewed the restoration of the
natural sensibility with copper and gold only.

Steel, tried three times, had no effect: nor had silver.
Sept. 3, evening. The precursors of an attack: at 6 p.m. it
is beginning, the hysterical ball rises, and then speech becomes
embarrassed. A copper armature is applied, and in a few
seconds all is over. In twenty minutes tingling is felt all
over the body, there is general heat and sweating, then agi-
tation and sleeplessness the whole night.

The next day, at the visit, great fatigue and lightness of
the head, which seems hollow to the patient: sensibility of
pain natural under the metal, a little dull around it: the
armature was not removed till 9 o’clock.

In the course of the day the flooding ceased completely.

4th and 5th. No treatment.

6th. The analgesia returned with all the other symptoms:
in the evening the precursors of an attack: general applica-
tion of the copper, and the same immediate and subsequent
effects as at first: at night the perspiration was still more pro-
fuse, the body and bed linen being literally soaked. In the
morning the same fatigue, the same sense of void in the
head, and the same progress of sensibility: bleeding twice
from the nose since yesterday: the uterine hemorrhage has
not returned.

7th, 8th, 9th. No treatment: and a return of the symp-
toms in succession. (The treatment was resumed, and with
the same benefit as before. We omit the daily report to
the 16th).


258 Hysteria, very old Amenorrhea,


16th. Sensibility natural everywhere: pressure of each
hand 70, from having been 50: no attack since the 10th.
But now some fresh symptoms arose which were very remark-
able, as shewing that a TOO PROTRACTED USE OF THE METAL,
although apparently harmless, MAY \TSELF PRODUCE SOME
DISAGREEABLE EFFECTS.

Evening. The same treatment (notwithstanding the state
of the sensibility and motility). All the night, agitation,
feverishness, sleeplessness: and in the morning, extreme las-
situde, diminution of appetite.

17th. For four hours to-day choakings, threatening suffo-
cation, great difficulty in speaking, rigidity of the head and
limbs, swelling of the pit of the stomach, feeling of strangu-
lation, but no convulsions or loss of consciousness, and espe-
cially no diminution of sensibility.

Night. No treatment ; but constant tranquil sleep.

18th. Natural sensibility and motility. The day passes
comfortably: in the evening, a general application of the
metals; agitation, feverishness, and all the symptoms of the
night of the 16th to the 17th. The heat and perspiration
were intolerable: but the patient, firm in following all direc-
tions, kept on the armature the full time.

19th. Morning: general feeling of illness; but still natural
sensibility and motility. Day-time: a fit for two hours and
a half, exactly like that of the 16th. Evening: no treatment ;
a quiet night.

20th. A good day: the armature is applied in the evening
again, and the symptoms returned in the night.

2lst. The same sufferings and even attack as on the 16th
and 19th. This time rings alone were applied, but, instead
of lessening the symptoms, increased them. Evening: no
treatment ; a good night.

22nd. Sensibility and motility natural: perfect calm.

The experiment was now considered decisive. Neither
Dr. Burq nor ourselves could doubt that the improper use of
the metals had caused all the disturbances.

22nd, 23rd, 24th, 25th. No treatment therefore, and no
symptoms: but undisturbed sleep every night and due per-
formance of all the functions during the day. The last bleed-
ing from the nose was on the 20th.


Remarkable influence of the metals upon the catamenia.
25th. In the afternoon, about 4 o’clock, the catamenia,
which had been entirely suppressed for five years, returned,
and lasted till 10 o’clock the next morning, without the use
of the rings: the fluid was very red, but scanty.


and Chlorosis, cured with brass. 259


26th. At 11 o’clock they stopped completely : at 1 o’clock
the patient, uneasy at this circumstance, put on the armature
before the time which was ordered, and went to bed, covered
with metal. In half an hour they began again, and continued
without interruption and in great abundance till 5 p.m. the
next day. The rings, remaining on all night, produced great
heat and sweating, fatigue, but no tingling.

27th. No armatures all night and a/so no catamenia.

28th. Morning: they seem to have entirely ceased: by
noon they had resisted two strong mustard foot baths. She
was then ordered to bed; and, at all hazard, a continued
application of copper upon the abdomen and lower extremities
prescribed. In an hour the catamenia had returned, and did
not quite cease till the morning of the 30th, having lasted
four whole days.

The armature was not removed till the visit, October 4th.
The patient having applied it again as a last precaution all
night, the old symptoms slightly returned from this fresh
abuse of the metal.

5th. Natural general and special sensibility: motility
above the natural degree. Pressure in each hand 80 kilogr.

6th. The patient is quite well, and at her own wish is
permitted to leave with a distinct promise to call again, and
to use the armature at home occasionally, especially at the
catamenial periods.

Simon Pierre, house-pupil at the Hétel Dieu.


After her return home the catamenia appeared abundantly
on October 23rd, two days before the time. They appeared
again on November 24th, and lasted till December Ist.

Dr. Burq published in his Inaugural Thesis two other
equally striking examples, which Dr. Simon Pierre collected
and communicated to the National Academy of Medicine.
We shall detail one only; and make extracts from the rest.


Hysteria, Paraplegia, Suppression of the Catamenia, Incipient
Palsy of the lower extremities, & excruciating Head-aches.
We began August 9th (1850) with a brass armature.
15th. Her head, which she had been unable to touch with
a comb for a month, is nearly free from pain.
18th. Return of taste and appetite.
24th. Return of the catamenia after an absence of four
months.
Sept. 4th. Left. . FF.


Hysteria in an unmarried female 22 years old. There


260 Hysteria and Chlorosis,


were amyosthenia and analgesia in an equal degree as the
hysterical convulsions.
Rapidly cured with rings of English steel. 8. P.


A case precisely like that reported at p. 244. Steel plate
acted imperfectly only on the sensibility, whereas a silver coin
(silver 9 parts, copper | part) restored it entirely. But neither
metal had any influence on the motility. Therefore the
treatment, as in Dr. Monod’s patient, could not be =

S. P.


A case of various hysterical symptoms was yielding com-
pletely to steel rings when the patient suddenly left.


Another case related by M. Pierre was the only instance
in which Dr. Burg could not discover any metal able to in-
fluence the patient.

The last case of this class extracted from those reported by
M. Pierre was one of Hysteria and Chlorosis (the pale disease)
with absence of the catamenia. The patient had often been
very intractable from childhood, so that treatment had re-
peatedly been begun over again.

Influence of the rings upon the sensibility and motility, and
of these upon the usual symptoms.—“ As often,” says Dr. Pierre,
“as the steel rings were applied long enough during the state
in which the patient was at her admission, they caused the same
effects,—great heat and sweating, tingling of all the palsied
parts, and at last fatigue in proportion to the duration of
their application: next, sensibility first of the skin, then of
the mucous membrane: return of motility, taste, touch, smell,
appetite and voice.

“The attacks and other nervous symptoms disappeared
whenever the natural sensibility and motility returned ; as
they did from August 12th to 25th, when the pressure by
each hand was 60 kilogr. The attacks never occurred sponta-
neously unless either was impaired; and the intensity and
frequency of both the attacks and the spasms and other ner-
vous symptoms were always proportionate to the diminution
of these two powers.”

Direct influence of the metals upon the atiacks.—“ At what-
ever periods of the attack or its precursors the armature was
applied, if applied accurately and completely, the usual symp-
toms of the attack did not take place, or they soon ceased
and did not return unless the armature was removed too soon
or accidentally deranged.” :


Amenorrhea and Palsy cured with metals. 261


Then M. Pierre mentions, that twice, once in the pre-
sence of Dr. Tardieu, Dr. Burq, arriving in the morning at
the moment of an attack, made it appear and disappear al-
most at will, not merely all over the body, but even upon a
single limb; by applying and removing the whole or a part of
the rings, as was recorded above in the case of the patient in
the Hépital Cochin.

Influence of the metal upon the catamenia. For three
months these had but just appeared.

July 26th. To-day they began but slightly: at 10 o’clock
the patient put on the armature, and they became so abun-
dant qu’une aléze en est traversée.

27th. They stop at noon. The armature was applied per-
manently upon the abdomen and lower extremities. In an
hour they reappear and do not entirely cease till the next
night.

Aug. 26th. They return at 8p.m. The rings being ap-
plied, they continue abundantly all night.

27th: the morning. The patient gets up, contrary to
orders, and puts her hands in cold water. They stop: at
noon they had not returned. The armature was placed on
the abdomen and lower extremities. At 1 o’clock they re-
turned freely and continued till the next day. S. P.


Of the five patients spoken of in the first part of this
article, Sequerlay and Verdelet left the Salpetriére, as Miss
Ch had already done, after Dr. Burq’s departure. Valois
remained only because, being an orphan, she had to wait till
she was of age before she could leave of her own accord.
Sylvan and Peffert continued in the same state. We lately
learnt these unprecedented circumstances from Dr. Burg,
whom very grave reasons have obliged to enquire into the
matter.

After all the facts now narrated, in which the action of
metals upon sensibility and motility in morbid conditions of
these properties without structural disease is so satisfactorily
demonstrated, we should not mention any more had not Dr.
Burg said, at the very beginning of his work, that nervous
paralysis, whether of the different senses or of motility, might,
when at the highest intensity, often resist the metallic treat-
ment. We shall close this interesting list of cases with some
others which will complete its unique character.

1. There was the case of Sequerlay, the paraplegic (palsied
in the lower extremities) patient at the Salpetriére, who gave
him the first hint of the efficacy of metal in such an affection.

2. A hemiplegic (palsied in a vertical half of the frame)
VOL. x. U


262 Palsies and Amenorrhea cured with metals.
woman, under Dr. Louis at the Hétel Dieu, was treated with
an armature of English steel and rapidly relieved.

3. A third female, hemiplegic and amaurotic (blind in the
optic nerve), under Dr. Rostan, was cured in a week of both
affections with an armature of half English steel and half
German steel, after having laboured under her diseases for
many months.

4. The young Baroness of R., who had been confined to
her bed with palsy for four months, and had been unable to
see enough to read for three, was treated with an armature
of silver of second purity (silver, 4 parts; copper, 1); and
could see to read on the third day, and took a walk ina
public place on the fifth.

[Dr. Burq’s Inaugural Thesis.

5, and last, Palsy, recorded by Dr. Pierre.

St. Ann’s Ward, No. 6. Brass. Admitted Aug. 27,
1849, a country girl. Perfect nervous paraplegia (palsy of the
lower extremities), amenorrhea, and hysterical spasms.

In March, 1850, in spite of various kinds of treatment,
she was seldom able to leave her bed. The catamenia ap-
peared once in January, 1849, and but twice since, and then
& peine son linge avoit-il-été taché.

March 23, says Dr. Pierre, the patient, examined in my
presence by Dr. Burg, shewed a phenomenon indicating
much to him and perfectly novel to myself. .A copper thimble
kept for a few minutes on a finger of her right hand, which
had somewhat lost its sensibility, rendered it more sensible
than the neighbouring fingers.

This phenomenon, which was not very perceptible even
to persons little accustomed to witness it, convinced him that,
if the palsy arose, as there was every reason to suppose, from
no structural cause, it would in all probability be lessened by
an armature. Dr. Tardieu allowed Dr. Burg to employ it.

25th. A copper armature was applied for eight or ten
hours. The same was done on the 26th, 28th, and 29th.

On the 27th she was so fatigued that the treatment was
suspended: and the metal acted with such rapidity that on
the 28th, in the morning, the catamenia appeared eight
days before the period calculated, and lasted till the 31st,
kept up by the copper, and that on the 30th, Easter Sunday,
she was able to go to chapel, leaning only on one of her
friends, and to return in the same manner after sitting and
standing during the whole of high mass.

June 27th. She left the hospital for her home (Clermont
in Auvergne), where she now remains in perfect health.

: S. P.


*-— —-_ -


|
|
|


@o-——™ -


Lesions of sensibility and motility in Insanity. 263


INSANITY.

In a new work upon the anesthesia and amyosthenia of
mental affections, Dr. Burg says,—

“Previously to the researches of Drs. Gendrin and Beau
and myself, the insensibility of hysteria and the neuralgia
of those convulsive affections which have been epidemic at
different periods were known: and so were the same symp-
toms in hallucination, ecstasy, melancholia, mania, &c.: and
abundant instances are recorded of madmen, after having
undergone severe surgical operations, or meeting with dreadful
falls, walking upon frightfully mutilated stumps without the
least pain. Since anesthesia (we shall presently speak of
amyosthenia) has been observed in insanity as long as in
nervous diseases, but turned to no more advantage in the one
than in the other, it has been regarded as only a curious cir-
cumstance—a symptom to be set down with all the rest.
But, the more or less perfect absence of sensibility in mental
affections, alone, or more frequently, as in nervous diseases,
united with a deficiency of motility, that we were the first
to investigate, if not to discover, appears here also to play
the principal part: and to be calculated to throw the greatest
light upon the course, distinctive character, causes, and treat-
ment of those diseases. In fact, extensive observations,
which 1 had an opportunity of making at my ease among the
vast number of patients in the Salpetriére under Dr. Falret,
the learned and modest professor of insanity, prove that all I
have advanced respecting anesthesia and amyosthenia, negative
or asthenic symptoms and positive or sthenic symptoms, as well
as about the division of nervous diseases into two great classes,
is equally applicable to curable mental diseases. We make
this latter distinction, because, just as we have passed over
in silence the incurable anesthesia and amyosthenia, or pal-
sies of certain organic affections, so we shall say nothing of
the general palsy of the insane, which indeed also presents
these two symptoms, but with a regularity, a fixedness, and
peculiarities, in the strongest contrast with the anomalies,
fugitiveness, and irregularity which so characterize them
when occurring in nervous diseases.”

The proofs of this new and striking assertion are almost
all to be found in the cases of those insane females who have
recovered on the restoration of the catamenia: and of those
chlorotic patients, with or without amenorrhea, but with
more or less disorder of the feelings or intellect, who have
been cured with the internal use of iron, which appears to
act then exactly as when employed in the form of an arma-
ture. Proofs are afforded also by those numerous mad per-
u2


264 Insanity with suicidal tendency


sons whose sensibility and motility were first unquestionably
impaired by intellectual labour and neglect of their health,
and who are often cured with travelling, exercise, gymnastics,
and even mental occupation without fatigue.


Melancholia, Delusion, and Suicidal Mania: rapid cure with
jewellers’ gold and English steel.


lst Case. In November, 1850, a lady, 32 years old, was
brought to me from the country on account of a mental affec-
tion. Her parents were nervous: and two or three relatives
on the father’s side, which is high in society, have disturb-
ance of their intellect. She was exceedingly excitable, neg-
lected exercise and other matters necessary to health, culti-
vated the fine arts, read imprudently, and mixed too early
with the world. From her 12th year to her 3lst she had
various nervous symptoms, and fits alternating with various
neuralgias. The catamenia went on well from her 19th
year. At 21 she married unhappily, always disagreeing with
her husband, and became a mother; and fell into a state
of melancholy, against which she struggled hard. After three
pregnancies, the last with twins, she became worse and re-
solved to live no longer with her husband, quarrelling con-
tinually with him, falling into despair and all kinds of delu-
sion, and at length, three weeks before I saw her, on being
reproved by him for neglecting the education of her children,
she in the coolest manner swallowed a large dose of laudanum,
which was rejected by the stomach and did no great harm.
For a few days she was better and then became worse than
ever, and was placed under my care. She reasoned well
upon all subjects, and knew all her duties, but felt unable to
perform any of them and yet was astonished at her own in-
difference—she had a moral analgesia. The most fixed of her
delusions was that of a woman in white, who stood between
her and every object she wished to reach, pursning her even
in the street and striking her on parts which she would point
out.

Perfect insusceptibility of pain in the upper extremities :
considerable, but less, in the lower. Evident diminution of
muscular power in the arms and legs. Force of the right
hand, 20 kilogr.: left, 15 kilogr. Habitual constipation :
catamenia a little lessened: for three months dyspepsia and
chlorosis.

The only sthenic (with strength) symptoms were, rather
too much sensibility at the top of the head, at the edge of the
fourth and fifth dorsal vertebrz, and at the pit of the stomach.
The old convulsions, spasms, neuralgias, hysteria, and other


cured with English steel. 265


nervous symptoms, which had tormented her till the begin-
ning of 1849, lessened in proportion as the symptoms of
insanity increased, so that for a year she had experienced no
fit and for nearly a month not the least of her head-aches.
Reflecting that probably the very condition which had before
existed in the organs of sensibility and motility had now be-
come transferred to certain parts of the brain, and was pro-
ducing the mental disturbances, and might be as readily
cured as if in the former situation, after trying metals for
several days, as I do for nervous disorders of the second class,
I fixed upon gold of second quality (+ copper) and upon
English steel. In the night, an armature of English steel :
and in the day, rings, bracelets, and necklaces of gold, such
as she wore habitually. I ordered her to go out frequently
and to exercise herself till she was fatigued, and to be rubbed
briskly with the bare hand and flannel brush on the limbs
and upper part of the body alternately. Every other day
a large salt-water bath (I wish it could have been in an iron
vessel), followed by friction and percussion of the whole body,
food less nourishing than before, and less time spent in bed.
This treatment began Dec. 4.

10th. Sensibility of all the limbs much improved. Pressure
with the right hand, 28 kilogr.: left, 20. Legs stronger :
bowels act more easily : appetite improved.

Delusion greatly lessened the last four days.

On the 8th there was a severe head-ache: on the 9th she
busied herself cheerfully with her children: and to-day her
expression of countenance is better. She is less lost: her
pulse is calm: and she sheds tears when her former state is
mentioned.

The treatment is continued to the 15th, only that she is
allowed more nourishing food.

15th. Sensibility almost natural. Force of the right
hand, 30 kilogr.: of the left, 25.

The bowels have acted daily except once. She always eats
with an appetite and sleeps well; she devotes several hours a
day to the education of her children, and the rest to domestic
concerns, an airing, or gardening. Reading is still for-
bidden, and but one hour a day allowed for music. At our
earnest entreaty she consented two days ago to one short in-
terview with her husband.

Dec. 20th. No hallucination since the 15th: her moral
feelings are perfect. On our moderately reproaching her,
she sheds tears profusely, and is most grateful tome. 18th.
A head-ache of shorter duration than that of the 8th. From
the 16th, she is perfectly reconciled to her husband and is


266 Insanity not cured with metals


with him for good. All the treatment goes on as before,
except that she takes only two baths a week instead of three
and the steel is applied every other night only.

22nd. Catamenia perfect in all respects, though they had
been scanty for three months.

26th. Sensibility natural everywhere. Force of the right
hand, 33 kilogr.: of the left hand, 28.

Every function is perfect, and my visits ceased. She came
to me now and then for a short time, and afterwards all her
letters gave me a good account. She continued a little
nervous, and she must long be upon her guard against the
effects of her hereditary tendency, of her bad physical educa-
tion, and early entrance into the world. She soon after this
gave birth to another child.


2. Melancholia with a tendency to suicide; but without
distinct delusion ; and in the latter point only was there much
difference in this case from the preceding.

Mad. P. had always been very nervous, but less and less
so as the mental affection came on; and at length lost all her
nervous symptoms when it became established. There was
the same moral indifference or analgesia, and even more
marked anesthesia and amyosthenia.

He tried in vain for several days the most common metals
to excite sensibility and motility, the diminution of which he
considered to be the sole cause of the complaint. Every
thing remained in the same state for three weeks, at the end
of which, her intense apathy preventing her from seconding
his efforts, he was at a loss what steps to take, and thought
of electricity,* which had been of some use in a case of hys-
teria equally uninfluenced by metals.

Strong electric currents were passed along the insensible
limbs—three times stronger than usual on account of the in-
tensity of the anzsthesia—sometimes with dry, sometimes
with moist excitants, and never desisted from till the needle
and dynamometer shewed an improvement in sensibility and
motility. The progress was slow from the great tendency in
the intervals of his visits to lose the ground which had been
gained. But at every advance he made, the mental condi-
tion equally improved. At the end of a month, all the
benefit which the metals usually effect so quickly and easily


* Electricity is highly extolled in palsy: but far too highly. For electric
frictions and currents, directed, not, as hitherto has been the practice, upon the
seat of spasm and pain, but upon limbs with loss of sensibility and motility, are
seldom as beneficial as they were in the present case: yet we ought not to neg-
lect it when other things fail. .


but with electricity. 267
had been nearly gained, when he was obliged to leave her for
some time. The head-aches were beginning again, and her
moral feelings and ideas were nearly natural. She was sent
into the country, compelled to fatigue herself with exercise,
and above all to take baths of Jaréges, that he has often seen
exert a very favourable influence upon the sensibility of sur-
face, and continued to improve. Her conditon is now satis-
factory, and the sensibility and motility nearly natural. She
had been placed under his care by a distinguished physician,
who is her relative.

In conclusion, Dr. Burq urges physicians to examine the
state of sensibility and motility in certain cases of insanity,
just as he considers that he has shewn we ought never to lose
sight of it in hysteria, hypochondriasis, neuralgia, &c.: and
contends that they will soon be convinced of the influence of
sensibility and motility upon the mental (cerebral) functions,
and that, if more is desired, or even an inverse proof, viz., the
influence of the state of the mind upon sensibility and motility,
the frequent reciprocal transformations of the disorders of the
two sets of functions will soon produce conviction.


*.* Dr. Burq promises an article for our next number respect-
ing the light thrown upon mesmerism by the metals.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.


When I reflect upon the facts which have presented them-
selves to me during the last fifteen years—from 1837, from
the period when the exquisite phenomena of the Okeys and
other patients suddenly opened to my astonished sight a view
of nature altogether new to me, down to the present moment,
I feel a greater pleasure in reading Dr. Burq’s very remark-
able communication than probably most other persons, how-
ever glowing their love of knowledge and intense their
pleasure in acquiring it and applying it to the good of their
fellow-creatures.

I had met in mesmeric patients with facts perfectly new
to me, as well as others rare and wonderful but described
in books upon disease and other subjects: and, although
these facts were palpable, they usually excited only a look of
ineffable superiority of wisdom and dignified pity whenever I
shewed or mentioned them to medical men of either high or
humble station.

Palsy of the sense of touch is a disease acknowledged,
though seldom seen unless in conjunction with palsy of mo-


268 Dr. Elliotson on the distinctions


tion in the same part, or with other nervous diseases,* or
from external causes. Abundant instances are recorded of
simple anzsthesia or palsy of touch, just as of simple palsy
of sight or simple palsy of hearing.

Among the facts new to me was that of the insensibility
to cutting, pricking, or pinching, although the contact of
objects was perceived as perfectly as ever. Dr. Beau pointed
out the distinction between sensibility of contact, tempera-
ture, dryness, and moisture, &c., and sensibility of pain, in
1848; and restricted the title anesthesia to the palsy of the
former, giving the name of analgesia to the palsy of the
latter. But in the mesmeric sleep-waking nothing is more
common than insensibility of pain from cutting and pinching,
and yet for the sensibility of contact to be unimpaired.

In 1839, I found that my patient, Master W. Salmon,
in his mesmeric sleep-waking had no sensibility of pain, yet
perfectly possessed his sense of contact. He felt the contact
of every object in his mesmeric state, and yet, having open
sores on his head which he could not bear to be touched
in his ordinary state, suffering agony whenever they were
dressed, he had no pain from the hand being laid upon them,
and had them dressed in his mesmeric state without any
uneasiness.t| In 1843, I mentioned in The Zoist, No. IL,
p. 178, that in 1842 I had a patient whose hands bore cut-
ting and pinching without pain (No. VI., p. 209), but who, if
her eyes were blindfolded and her mesmeriser and a score of
others touched her hand with the point of their finger, dis-
tinguished his finger and grasped it, but repelled the finger
of another. The same sensibility of touch and insensibility
of pain I noticed in an interesting case in 1842, and described
it in The Zoist, No. 1X. In short nothing is more common.

In Paris, so long ago as 1829, when M. Jules Cloquet
removed the breast and many glands from a lady in the mes-
meric sleep-waking without her feeling the least pain, the
sensibility of touch was still observed : for, when the water of


* In 1830 a case of catalepsy with anesthesia was in the Edinburgh In-
firmary. The whole was unquestionable, yet Mr. Liston, the surgeon, thought
proper in his ignorance of such cases to doubt its reality, and ‘‘ tore with his
nails two separate pieces of skin from the hand of the patient.” In the lecture
upon her case by her physician, Dr. Duncan continues, ‘‘ She was not aware of
the cruel and unwarrantable experiment, but she feels its effects in the intervals
(of her paroxysms) very acutely.’”” Dr. Duncan called it also, “ unmanly,
wanton, and barbarous.’”” Mr. Wakley, who had not then joined Mr. Liston in
his mad hostility to mesmerism, called it ‘‘inhuman,’’ Lancet, May 22, 1830,
p- 278 and the Index.

t Zoist, No. III. See my account of Miss R. Barber’s exquisite case in
ae VI., p. 210; 1844: and my Numerous Cases, of Surgical Operations without
"ain, 1843.


of sensibility known to mesmerists. 269


the sponge used on the occasion trickled down, she felt
tickled, laughed aloud, and several times said, “ Come, leave
off, don’t tickle me.’”’*

Sensibility to temperature often remains in mesmeric in-
sensibility to pain. Of this I had an instance in 1841, and
recorded it in No. VI., p. 210.¢ In palsy of touch, sensi-
bility to temperature has frequently been noticed, and Dr.
Darwin therefore conceived that there must be distinct nerves
for temperature. I may be allowed to quote some passages
which I wrote in The Zoist (No. III.) in 1843 :—


‘* The facts in sensibility displayed by mesmerism are very curious.
In the mesmeric state, a part insensible to the severest pinching, &c.,
may not only feel contact, whether the contact of a person or an
inanimate thing, but the patient, if not annoyed by it, may even
grasp and pull it. This may occur in one part and not in another.
I have in some cases known all parts to be insensible to pinching,
&e., except the face, which was as exquisitely sensible as ever.
Tickling may be acutely felt, when the same part is insensible to the
severest pinching, &c., as was observed in the lady whose breast was
removed by M. Cloquet. I have seen the most exquisite sensibility
to temperature when the same part was totally insensible to the
severest pinching, &c. There may be complete insensibility to me-
chanical violence, temperature, and to all contact. There may be a
peculiar sensation from the touch of the points of the fingers of the
mesmeriser and all other persons, so that his shall be distinguished
from theirs, and be felt warm and agreeable, whilst theirs is disagree-
able and feels extremely cold, though the eyes be thoroughly closed
and blindfolded, and no ordinary means of distinguishing be pos-
sible.” p. 339.


In the mesmeric state, contrarily to what Dr. Burg alleges
to happen in disease (pp. 230—232), there may be complete
insensibility of pain, while the sense of contact and other
agencies is unimpaired: and the analgesia may occur for
years, as often as the mesmeric state is induced, and anzs-
thesia never follow.

Through mesmerism I also became acquainted with pro-
perties of metals in reference to the living body that I had
never heard of or suspected. When mesmeric phenomena


* See this most interesting account copied in my pamphlet on Numerous
Surgical Operations without Pain in the Mesmeric State, pp. 783—81. The facts
were among the most astounding and important in medicine, but the profession
utterly disregarded them : nor has M. Cloquet, who is still alive, ever performed
a second such operation or turned his mighty fact to the good of his fellow-
creatures ; so that thousands of human beings, who might have been spared all
pain, were tortured by surgeons for twenty years—till the time of recent mes-
merists and their offspring the employers of anesthetic drugs. Sir Isaac Newton’s
apple would have dropped unheeded before all the Colleges.

+ Mr. Prideaux recorded one in my Pamphlet, p. 69.


270 Dr. Elliotson on the properties of metals


were first presented to me I knew nothing of the subject,
and they were too astounding and too absorbing to allow me
to spend my time in reading accounts of it when nature was
spreading before me the very treasures which authors de-
scribed, and for the contemplation of which all the time I
could spare was far too little. Nor have I yet read a single
foreign work upon mesmerism, though I have dipped into
half a dozen, and read quotations from them in English
authors, There was generally too much mysticism, super-
stition, and hypothesis, and too little calm and laborious
physiological investigation to suit my taste: and, whenever
we can apply to nature herself, it is poor work to obtain
things second hand. I therefore worked on patiently. Some
persons had told me that metals produced peculiar effects upon
mesmeric patients: but what I did not learn. I therefore ap-
plied metals to persons in the mesmeric sleep-waking: and
found spasm, pain, insensibility, exhaustion, frequently pro-
duced.

I found some persons not at all affected by metals placed
in contact with them, which produced great effects upon
others: different persons affected differently by the same
metals: some affected by no metal which I tried: some af-
fected for a period and afterwards not at all. In some a metal
produced no effect unless first mesmerised by being breathed
upon or kept in contact with a living body: or, if not in con-
tact with it, in contact with something which was in contact
with a living body, and the time required was always shorter
in proportion to the less density or thickness of the interven-
ing body. Some persons were unaffected, however long the
metal had been in contact with another living body, if it was
first well wiped. The Okeys were affected by no metal, not
by gold, silver, platinum, nickel, not previously mesmerised :
they were affected by some only when the moisture of the
mesmeriser’s breath or perspiration was adhering to the metals.


When speaking of the Okeys in my Human Physiology,
I said,—


**Many things that another person, or, indeed, I may say,
another animal, has touched, acquire the influence. Thus, gold,
silver, nickel, platinum, if held in the hand or mouth, will, though
wiped, on being brought into contact with them, when they are
susceptible, occasion sudden sleep if the susceptibility is extreme ;
in which sleep there may be convulsive actions; or a spasm of the
part, and at length sleep; or a spasm only. Just as in the case of
passes, when the susceptibility is extreme, a pass knocks them down
senseless and relaxed; if they are not so susceptible, it merely stu-
vifies them, makes them senseless, with their eyes open, rigid


known to mesmerists. 271


throughout, and fixed in the very attitude in which they were at the
moment. This fixing with the eyes wide open, and senseless, is one of
the most wonderful and magical-looking Tegan of the whole. Its
success behind their back, and by perfect strangers, has converted
hundreds who, not understanding the subject, were bewildered by
the more delicate phenomena. A beautiful experiment showed the
= diminution of the power imparted to the gold: and could,
or the most part, be made upon the younger only, as her suscep-
tibility was, in general, not so great as to show powerful effects from
moderate causes. A sovereign is held in a person’s hand, and then
given her. Instantly her hand closes violently upon it, she be-
comes stupified with her eyes open, and at last falls senseless and
relaxed: on waking, in a minute or two, she is desired to pick up
the sovereign, and again it causes her hand to close, and stupifies
her; yet not so soon but that she has time to rise a little from the
floor, before the stupefaction and rigidity come; and the perfect
sleep and relaxation are longer in supervening. On waking she is
desired to pick up the sovereign again; the effects are longer in
supervening, so that she rises higher from the floor before they
come, and there is time, by pointing one’s finger at her closed hand,
to cause it to relax and drop the sovereign; and, in consequence of
the absence of this, the rigidity and stupefaction are not kept up
and terminate in waking instead of perfect sleep and relaxation.
She is desired again to pick up the sovereign; she does so, and rises
higher than ever before the effects come, and they are shorter. All
is repeated, she rises completely before they come, and they are still
shorter. Again all is repeated, and she not only rises but goes
about, and talks before the effects come, and they are slight. On
repetition a still longer time intervenes, and still slighter are the
effects; and so experiment after experiment goes on till the sovereign
has lost its power altogether. The sovereign often rolls far away ;
and in such cases it has been changed for one charged by contact
with another person, it being impossible for her to observe the
change and impossible for her to detect any difference in regard to
warmth or moisture, as the original sovereign has been as much in
her own hand as the new sovereign in the hand of another person.
The new sovereign has always produced a far more quick and strong
effect than the exhausted one.

**By means of chargeable metals, I devised a mode of showing
very accurately the influence of health upon the mesmerising power.
I took one of the sisters into a female ward in which she had never
been, and respecting the inmates of which she and I were perfectly
ignorant. Every ticket with the name of the disease on the head
of the bed was removed: every patient had the clothes drawn com-
pletely over her. A sovereign, which had lain long untouched, and
had therefore no mesmeric charge, was taken up by her, and we
proceeded to the ward. She put the sovereign under the bed-clothes
into the hand of each patient in succession, and at the same number
of moments by my stop-watch took it out again and kept it in her
hand. I noted the period at which the effect began, the length of


272 Dr. Elliotson on the properties of metals


time it lasted, and the amount of it,—whether it caused spasm of the
hand only; of the hand and arm; or spasm and stupefaction. So
we went round the ward, and at one bed, by the request of a certain
student, I repeated the experiment. As soon as each experiment
was finished, the bed-clothes were turned down and the ticket exa-
mined. The effects were in every instance precisely proportionate
to the strength of the patient in whose hand the sovereign had been
placed. Those in consumption or worn down with paralysis produced
little or no effect : those who had complaints not impairing the health
and strength produced full effect : and all the intermediate degrees were
exquisitely proportionate to the condition of the patient. One patient
had produced a great effect, who, the student said, was continually
bled and kept constantly on low diet. But I found she had not been
bled for some weeks, had been for some time on full diet, was taking
bark, looked in capital condition, and had only some cutaneous dis-
ease not interfering with her strength. Of the two experiments
made at oue bed, the first had produced a full effect proportionate to
the strength of the patient. The second experiment produced only
a moderate effect : the clothes were then turned down, and it proved
that a nurse said to be in good health, and to do all the work of
the ward, had been laid in it. The woman, however, looked very
sickly, and I found that she had just lain in, and had come
back to her place very weak, and long before she was competent.
The experiment was triumphant, and an apology was the next day
made to me by the student who had so misrepresented to me the
state of those two patients, and at whose request I had willingly
made the experiments in this his wise uncle’s ward, because the
results in the case of both sisters, perfectly accordant in every in-
stance up to that time with the strength of each patient, though
modified like all results in their form in each sister, had been made
in my own ward, where they and I knew every patient.”

‘Screens lessen the effects. The thicker any given one is, the
greater the impediment. But the effects through them, when so
managed as to prevent the patient from knowing what is doing, are
very satisfactory. Mesmerised gold or silver produces its effects
more slowly and faintly in proportion as it is more wrapped up; and
is thus proved to have power, because, if wrapped up and rubbed
— the patient, it is impossible for her to know what metal is
u a

** Some metals, as lead and copper, could never be charged so as
to affect the elder: and nickel had always a tremendous influence
over her, such as I defy any human being to imitate. But lead and
copper affected the younger, if, after having been held in the hand
of another, the perspiration was not wiped off them. If it was wiped
away, no effect ever occurred. Iron could never be made to affect
either, under any circumstances; on the contrary, it invariably des-
troyed the power in charged gold or silver. Nothing could be more
interesting than to see a charged sovereign or shilling lying in their
hand, a sereen being held between it and their head; and, as soon as
the hand began to close and the eyes to fix, to observe these effects


known to mesmerists. 273


instantly arrested and subside when a short iron rod was brought
into contact with the metal, and increase again when it was with-
drawn. I have often substituted a rod of silver or of some other
metal, for I had rods made of various metals precisely similar in
form and size, when it was impossible the girl could know which was
being used; and in the case of a leaden I myself should not have
known by the eye at the moment, but to prevent confusion had put
each into a separate pocket. The silver, copper, and lead had no
neutralizing power, and therefore never diminished or arrested the
effect. I recollect one day having put a charged sovereign into the
hand of the younger. Her hand began to contract, and she could
not by any effort open it. She was very cross, and, seeing two rods
exactly alike, took up one, thinking it was iron: and told me now
she was a match for me and would open her hand. But her hand
would not open. I then went to look at the other rod, and found
that it was the iron rod, and that she had taken the leaden. I pulled
the leaden one out, and introduced the iron one between her fingers
and palm, and her hand immediately opened.”
** Another curious fact is that, although lead and copper have no
nora of producing spasms of the hand, however long they may have
een in contact with another person, and however long and with
whatever friction they are applied; yet, if rubbed against charged
gold, silver, or nickel, they acquire a charge, and, when applied,
= the effects, in a less degree, of the metal with which they
ave been in contact. I have made such experiments many thousand
times : and allowed others to make them: and, when the suscepti-
bility existed, the effects have been invariable. I have taken a short
rod of copper or lead in my right hand, put both my hands behind
me under my coat, and even had a large pasteboard placed at the
same time before the face of the girl with its lower edge close against
her chest, and then rubbed it five hundred times (first wiped if the
subject was the younger sister) on the palm of either of them. No
effect ever ensued. I have then put its extremity against a sovereign
or shilling which I had in my left hand, still behind me and under
my coat, and, soon after rubbing her palm with it, the hand has
closed with strong spasms. I have put the rod of lead or iron be-
hind me in different experiments again and again without bringing it
in contact with the gold or silver, and never saw an effect ; but after
I had silently, and without the possibility of any one knowing what
I did, rubbed it against the gold or silver, friction of the palm with
it invariably, when there was any susceptibility to gold or silver at
all, excited spasm.”


The long or repeated application of an efficient metal
caused violent symptoms and extreme exhaustion. In some
persons the slightest application does this.

My long mesmeric experience perfectly agrees with Dr.
Burq’s in unmesmerised persons—that different metals act
differently upon different individuals—that their effect may
wear out, and I have sometimes found it return—that their


274 Acupuncture.


application may be so long as to exhaust and injure a patient
—that like all mesmeric effects they may be perfectly inde-
pendent of imagination.

I found also that persons affected by metals in the mes-
meric state were often affected by them in the natural state.

I never turned the effects of metals to any other use than
to induce coma when this was desirable and could not be
effected by manipulations, gazing or breathing; to increase
the effect of manipulations, &c.; and to remove pain. I never
tried metals extensively and long as Dr. Burg has done :—coins
and pieces of metals of the size of coins, and small rods a
few inches long, were all I ever used.

It is now known that crystals form another class of agents,
even when not mesmerised. The power of magnets upon the
body has been long known: and that in many cases it is
the magnet and not the metal I proved by causing patients
to touch iron not made into a magnet, and, while they were
touching it to make it into a magnet by means of a galvanic
battery in an adjoining room, when strong effects instantly
took place.*

It is impossible to read Dr. Burgq’s article and not re-
member that there has been a practice from time immemorial
in China, that spread thence ages ago to Japan, of plunging
needles of the purest gold or silver, but preferably of gold,
into parts pained or otherwise disordered. In Europe we
term it acupuncture, and employ needles of steel. I pub-
lished an article upon it in the Cyclopedia of Practical Medi-
cine in 1833; and in 1827 the Royal Medical Society pub-
lished in the 13th volume of their Transactions my report of
my experience of it. Dr. Copland, with the want of informa-
tion and judgment which have characterized his violent
opposition to phrenology, mesmerism, and all means of
preventing the agony of surgical operations, which, Good
Christian ! he contends ought to be painful, strangely declares
off-hand that the practice of acupuncture has deservedly fallen
into neglect: and for no other reason that I can guess, but
that he is very furious at our mesmeric victory. The power
of acupuncture is wonderful in uninflammatory rheumatism
of fleshy parts. I reported that in St. Thomas’s Hospital,
“of 42 cases of uninflammatory rheumatism, taken in suc-
cession from my hospital books, 30 were found to have been
cured, and the remaining 12 hed clearly not been adapted


* My experiments with the magnet will be found in Zoist, Nos. XIII., p.
107; XV., p. 278. Examples of the effect of gold, &c., in my patients are to
be found in Nos. III, IV., V., VI., IX., XII, XIII., XXXIV. In very
many, gold causes a burning sensation. .


Observations of Mr. S. D. Saunders. 275


for the remedy, as either heat had existed in the affected
part or heat had aggravated the pain.” Dr. Churchill’s ex-
perience had given all my own results. The proper cases
were the uninflammatory. Of 129 rheumatic cases treated in
Paris by M. Jules Cloquet, about 85 yielded to acupuncture.
I found that the benefit was proportionate to the length of time
during which the needles remained. “One needle,” I re-
ported, “remaining an hour or more, is more efficacious than
several speedily withdrawn.” Therefore I allowed them to re-
main for an hour or two, and observed no harm from their re-
maining four and twenty hours. Failures were frequently as-
cribable to the shortness of their application. It will now be
important to ascertain whether an occasional cause of failure
may not be that the proper metal has not been selected. We
should henceforward have needles of various metals. The
Chinese used their needles to let out some imaginary acrid va-
pour, which they regarded as the cause of disease. I was igno-
rant of the mesmeric influence of metals when I examined into
acupuncture, and had no idea of what will probably turn out to
be the nature of the operation of this Eastern practice. But I
did not attempt to explain the effects by fancies: I confessed
my ignorance. “The modus operandi,” I said, “is unknown.
It is neither fear nor confidence: since those who care no-
thing about acupuncture, and those who laugh at their me-
dical attendant for proposing such a remedy, derive the same
benefit if their case is suitable as those who are alarmed or
who submit to it with faith. Neither is it counter-irritation :
since the same benefit is experienced when not the least pain
is occasioned, or when pain is felt.”*

Mr. Saunders, of Clifton, sent me a few years ago a steel
apparatus which he had constructed for application to the
head when this part ached, and which he found extremely
useful. I have begged him to communicate his experience
to me, and received the following letter :—


** ], Upper Portland Place, Clifton,
“ Sept. 11th, 1852.

** Dear Sir,—In reply to your note of the 8th, I beg to say that
the idea of curing the Seal-aihe by the means of my steel apparatus
occurred in this way. Having read in some mesmeric book (I forget
which) that by holding a piece of polished steel tightly in the hand


* It is amusing to read in Dr. Copland’s Dictionary (article Age), that
it is a good practice to rub babies’ gums with a ring, and that he recommends a
gold ring as the most efficacious. He also (article Debility) insists upon the
undoubted fact that infants often waste and die from sleeping with old persons—
a mesmeric fact : the active and abundant vital powers of the infant passing
into the languid and powerless frame of the old person. ’


276 Observations of Mr. 8. D. Saunders.


for a few minutes, and then placing it in the hand of a patient, sleep
would frequently be weet y I tried the experiment upon Mrs.
Saunders, and she immediately went into the mesmeric sleep, keeping
tight hold of the steel, and saying that it made her hand and arm
feel so comfortable that she did not wish it to be taken away. Two
or three days afterwards she had a bad head-ache. I sent her into
the sleep, and it occurred to me that, as the steel had made her hand
and arm feel comfortable, it might also produce a soothing effect upon
her head. I accordingly held the steel to the right temple, where
she said she felt the greatest pain, and it began to give immediate
relief : but she said that her left temple pained her and also her organ
of Veneration. I took up the poker and held it to the left temple,
still holding the steel to the right temple: but I was at a loss to know
how to get any steel to the organ of Veneration. I, however, placed
a pair of scissors on the organ, and in a very short time her head
became perfectly free from pain. Soon after this, a boy, John
Brooks, complained of head-ache. I sent him into the sleep, and
held a sovereign over the part which he said pained him. He im-
mediately cried out that it made the pain worse and burnt him. I
then changed the sovereign for the steel, and he said, ‘‘ There now,
that be good: I feels cooler, and got no pain.” A short time after-
wards having removed to Bristol, Mrs. Saunders had a return of her
head-ache: and, finding great difficulty in holding steel to both her
temples and organ of \enentin at the same time, I had an appa-
ratus made of steel, which, after trying its powers upon many in-
dividuals with the greatest success, I sent up to you begging your
acceptance of it. This was in the year 1847; the early part of it.
Since then I have made considerable use of steel for head-ache and
in cases of local inflammation. But it requires great care; for, when
the disease is not the result of too great an accumulation of electyi-
city (or whatever the force may be called), then the steel produces a
degree of cold, causing numbness in the part. When once the
steel becomes charged, it should be removed, and fresh steel applied.
One of my patients, a young lady, who suffers from severe pains in
the head, Bes two or three pieces of steel constantly by her side: and,
when the pain comes on, her mother or sisters hold the steel to the
part affected; and, as the pain leaves her, they feel the heat pass off
into their fingers, and the patient herself says that she feels the heat
as it were forcing iiself out of her head. When once the steel be-
comes charged, it discontinues to do good, and they change it for
another piece; and by the time that this second piece has become
heated the first is again ready for use.
**T remain, dear Sir,
** Yours obediently,

“* Dr. Elliotson. “S$. D. SaunpErs.


‘I will just mention that the steel apparatus is chiefly of use in
the absence of the mesmeriser ; and, although I frequently make use
of it, yet I find that the cures effected by my hand alone are of a
more permanent description. But wherethere is head-ache with pain


Properties of metals known to mesmerists. 277


in some other part of the body, say the leg (neuralgia), then the ap-
paratus is of great use, as it relieves the head and allows you at the
same time to devote your whole energies to the leg.”’


A lady consulted me several years ago on account of in-
tense nervous and muscular debility. I discovered no struc-
tural disease or other affection, and considered that iron was
the proper remedy. I gave it her long and in large quan-
tities: but in vain. She consulted a real and respectable
clairvoyante at Paris, who gave also the same opinion as my-
self and prescribed iron, but in the form of a bath. She
remained long daily sitting in a bath into which many pieces
of rusty iron were kept: and she perfectly recovered and is
well to this day.

One of the best forms of iron, especially with children,
who take it willingly mixed with treacle, is the brown or
chocolate-coloured powder called sesquioxide. A small quan-
tity often suffices. But I found that large quantities fre-
quently cured obstinate diseases when small quantities had
failed, and cured common cases more quickly. These facts
were met not by opposite facts, but by the assertion that the
preparation is very insoluble and so minute a quantity is ab-
sorbed that a minute dose must be always as good as a full
dose, and that we see the far greater part of it pass off black
from the bowels. Now if a most soluble form of iron is given, so
large a quantity passes off as equally to blacken the evacuations:
and I always replied that I did not know that absorption was
indispensable ; I did not know that the simple contact of the
medicine was not the agency ; and, if it were, that a quantity
enough to produce constant contact all along the immense
surface of the alimentary canal might be advisable. I cured
two very bad cases of lock-jaw, arising from a contused wound,
the one of a great toe, the other of athumb: and the Royal
Medical and Surgical Society recorded the cures in its Trans-
actions. Each patient took many ounces daily of the iron
powder.

All these facts harmonize beautifully with Dr. Burgq’s
observations.

Silver, copper, iron, zinc, and other metals have a high
reputation in nervous affections.

Just as he found with his external plates, we find one
metal given internally succeed in the nervous disease of one
patient, another in that of another.

Knowing how much both mesmeric power and suscepti-
bility are increased by warmth, it might be well to ascertain
whether the power of metallic plates is greater when they
are applied warm and kept warm by coverings: and the facts

VOL. X. x


278 Account of the Mesmeric Hospital in Bengal


which I noticed in augmenting and reviving the mesmeric
effects of metals make it desirable to ascertain whether fric-
tion with the metallic plates ever adds to their power. Would
they ever be more efficacious if mesmerised ?

I will not close this note without expressing my coinci-
dence with Dr. Burq in his recommendation not to repress
the muscular violence of fits. I always allow a patient in a fit
to agitate himself to the utmost, taking care that he shall not
hurt himself. The force ought to expend itself: and, besides
this consideration, I am satisfied that there is usually some
consciousness in the deepest apparent insensibility, though
all may be afterwards forgotten, and that by restraining the
muscular actions we only irritate and distress the patient and
aggravate the disorder.


II. An Account of the Mesmeric Hospital in Bengal since Dr.
Esdaile’s departure from India. Communicated by Dr.
Elliotson.


“The monster delusion of the century, however, may detain us somewhat
longer. It, too, has not sprung to life in our generation, though it has equally
received the stamp which marks the time in which it flourishes, in having had its
marvels multiplied by engrafting it upon another so-called science, resuscitated
for the purpose from fast-approaching oblivion.

‘« The amalgamation has, as might be supposed, made but a motley figure of
the two absurdities ; the mesmerising system came with pretensions to a power
actually superhuman, which, applied by instruments the most puerile, was suffi-
cient to remode! the physical condition of man, and overturn his whole moral
state. We have been told that a few starings or grimaces, or holding of another
human being’s thumbs, was enough to cause the spirit ‘to shuffle off its mortal
coil,’ and endue a creature with a sort of omnipresence and omniscience. We
start at all this pure essential spirituality, and are then presented with a strange
contradiction in the assertion that the recipient of these marvellous powers remains
still prostrated beneafh the mesmeriser’s will, and that the functions both of
mind and sense, which can be exercised without their proper organs, may still
be excited and directed by his touch upon certain imaginary organs in the brain,
mapped out upon the skull. There is excuse enough in the face of these absur-
dities to release us from the weary task of trying to disengage the few grains of
truth from the mountain of nonsense which composes this so-called science, espe-
cially as one of the earlier features of its history is repeated and brought forward
in a form most whimsical at the present moment. Each professor in his turn
has accused his predecessor of imposture. Mesmer denounced Hell, and D’Eslon,
Mesmer ; and the electro-biologist now in his nightly exhibition defies all the
world to prove that his philosophy is connected in the most remote degree with
that of the mesmerists. After the often-repeated investigations, and as many
confutations, by really learned and impartial men, it is hard to be continually
appealed to, as we are, to bestow time which might be far more usefully employed
than in sifting the fricky evidence. 1 conceive that the same test which was given
us to distinguish between true and false prophets may without impropriety be
applied to discriminate between true and false philosophers: ‘You may know
them by their fruits.’ Tried by this rule, we shall find that while our men of
real science have bestowed on this generation two benefits which are actual bless-
ings to society,—that while the natural revulsion of the frame under surgical
assistance is altogether spared, and while most distant friends have gained the


since Dr. Esdaile’s departure from India. 279


consolation of immediate communication,—WE MAY SEARCH IN VAIN FOR ONE
SINGLE WELL-ATTESTED PRACTICAL BENEFIT FROM THE INVENTORS OF THIS
SYSTEM, WHO CLAIM A MYSTERIOUS CONTROL OVER THE MOST SUBTLE AND
POTENT AGENCIES. It is pleasant to pass from these ‘speciosa miracula’ of
empiricism to glance at the practical advantages which we are daily deriving from
the advance of science in the legitimate path of sound induction.’”’—A LecTuRE
DELIVERED BEFORE THE LONDON CoLLEGE oF PuysicIANs THIS SUMMER BY
Dr. ALpERson, a Graduate of Cambridge and Fellow of the College! and pub-
lished in the Lancer for July 24th, 1852.*


I recervep the following accounts, the one by a native sur-
geon, the other by a Fellow of Caius College, Cambridge,
from Dr. Webb, accompanied by a letter, which I will take
the liberty of prefixing to them. Dr. Webb’s excellent,
honest, and courageous introductory lecture, delivered at the


* Mesmerists are blessed beyond other people. Their occupation is to lessen
the sufferings of their fellow-creatures and to study the greatest of all nature’s
wonders : and for their recreation after their toils there is provided for them a set
of merry mad wags, who refrain from no broad farcical misrepresentation nor
from any kind of language which they hope will produce a laugh. Dr. Alderson
is at the head of these performers, now that Mr. Wakley has retired into the
shade. Throwing aside fact and argument and all politeness of language, as
harlequin does his cloak, he comes forth full of fun, flourishing his baton, hitting
to the right and left, cutting delightful capers, and, by ‘‘ amalgamation”’ with
the functions of another personage who is always present in pantomimes, he ex-
claims that we grimace, pretend to superhuman powers, send off the soul on
errands, endow people with a sort of omnipresence and omnipotence, and that
we do this by a few grimaces. He deserves thunders of applause for the self-
sacrifice which such performances require. Poor me! I have never grimaced ;
I have never pretended to superhuman power, never attempted more than a
simple natural process,—a process as simple and natural as turning an electric
machine ; I have never tried to loosen any body’s soul and make it shuffle off, I
have never even looked for it; I have never tried to endow people with omnipre-
sence and omnipotence, nor did I ever suspect there was more than one sort of
omnipresence and omnipotence: I have never thought of amalgamating the ab-
surdity of mesmerism with any other absurdity ; 1 have never accused my prede-
cessors of imposture, nor my cotemporaries either. We mesmerists do not quarrel,
but imitate the successors of Mesmer, the virtuous Puységur and Deleuze and
a host of others, and are united heart and hand to support truth and benevolence.
I have never seen a confutation of mesmerism, nor known it to be investigated
and confuted by any impartial and learned man: I have never offered tricky evi-
dence: I did not know that not one single well-attested practical benefit has
arisen from mesmerism. I thought that hundreds of the most dreadful surgical
operations had been performed under mesmerism without pain: I thought that
thousands of unquestionable cures had been performed with mesmerism after the
failure of all other means,—cures of pains, convulsions, insanity, palsy, ulcers,
tumors, cancer, &c.: and I thought that they were recorded by careful, truthful
persons, with the names and addresses of the patients, the mesmerisers, and the
professional brethren of Dr. Alderson who had failed to effect a cure by respect-
able means, as well as with the opinions of those former attendants respecting both
the nature of the disease and its future result: I thought that the ten volumes of
The Zoist were as authentic and satisfactory records of medical benefits as any
medical work ever written: I was quite proud of our fruits.

Fiddle de dee, says Dr. Alderson on hearing this. Fiddle de dee. Have I not
investigated mesmerism for myself laboriously and practically? Am I not the
very cleverest man in Europe? Who are you ?

Oh the merry rogue! He is almost too bad, but we can’t help laughing at
him.—Joun Exuiotson.


x2


280 Account of the Mesmeric Hospital in Bengal


opening of the sixteenth session of the Calcutta Medical
College in 1850, and published at the request of the Council
of Education in India, was laid by me before the readers of
The Zoist in No. XXXII.


“Calcutta, June 3rd, 1852.

“My dear Dr. Elliotson,—I dare say it is quite possible
that you may find some difficulty in making out by recollec-
tion your ancient vis-a-vis neighbour at Mr. Alcock’s, in Bur-
lington Street, of above twenty years ago, whom you used
to take in your carriage to St. Thomas’s, and shew the use
of the stethoscope, by induction upon the living and demon-
stration upon the dead, in diseases of the heart and chest.
Twenty years have not effaced my gratitude to yourself, nor
have years of silence diminished my admiration of your talents :
for, if ever there was one man in England more legitimately
entitled to fair medical fame, I only regret that I never met
with him. Physiology and pathology were studied and rea-
soned upon with more comprehensive grasp and more patient
industry than by any other physician. It is evident, therefore,
that you were best fitted by the excellence of your talents
and reputation to exert some lasting influence upon medicine
and guide us to new lights in science. In mesmerism you
have done just what those who most highly valued your cha-
racter would have known you must do,—‘ stand by it for the
truth’s sake.’

“Well, for six years I have followed you here, as I did
with the stethoscope. I had risen so high in the clairvoyant
estimation of my friend Esdaile that he made it a last request
with the Government that I should succeed to the mesmeric
hospital. Should you see him, he will learn with surprise
that that charge which was promised him, and given to me, as
I understood, was, after fourteen months, supposed never to
have been given, but conferred on some one else, as I learnt
from the newspapers first, who, so far as I know, never had a
mesmeric case.

“* However, here is a statement of eight months’ practice
at the hospital while under my charge.

“The native figure of a tumor, to remove which from the
neck the carotid artery and jugular vein were exposed while
the man slept quietly in the mesmeric trance, may amuse you
or the readers of the journal if you give it a place.* I fancy
that these enormous scrotal operations would have interest
elsewhere if no English medical journals give them publica-


* See Plate.


since Dr. Esdaile’s departure from India. 281


tion. The improvements in scrotal operations are very great :
upon this subject I am preparing a work, and, if England
will not give it a place, I will give it publication abroad.
“ Yours sincerely,
“ Arian Wess, M.D.,
“ Professor of Anatomy, Med. Col., Calcutta.”


“ Report of the Government Sukeas’ Lane Dispensary and
Mesmeric Hospital. From May to December, 1851.
(Drawn up by the Native Sub-Assistant Surgeon at the
request of Dr. Allan Webb, Surgeon Superintendent.)


“ After the departure of the late Dr. Bose to Lahore, in
December, 1849, the Sukeas’ Dispensary was enlarged, and
incorporated with Dr. Esdaile’s Mesmeric Hospital (May,
1850), and confirmed by orders of Government in July, 1850.
The present establishment of officers therefore consists of an
European surgeon* superintendent, a sub-assistant surgeon,
two compounders, one dresser, and three mesmerisers, with
nine inferior servants, as durwan, bhistee, cooks, and coolies,
&c. The monthly expense, including the house-rent, amounts
to rs. 397, and rs. 53 for bazaar expenses and dieting of sick.
Total—Co.’s rs. 450.

“The total number of out-door patients, treated during
the past half year, amounts to 3,646; of whom 3,270 were
relieved, 6 incurable, 327 absconded,t 4 died, and 35 re-
mained under treatment on the 3lst December, 1851. The
daily average of attendance was 63°54.

“The accompanying returns of the house-patients show
the total number treated 67, cured 40, incurable 5, ceased to
attend 10, died 5, and 9 remain under cure. The daily ave-
rage of sick was 11°49.

“The reputation and the utility of the institution, it is
pleasing to state, are now even greater than formerly. Occa-
sionally, in order to be operated upon under mesmerism, re-
spectable persons gladly become house-patients, bearing the
cost of their own support. Gopaul Chunder Bose, a writer
to the Bengal Secretariat; Rammohun Roy, a merchant;
Isser Chunder Sircar, a merchant ; and Nufferloll Ghosain,
priest to His Highness the Maharajah of Burdwan, were pa-
tients of this class.

“Cases of hypertrophied scrotum, for the cure of which
this institution has especial reputation, continue to come in
for relief from the remotest parts of Bengal, as for instance,


* It is not now under European superintendence.
+ Gave up attending.


282 Account of the Mesmeric Hospital in Bengal


Beerbhoom, Purneah, Chittagong, and Cuttack,—places dis-
tant from two to five hundred miles from Calcutta, and in
one instance (30th October, 1850), a patient, by name Assub
Khallasee, came round from Bombay for scrotal operation
under mesmerism. He was mesmerised and operated upon
on the third day, and returned perfectly well to Bombay.

“ Mesmeric treatment has not been confined, however, to
scrotal operations. From among the out-patients, other cases
requiring capital surgical or other operations have been ad-
mitted.

“From the annexed descriptive roll of operations per-
formed at this hospital, it will be seen that they amount to 29
during eight months. The corresponding period of the pre-
vious year shows only 25: increase 4.

“In the month of August last, hospital gangrene break-
ing out; and in November last, the building undergoing a
thorough repair ; it became necessary to reject all applications
for operations. At least half a dozen were sent away, one of
them after being completely mesmerised and ready for the
knife.

“ Of three operations, which shall be detailed hereafter,
there were two cases of unusually large adipose tumors: one
situate on the back of the right shoulder, twisting round into
the axilla; and the other hanging down from the side of the
neck, commencing below the angle of the lower jaw.* The
tumors were nearly as large as the head. Dr. Webb removed
both of them by single incisions and dissected out the con-
tents, leaving the flaps of skin entire, ultimately to contract.
This was effected by keeping the adhesive and granulating
processes confined to the edges of the enormous sacs: and
the consequence was that the utmost freedom existed in rais-
ing the arm in the one case, or in turning the head in the
other, after the cures were complete. The third was a case
of hypertrophied scrotum of huge size. It weighed after
operation upwards of ninety pounds and was of twenty-eight
years’ growth.

“This tumor measured at the neck 24 feet; the antero-
posterior measurement was 5} feet, and the oblique one 64
feet. In the Mesmeric Hospital practice this case stands
alone, from the circumstance of a tumor of this size being
removed under the influence of chloroform. The man could
not be mesmerised either under Dr. Esdaile’s instructions, or
at a later period under Professor Webb’s. The probable
cause of this is that the man was accustomed to take opium,


* See Plate,


since Dr. Esdaile’s departure from India. 283


lately to the enormous extent of four drachms daily (solid
opium). The distress, however, of his life, from the size of
the tumor, induced him to beg its removal under any circum-
stances ; and the only question then to consider was the best
means of removing it. It was resolved by Dr. Webb on con-
sultation not to save the testes, not to dissect nor look for
hernia, but, having secured the colis, to remove at once the
rest.

“The passage from the orifice at the surface of the tumor
to the symphisis pubis was two feet six inches; and hidden,
for the greater part of its length, under five inches of flesh.
To have laid open this passage, as is usual in small opera-
tions, would have caused great, and, as Dr. Webb thought,
fatal, hemorrhage. He therefore first introduced the long
bistouri caché, opened it, and thus determined, roughly, the
position of the end of the colis, which was three inches below
the surface. One cut, about 12 inches long, was made
across the anterior half of the base, down to the point of the
bistouri: two short cuts of about 3 inches long were made
at right angles to this—one up to the pubes, the other down
along the bistouri. By these three cuts, the blood was im-
mediately drained off, and the colis convenienly laid open.
It was seized and pulled upwards, and, by a single stroke
below, dissected out. One of Liston’s longest knives was
then thrust quite through the neck of the tumor, and, by one
cut to the right and another to the left, the huge mass was
completely severed from the body. Thus the cutting part
was reduced to five strokes, and the whole only occupied five
seconds, as stated by the Rev. J. Long, C.M.S., who care-
fully took the time ;* the hemorrhage was very little, not
more than in the ordinary-sized tumors removed daily. One
reason why so little blood was lost is that the tumor was
drawn up by a pulley fastened to the ceiling, and well drained
before operating.

“The intolerable burden of this enormous appendage,
added to the excessive quantity of opium which the man
took, had so much worn out his constitution, that he did
not long survive the operation! The digestive powers of his
stomach wholly failed, and he expired, on the eleventh day, of
exhaustion.+


* “ The tumor cut off from the poor Chinaman, Hoo-Loo, in London, was
smaller than this considerably. It took the surgeons, Sir A. Cooper and Key,
one hour and forty minutes to remove it. The man left the table a corpse.
Brett’s first case, 20 minutes ; Goodeve’s, 14 minutes. Two minutes and a half
or three minutes, suppose, generally.”

+ ‘ The constitutional force—vis vite, is greatly upheld by using mesmerism,
instead of, as in this instance, chloroform. This man would perhaps have sur-


284 Account of the Mesmeric Hospital in Bengal


“One case came in of false passage in the urethra, and
another of compound fracture of the pelvis. The urethral
case was admitted on the sixteenth day of the accident.
There was incipient sloughing from urinary infiltration of the
perineum, and the bladder was paralyzed. An operation,
therefore, becoming imperative, the patient absconded. In
the other case the proper bones of the pelvis had pierced the
urinary bladder. He came on the third day. The accident
was caused by the man’s being crushed under a huge bale of
cotton, while carrying it with three others on their heads ;
and, except the local injuries, there was not much constitu-
tional disturbance present. But after five days the man was
compelled by his wife to go to his native village, whence she
came to escort him.

“ Of the five incurables, that of dislocation of the femur,
backwards and downwards, into the ischiatic notch, merits
mention. The man, the subject of this case, applied ten
weeks after the accident. Dr. Webb, however, by steady
tension of the limb for about an hour at a time under chlo-
roform, succeeded on the second attempt in drawing out the
head of the bone from its new attachments as far as the edge
of the acetabulum, which, having been filled up, the dislo-
cated bone could not re-enter: yet an artificial but useful
joint was formed at the acetabulum by proper position. The
man, with lacerated wound, came down from Beerbhoom :
part of his right forehead and cheek, and the globe of the
eye, were torn off by a wild bear six years ago, and the
frontal and nasal sinuses exposed to view. The unprotected
state of these passages was a source of constant distress to
him from dust and insects ; and, with the view to relieve the
man by rhinoplastic operation, he was at first ordered to be
mesmerised, which succeeded quickly and completely: but,
the scalp becoming diseased by numerous little abscesses and
exfoliation of bone, he was dismissed the hospital, as the
attempt to transplant new skin upon parts so diseased would
prove fruitless.

“ Another case was one in which Dr. Webb detected by
percussion an inguinal hernia imbedded in the large scrotal
tumor, for the removal of which the patient had come down


vived, if it had been possible to mesmerise him. Another case of eighty pounds’
weight, upon which I operated in mesmeric trance, did well,

‘* The shock is diminished in our days both by mesmerism and by chloroform.
In tumors of equal size bleeding is governed by the time. If the operation be
over in four minutes, it will be two-thirds less than in fifteen minutes. Dr. Goodeve
estimated thirty or forty ounces to have been lost in his case. Now in ordinary
cases it is ten or fourteen ounces. —A. Wess.”’ ©


since Dr. Esdaile’s departure from India. 285


from Beerbhoom. Had the intestine been cut, the man must
have died.

“The deaths which occurred were unavoidable. Three
were cases of scrotal tumors, one of which has already been
noticed. The second died of serous apoplexy, which mani-
fested itself on the second day from the operation. And the
third died on the nineteenth day from the operation, when
the wound was healing rapidly, of obstinate diarrhoea, com-
pletely exhausting him. The fourth casualty occurred from
protracted spleen disease. And the fifth and the last from
gangrene. This last man had malignant disease of the face
and of the testis. He came in in a hopeless state; the dead
and the diseased parts were cut off to give him a chance of
recovery ; the man already sinking, died on the next morning.
The miscroscopic examination of the testis by Professor
Walker presented some very rare and curious results: the
man had the same disease in other parts apparently.

“To return to the operations, sixteen out of the twenty-
nine cases, including fourteen of scrotal tumors, that of ad-
hesion of the arm to the chest, and the tumor on the neck,
were operated upon in the mesmeric trance. Two more com-
pletely mesmerised were sent back after they were mesmerised,
as stated above. Eleven were chloroformed, and two had not
any anesthetic agent. They remained in hospital at an ave-
rage forty-four and a half days.

“It is extremely to be regretted that no purely medical
cases have been admitted, for want of means and of space in
the wards.

“It might be mentioned appropriately in this place, that,
unlike other hospitals, the extensive suppurating wounds
consequent upon scrotal operations (larger than in any other
kind of amputations, excepting perhaps at the hip-joint) re-
quire constant cleaning of the wards, and very soon spoil the
mattresses, &c.: and it is palpable that the want of cleanli-
ness, and the crowding of the wards to any extent, become
highly obnoxious to the patients. There are at present three
wards capable of holding altogether a dozen of beds only.
The greatest number of patients at one time was fifteen, and
thus it was that the hospital gangrene, in August, 1851,
broke out. This could be avoided by frequent changing of
the mattresses and blankets, &c., and increasing the wards
by building out-offices of accommodation for the compounders
and dressers, &c.; but unfortunately there are not funds for
it. Any surplus money of the late mesmeric hospital could
hardly be more appropriately applied than to the wants and
purposes of this institution.


286 Account of the Mesmeric Hospital in Bengal


“ With regard to the mesmerisers attached to the institu-
tion, they have been quite as successful as formerly in induc-
ing trances, in many instances on the first day, and so intense
as to allow of an operation on the same day, or on the second.
It was upon three occasions that two or more mesmeric ope-
rations were performed in one day. On the 27th of October
last, His Excellency the Ex-Governor of Batavia and suite were
present, and were quite struck with admiration and astonish-
ment at witnessing for the first time the practical application
of mesmerism. When His Excellency observed the man who
had suffered amputation of the largest tumor still sleeping
calmly a quarter of an hour after amputation, he emphatically
said to Dr. Webb, ‘I was mistaken, for I thought mesmerism
was but charlatanism ; you have most honourably convinced
me of its vast utility. I am astonished, I cannot tell you how
much so, at what I have witnessed. This is most honourable
to you and to the Government. On my return to Europe, I
will mention in every country I may visit, the wonders which
I have witnessed in the Calcutta Mesmeric Hospital.’

“On the second occasion, of three operations in one day,
Professor Walker was.present and many students of the Me-
dical College. On the third occasion, a large concourse of
natives of respectability and of missionary clergymen.

“There have been several applications for the services of
our mesmerisers in medical cases from persons of the highest
rank and respectability, and occasionally from professional
men.

“Our mesmeriser, Meajaun, obtained a reward of rs. 300
for his success; which may be permitted an appropriate men-
tion in this place.

“When the tumors have not been very large, or the ope-
rations not greatly dangerous, as amputations of the leg and
foot, &c., or the patients for many days resisted the mesmeric
influence, or where the cases urgently demanded immediate
operation, Dr. Webb has used chloroform.

“ PuRMANUND Set,
“ Sub-Assistant Surgeon.”


“ A Visit to the Mesmeric Hospital.


“It was my good fortune to be present at the Mesmeric
Hospital on the occasion of the visit of His Excellency, the
late Governor-General of Java, M. Rochusen ; and, though
I have often witnessed expressions of surprise and approbation
at the uniform success of the terrible operations there per-
formed, yet nothing ever approached the ecstatic commenda-


since Dr. Esdaile’s departure from India. 287


tions of that noble stranger. He had, as usual, been sight-
seeing, and not a little startled by the uproar at a Govern-
ment opium sale; but neither the heat of the day, nor the
fatigues of the morning, could prevent his making his way to
what he justly considered a ‘ grand spectacle.’

“Few persons know where the hospital is now situated,
and fewer still can spare time and horses for the journey. It
was certainly most unfortunate for the mesmeric cause, that
Government removed the establishment from Dhurrumtollah
to the distant and unknown region of Sukeas’ Street: for
men of business have lost sight of the institution, when, from
the number and magnitude of the operations, a visit would
have been doubly interesting. Cases which, five years ago,
would have attracted the Deputy-Governor, and a host of
high officials, are now without a spectator.

“His Excellency’s curiosity had been aroused at the
Bishop’s breakfast table, where, for the first time in his life,
he heard mesmerism spoken of with respect. Hitherto he
had considered it as little better than humbug, or, if not, as
something akin to the black art. The whole party, by assur-
ing him of the reality of its effects, disabused his mind of
the former notion, and our venerable diocesan, as in duty
bound, combatted the latter, and saved the character of poor
mesmerism from such an unhappy aspersion. Fortified by
the word of a bishop and of Dr. Webb, who looked a most
unlikely man for an arch wizard, His Excellency determined
to see the whole with his own eyes.

“The hospital may be reached either by a long drive
down the Circular Road, until groves of palms begin to take
the place of houses, or by Amherst Street. To persons not
knowing the locality, the latter is the better road, as a sign-
board, a little beyond the Alms-house, points out the way
clearly. The building is situated in a narrow lane, over-
arched by palms, between Amherst Street and the Circular
Road, and is shewn by an English and Bengallee inscription
to be the Mesmeric Hospital and Sukeas’ Dispensary. It
looked dingy and neglected, a peepul tree flourishing at the
top sent its long roots to the very foundation. On the trees
outside the compound wall, large flocks of bats were hanging
from the half-withered branches, like rows of soda-water
bottles. The lower floor contained three large, and five or
six small, rooms, while a single apartment, perched on the
roof, formed the upper story.

“The gentlemen who were present to receive the Governor,
conducted him into the dispensary, where about one hundred
patients are every morning treated for all the ills that flesh is


288 Account of the Mesmeric Hospital in Bengal


heir to. Dr. Webb introduced to him a gentlemanly-looking
native, the resident officer of the hospital, and a most skilful
practitioner. His Excellency remarked, that it was very cre-
ditable to the Medical College to train such superior men for
sub-assistant surgeons; and added that he had made some
attempts of the same kind in Java, but that his most successful
measure was the prohibition of inoculation, and the universal
introduction of vaccination, by which small pox had been ban-
ished from Java as completely as it is from Denmark, where
doctors live and die without ever seeing a single case.

“The next room, ornamented with a curious ceiling of
carved wood, was large, dark, and dirty. The filthy beds,
covered for the occasion with white sheets, were occupied
by patients in all stages of recovery, most of whom had been
operated on in the mesmeric trance. One had lately been
freed from an extraordinary tumor, as big as his head, and
projecting from his neck or rather his lower jaw, which was
still hideous with large bags of skin; the arm of another
which had grown into his side, had lately been dissected out ;
the rest seemed cases of those monstrous elephantoid tumors
for which the hospital is celebrated. On this occasion, or the
week after, I forget which, I saw one poor man in a side
room ward, who seemed anchored on his bed, or rather moored
to a great buoy—a tumor apparently heavier than the rest of
his emaciated body. In these extreme cases, the outline of
®@ man approximates to that of a gigantic wasp. The sufferer
had so altered his nervous system, by the habitual use of
opium, as to be insensible to mesmeric action, and was to be
treated with chloroform as soon as he recovered from a violent
attack of fever.

“We were now introduced to the third ward, where the
objects of our visit were dimly seen through the gloom, each
with a mesmeriser at his head brooding over him. A door
was now opened, and a flood of the brightest light poured into
the room, without disturbing the proceedings. The three
patients slept soundly as before, and the mesmerisers, all vi-
gorous young men, two of whom were Hindus and one a
Mussulman, continued their labours: each, with a serious
earnest expression of countenance, bent over his subject’s
face, as though about to kiss it, breathed on the eyes, and
laid his hands on the pit of the stomach, or moved them with
hooked fingers before the brow.

“To test the intensity of the coma, the first man was
pricked with a sharp pointed knife on the most sensitive parts
of the body. As no flinching was perceptible, a live coal was
dropped on the inside of his thigh; and, as he still slept pro-


since Dr. Esdaile’s departure from India. 289


foundly, he was declared ready for the operation. Dr. Webb
now drew His Excellency’s attention to some of the distin-
guishing features of the mesmeric trance. The jaw was rigid,
so that none of us could open it; the eyelids kept up a con-
stant quiver; and the limbs, when lifted up, fell back like
those of a corpse. He then went to the second and third
beds, and treated their sleeping occupants to the same expe-
rimentum crucis of fire and steel. There was something awful
in the imperturbable repose, which stood out against this.
Those who at first thought that they could not endure the
sight of blood, were now convinced that there could be no
pain, and determined to remain. Thc instruments, which had
been previously examined, were now brought in; and mur-
derous weapons they looked. One, called the bistouri, espe-
cially attracted attention, being a long thin reaping hook, and
opening from its attached sheath like a pair of scissors. The
doctor now donned his hospital suit, which consisted of oil-
skin trousers, terminating in a pair of fisherman’s boots, and
an apron reaching to the neck.

“ He informed us that it was an unexpected pleasure that
he could shew us three cases, as he had heard only of one,
for the two others had come in only the day previous. They
were, however, quite ready. Two were scrotal tumors and
the third something else, I think a cancer. The first tumor,
the size of a cow’s udder, was laid bare, and the bistouri
introduced. It was a sickening yet wonderful sight, to see
the long knife slashing through the mass, and yet avoiding,
as by a miracle, the parts to be preserved ; and the fingers of
the assistants who pounced eagerly on the spouting blood-
vessels. The long deep preliminary gashes, the careful dissec-
tion out of parts hidden in the centre of the mass, the severance
of the tumor, when these were secured, the tying up of nearly
twenty blood-vessels—all did not occupy, by my watch, three
minutes. While this was going on, the mesmeriser, doubled
up at the head of the bed, was pouring his whole soul into
the patient’s face, who continued to slumber like an infant.

“The second case was then disposed of, but even more
quickly and with the same success.

“The first patient, who, after the operation, had been
left by the mesmeriser, now began to awake ; and the Go-
vernor, who was standing near, called our attention to him.
He was very composed, but perfectly ignorant that anything
unusual had happened ; and, on being asked when he would
like to have the operation performed, calmly answered, ‘ now.’
The sheet was removed, and he saw with unutterable amaze-
ment that his burden was gone.


290 Account of the Mesmeric Hospital in Bengal


“There was something so touching in his look of surprise
when fully satisfied that all was over, something so grateful
in his efforts to kiss the doctor’s extended hand, that the
whole party was affected.

“His Excellency, with tears in his eyes, now withdrew
from the room, and, after grasping Dr. Webb’s hand energe-
tically, and pouring out a torrent of English, Dutch, and
French gratulations, in which ‘brave man,’ ‘ respectable
man,’ were chiefly distinguishable, took leave of the Mes-
meric Hospital.

“It is pleasing to know, that, not only in Calcutta, but
subsequently in the North West, he has declared his inten-
tion of vindicating the claims of mesmerism in his own
country, and will, perhaps, be able to obtain some recogni-
tion in Europe of the benevolent exertions of that extraor-
dinary man, Esdaile, who performed these painless operations
before ether or chloroform was known, who prevailed upon
the Government to found this hospital, and who established
a reputation among the natives of India through a wider
circle than Great Britain itself. Jews, Mussulmans, and
Hindus speak of this ‘ great hakeem,’ as more than mortal :
‘ By a look he could kill, by a look he could make alive.’


“H. Wooprow, M.A.,
“ Fellow of Caius College, Cambridge.”*


* He who can read such accounts without deep emotion must be lost to the
best feelings of our nature. So must the practitioner, who, hearing of them,
refuses to examine seriously into the subject ; and lost to all sense of honour also.
For, when he receives money from patients, it is implied that he has treated
them in the best method according to the knowledge of his day: and yet, aware
of the existence of such important practical truths as are in The Zoist, he has
proudly refused to read a word, to hear a word, or to witness a fact.

When in 1838 I had a seton inserted into the neck of Elizabeth Okey without
her knowledge in the wards of University College Hospital, every one of my col-
leagues was absent and sneered at the matter. When the touching account of the
painless amputation at Wellow was read in the Medical and Chirurgical Society
in 1842, the members united in one movement of contempt: and at the follow-
ing meeting with rabid violence ordered that no minute of such an account having
been read should appear in their books. The numerous important operations
since performed painlessly in England, America, and France, and the hundreds of
operations, many of them terrific, performed painlessly in India, and all recorded
in the volumes of The Zoist, are passed over in contemptuous silence by the me-
dical journalists, no less than the accounts of all the beautiful and blessed cures
and alleviations of disease by mesmerism.

The profession not only live in the completest and proudest voluntary igno-
rance of our science, but, when entreated by unbenefitted patients to allow a
trial of mesmerism, cruelly object ; and, when too well off to care for the patient,
declare they will never attend again if mesmerism is employed, and they allow
the disease and the suffering to continue and death to ensue without a trial of it.

The world are beginning to stand aghast at this fearful spectacle. They
have hitherto believed the profession to be ardent in the acquisition of know-


since Dr. Esdaile’s departure from India. 291


ledge, enlightened and liberal, disinterested and benevolent. They cannot recon-
cile the present dulness, the present bigotry, the present intolerance, the present
selfishness and hard-heartedness of the profession, of its members, both high and
humble, metropolitan and provincial, with their former ideas. Deep is the
self-inflicted injury done to the profession, and certain is the severity of the
judgment of posterity against its members of the present generation.


The account of the support given by Government at present to mesmerism is
dismal. Where is the Governor-General? Where are those good men under
him who formerly behaved so nobly in the matter of mesmerism ?* Where the
numerous rich natives who came forward ?—‘‘ Three wards capable of holding
altogether a dozen beds only !’’ ‘and thus it was that the hospital gangrene
broke out!” ‘* This could be avoided, &c., but unfortunately there are not funds
for it!” The Hospital removed by Government “to the distant and unknown
region of Sukeas’ Street!” ‘* The building is situated in a narrow lane !’’—
‘* dingy and neglected!” ‘* The next room dark and dirty !” No purely me-
dical cases have been admitted for want of means and of space in the wards !

If Dr. Esdaile had destroyed half as many lives as he has saved, if he had
caused half as much misery as he has caused happiness, had led on troops as he
leads on his medical brethren in India, living and future, to victory, he would
have been made a K.B., been styled “Sir,” or ‘‘Lord’’ and after him his
heirs male lawfully begotten, he would have received a shower of stars and rib-
bons, and been banquetted both on leaving India and on arriving in England.


I have just met with the following passages in a new and interesting book—
Journal of a Writer’s Tour in India: with a visit to the Court of Nepaul. By
the Hon. Capt. Francis Egerton, R.N. 2 vols. London, 1852. vol. i., p. 137 :—
‘* During the day Grosvenor went with Sir John Littler to see an operation per-
formed on a native in a state of mesmeric sleep. I was to have gone, but missed
Capt. M., who was to have driven me to the house of the operator, Dr. Esdaile.
The operation was completely successful : it was the removal of a tumor weighing
twenty-five pounds. The patient suffered no pain, knew nothing of the operation
until he was awakened, lost comparatively little blood, and was not weaker than
usual after an operation of the kind. When he felt for the tumor and found it
gone, he said, ‘ My life is saved.’ Dr. Esdaile has performed many severe ope-
rations under similar circumstances with complete success. It seems strange that
a science so little known or used in England should be so successfully carried out
in India.”

Thus it is that the world becomes gradually informed of mesmeric painless
surgical operations, while the medical journalists, compilers of Restrospects and
Vade Mecums, fancy they are able to hide our great truths from mankind. They
are as absurd as children, who shut their eyes and then believe that nobody can
see them: and like great babies they fancy that their profession, with its journals,
its colleges and societies, is the universe; and in that narrow circle they move,
having no understanding of aught beyond it, of sublime truths, of true glory, of
anything large and noble.-—Joun ELviotson.


* Nos. XVII, XXII.


Return of House Patients, treated at the Government Sukeas’ Lane
Dispensary and Hospital, from May to December, 1851.


Dated Ist January, 1852.


Remarks.


1 of neck, 5 lbs. ; 1 shoulder,
6 ditto; 1 thigh, 8 ozs.


me a cheek ; 5 ham.


1)... |.. |Right ulna.


Pelvis, laceration of the uri-
nary bladder, which opened
into the rectum.


Soft cancerous of upper jaw.


Re-admitted case of Scrotal
Tumor ; the wound nearly
healed.


In cases of scrotal tumor re-
admitted.


23 ;|3|3| |2
Diseases. \s las/Blele| |S
B/8\3/2|2)2/2\E\6
S\t\o| sol si2 isle
PPT TTT TTT
Adhesion of arm to chest .. mB B.h ,
ee re eueenevns -| 3} 3} 3}.. 7”
Cancer.. ‘ «| 2] 2)..].. Jalal).
Diarrhoea eee ea ee i a
Elephantiasis nei “ea epipeatal 9)21/30)16)..|..| 5) 3) 6
Dislocation, hip . 1} 1} li. iat.
Exfoliation ...... pel Bt Bles -
False Passage in Urethra 1) 1).. »- «
Fracture, compound . 1) ll. a ;
| Gangrene scrotal............|..| 1] Ij..]..]..]..] Lj..
| Hernia, inguinal direct ......|..| 1] 1} 1j..]..|..]..]..
| Hypertrophied labia pud. Or Oe Wiles hee Posie Bes
| "eer $f = S SSS
i PETER TE Se SV
Piles, external........  ¢ & ee eS
Rheumatism J S55"
Splenitis ...... oof Sf Be. fes ise }oo} Bh.
| Stricture, rectal ; ;andfistula, anal. ae MP ae Eibctetee nc
Syphilis, primary. . -o| 2] 2 1).. “| =
*” secondary ..........|.. BE BE Blew les keeles
Testicle, diseased............|..| 1] 1} 1].. et *
pl eee ee ee ee
Typhoid Fever. . " | a A at vot ol {
Ulcers, indolent ........ 1| 1} 1... # .. |.. |Leg.
»»  phagedenic..... 1} 1} 1)... fee ]oe fe
— ware oe Fe ee eS
» with sinuses ‘ 2] 2) 2..
Urine, retention of ..... 2] 2) 2)..|..|
Wound, lacerated Bh Bivoke |


Hg Mt oth Forehead, by a Bear.


Daily average of sick,, 11°49.


‘TD ‘19D "PIA ‘UY Jorg puv 4Suopusjutiedng uoading “q’y ‘aaa A, SVTITY


“u0eZINg JUVISISSY-~qng ‘Lag GNONVRBOg
‘yey1dso}y 04} WIZ peSIVYOSIp oq UOOS [TTA oIND JopUN Suyuyeuel esoy} : yuepuautiodng oy} Aq pouiojsed sum uoMsiodo oY} ‘, SNY} peyseU sesvo U[—"g*'N


"pOsTOXA ,
“postoxg
“pes|oxg.
"POstOXg ,
“POSTOXY »
“POsTOXT »
“pospoxey
"POSTOXT »
“POSTOXT »
“pespoxy ,
"you Jo OpIs pospxg,
“payeyndury ,


“29prnoys jo .
4ovq 94} Woly pospoxg
*Pespxads


“POPHICs


“pospoxg
"POSPXA
“paspoxg
81989}
pure UIN}O198 PestoxT, }
“pospxg
“posjoxg
*pospoxa »
‘syxu} Aq poonpoy
*pasyoxd «
“pastoxg


aL
et


° 98d WILT


“AON 3873)"
“AON UypT|"*


|
eresceeesccoseseee |e ‘20 TOL
* YVW WSs)" “99C WIT
**90T UIST
“AON UIT
"AON U9
“AON 19
“AON 19
“PO WET


"490 4308
"ydog 1IFG
“ydog WIFe
“dog (I9T


~O HF Ame EZ


=“ 990 Tg!"
“* “390 UPS)" oun TIO
““* GUN 4708)" OUNL IIET


ms ie ST)" oun Pe TST


* Ame wee) oune mst
* une IN0T
“oun 18
“-OUne UBF


* ABW WZI


“pO TB)"
“PO WUzZ\"
"YO 4203)"
* ULLOJOLOTY)
9 PoesLiouse
* posLIoulse W
* pesLiouise
“ydeg utp)
“Suny me .
“sy "Ww .
* LLOJOLOTY)
Ane paga|"
* poslIoulse Wl
* *ULLOJOLOTY
4 *ULIOJOIOT YH)


* “ULLOJOLOTY
* postiouise
* pasLiouise
* ULIOJOIOTY()
* posLioulse qq
* pespoulse jy
* “ULIOJOIOTYD
* “ULIOJOLOTY()


posT1oulse Wy
pesLiourse yy
paspiouise


pestiouise
*ULIOZOIOTY
pestiouise jy


pestourso yy


IPS 1 PP PlRS IPR” | RBRSSE |


* savod %
+" srvo 02)


anal site Teo10s ‘auelZuB4
JOU, [8}019g

** OWN], [B}O1NG

** OWN, [OIG


**JOMUN,, [B}010g]"
** OUIN,], [B3019g |***


*** JOUUNE, [BIOIIG
* Urey OY} UF 4o0uw)
* OUIN, [R}O.19g


|SYBVUUNS194-FZ


mooyqie0q,
WOO YqG1900g]

A[S00H]
SyBvUUNs10g -FZ
qeoppan


“IOUINY, [8}0.10g |***


oun, asodipy
00g ‘


** LOUINT, yRiou9g ‘
. OWN, [8}0I9g |"
++ AQUUJUT }S9Y9 0} ULIB Jo UOISOypY |"

10UN,, [8}019g |"
* soumy, osodipy |***


+ JOU, [B}OI9g|***


* OUB UT BINISTY
Sumjoy ‘aInjoLyg
“*** JOUINT, [8}019g


* s0UINLY, [8}019g |"
soumy, esodipy |"


“70108 PUB SSA], posvestq|***


yor0TT,)


* paspiouisa
* ULLOJOLO[ IY)


* ABW ISTE!"


posLIourse jy


“‘SuUVRaY


sAvp
jo
‘ON


‘uoneied9


“ULIOJOLOTY
10


posjiomsoy


8
g


T


“sq,


eeeeees S8tq [wUleyxXy


SO[tq [eUsey xq |"
OWN], [83019 |"
BIQeT pe arydounaed 4 Fy |*

** ByWLIOH yeuynzuy |"
* JOWIN], [8}019g |"


“eynayeg
wOoYyq.120¢
syng[Vp


“+ £1300H
“= eyNOTBD


“wrMaTED


BRARSRISRS


ooputH |"
“9 OOpUTT

“* oopulH|"*
“ oopulH|"*


oopulH
oopulH


“= OOpUIH
“= OOpUIA]


oopulH
uvulnssn


uvaynssnyq |"

oopurH|*
uvulpnssn | *
uvurnssn jy | *


oopurH
oopulH


oopulrHy
uBUIpNSssn


oopurH


uvurjnssn yy |"


Tnedop wey


*** Jopuny) 108s]


‘a ‘Sao ooyynry|**


orrers DUNT D B04)


 unyo, osry]
* AMP WHS
 oune THOT


* AMF WOT
“uyesoF] WIBjOys|**


“* Burg ofoppn
“gq ‘se8uniqoung
acypollnA


*yyney Aoquvag
‘BLN HT
J ‘souynoy


ooput


* ooputH|’


oopulrH
oopulH


ooxng
* “¥ ‘sousowE yy
* ssuq WIRY
(IDEN OSSiey
‘ropunyy) svpAoy


ToPegaNn |”
* ooseeg)**
 requey|"


* puney9 Sop |‘
unpnsoopoyy|**


* oun 432%


“ GUN TST


eune 3ST


** UDF THOT
* gunner 4VZ
“" 9une U32
* 9Une Tp
“+ ABW PUZZS
+ ABW WZI


‘OSBasi(
uoyeing


“aouepIsey


“Oysey


*soTBN


*NOISSTUpY


| namwoe & DRO


So
Zz


‘IGS ‘laquasag 07 hvpy woul ‘yopdsozy arsawsapy svayng ay) 70 pausofiad suoynsadg yonbang fo j8v7


( 294 )


III. Cursory Notes of a late Visit to London. By the Rev. J.
Peep, of Slevoy Castle. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


** We have stated as our firm belief that there is an unearthly, evil power in
mesmerism and clairvoyance. In every country throughout Christendom won-
ders are being wrought and being witnessed by its agency, while the character of
it is manifestly and strikingly godless. If the term ‘familiar spirit’ has any
popular signification, surely it is most appropriate here; for no subject is too
familiar, no circumstance too trifling, to be beneath the spirits which are at
work in those ‘ arts.’ ”—Mesmerism and Spiritual Agency, p. 31: London, 1852.
A Sermon understood to be bya Mr. Tarbot, of Liverpool, Elder of the Irvingite
Church.*


A cLercyMAN brought a letter of introduction to me several
months ago from the Archbishop of Dublin. Some time
afterwards His Grace sent me some notes which he had re-
ceived from the gentleman; and I requested permission to
publish them. The Archbishop enclosed my letter in the
following one from himself to the clergyman :—


** Dublin, August 12, 1852.
** My dear Mr. Peed,—I have thought the best way of answer-
ing Dr. Elliotson’s inquiry about you is to send you his note, and
let you send him your direction, and where you will be, when.
‘Pray say to him at the same time that he is at liberty to men-
tion me merely as knowing you, and having full confidence in you;
which is all I can attest in the case. As I do not shrink from giving
my testimony when needed, so I do not wish to obtrude myself on
the public.
** Yours truly,
“ Rev. J. Peed.” “R. Dupri.


His Grace’s letter was enclosed in the following one to
myself from the clergyman :—


** St. Anne’s Hill, Blarney, Cork,

** 16th August, 1852.
‘Dear Sir,—From your letter of the 11th to the Archbishop of
Dublin, which His Grace has forwarded to me, I understand you
desire to publish my notes of a late visit to London in the next Zoist.
My impression is that the notes are not by any means fit for publica-


* A surgeon named Mr. Thomas Flintoff, who practised at No. 73, Great
Titchfield Street, on producing mesmeric phenomena in patients and benefitting
the sufferers, became so warm a convert that he put his name down for £5 to
the Mesmeric Infirmary and became a member of the Committee. But, espousing
Irvingism, he viewed mesmerism as the devil’s own work, and gave up it and all
the good which it did to his fellow-creatures ; and to this hour has not paid his
promised donation. Applications were made repeatedly to him, but he forgot
St. Paul’s precept that we should be courteous, and never took any notice.

Mr. Flintoff had cured a case of epilepsy with mesmerism, and, in conjunction
with Mr. Fradelle, a breast condemned to excision in the Middlesex Hospital, and
extracted a tooth painlessly, and published all this in No. XIV., p. 240. See
also p. 218.—Joun Extiorson. ‘


Cursory Notes of a late visit to London. 295


tion, having been written in a hurried manner, and sent according
to promise to the Archbishop for his private perusal. The notes are
however very much at your service, if you think the testimony of a
stranger like myself of any use in advancing our good cause. I
enclose the Archbishop’s letter to me, which will answer your query
respecting his attestation of credibility. I expect to remain at St.
Anne’s for about six weeks longer, where 1 am under hydropathic
treatment. My address when at home is Slevoy Castle, Foulkesmill,
New Ross. With many thanks for the kind reception you gave me
on the occasion of my last visit to London,
I remain, dear Sir, yours very faithfully,

** Dr. Elliotson.” “James PEED.


Joun ELLioTson.


7th October. Visited the Mesmeric Hospital, Bedford
Street ; saw, amongst some other interesting cases, that of a
woman between 50 and 60 years of age, who had been blind
for seventeen years, and declared incurable by Alexander.
Both eyes were suffused with a thick opaque film. Patient
under treatment at the Bedford Street Hospital for some
months. Could already distinguish near objects, her hands,
&c. I magnetized her by placing my right hand over her eyes,
my left at base of brain. After some moments she declared she
could see less indistinctly. Magnetized her again by placing
- fingers of right hand vertically over centre of cornea: fingers
of left as before. After five minutes I withdrew my hands;
patient exclaimed with surprise, “I can now see both win-
dows,” (the windows were about 12 feet in front of her,)
“and all round the room.” Mr. Capern (secretary and
principal mesmeriser) took a note of the method used and
said he would follow it. About three days after I visited the
hospital, Mr. Capern said he had mesmerised this patient
(then present) after the method I had shewn him, and had
for the first time produced a slight moisture in the eyes—an
effect which Alexander, after many efforts, had failed to pro-
duce, and declared the woman had a “dry eye,” and was
consequently incurable. I asked Mr. Capern if he had ever
tried gold? said he had not. On my left hand I wore a plain
seal ring of solid gold; I have worn it for many years: on
my right a plain gold ring—my wife’s guard ring, which I
had worn for about ten days. Placing the fingers of the left
hand at the base of the brain, a little on the side of the left
eye, I magnetized the woman’s left eye with the signet ring
by rubbing the eyelid over centre of cornea. After a few
moments she cried out that bright stars were shooting across
the eye and falling to the ground. Thinking the pressure
might have simply produced a spectrum, I changed the posi-

9


~


296 Cursory Notes of a late visit to London.


tion of the ring; but the stars still fell over the same spot
(centre of eye), yet fainter in proportion as the ring was
removed from centre of cornea. Tried same experiment with
guard ring—effect far more faint ; with fingers of right hand
—effect about equal to that of guard ring: ultimate result—
eye suffused with tears, a bursting sensation over base of
upper eyelid as if much moisture hung there which wanted
vent. Capern and his patient in unqualified surprise at the
fact of moisture having been so speedily drawn from the eye.
From this experiment I would infer, ;

Ist. That the cornea of the eye is peculiarly susceptible
of the mesmeric influence.

2ndly. That the efficacy of the precious metals is partially
intrinsic, principally from their power of imbibing, and af-
terwards imparting the mesmeric influence which they may
have imbibed. This same signet ring placed in the hand of a
strong healthy man, but very susceptible of mesmeric influ-
ence, without his having been acquainted beforehand with
any effect likely to follow, caused after a few seconds his eyes
to close, and then threw him into strong convulsions, so
much so that I had much trouble to demesmerise him. I
allude to an experiment tried on a Mr. Lloyd, of Dorset
Square, with whom I was sitting in the drawing room paying
a morning visit. Now he was unaware that gold had any
mesmeric influence, wore a ring, and handled other rings
with impunity.

3rdly. Perhaps we may infer from the above experiment
on blind woman, that whatever it be the mesmeriser emits,
it is in some cases perceptible to the vision of the patient.

Oct. 13th. Spent the evening with Dr. Elliotson: saw
Mr. James Salmon, whose case was mentioned in The Zoist.*
Dr. E. and I each mesmerised one half of said Salmon, who
clasped the hand of each mesmeriser with equal affection,
saying he felt very happy, but very odd. Dr. E. then mes-
merised my half, and eventually became possessor of the
whole Salmon. As Salmon stood between us, clasping the
hand of each, Dr. Elliotson remarked, “that this was clearly
an allowable case for polygamy.”’ Here I met a French gen-
tleman,t who pretended that by clasping a thin plate of
copper on the fore-arm he could increase its muscular power.
The experiment certainly succeeded in the case of Salmon,
who was able to bend a curiously constructed spring some
degrees more by a small graduated table than before the
copper was clasped on the arm ; but with me it produced not


* No. XXXIV. - + Dr. Burg.


Cursory Notes of a late visit to London. 297


the least effect, to the undisguised disgust of monsieur—how-
ever, “one swallow makes no summer.”

Oct. 14th. Returning from royal apartments at Windsor
Castle, saw, at entrance door, a tall, spare policeman, whose
left arm was in a sling. As the visitors crowded by him, one
gentleman accidentally touched his hand, whereupon police-
man winced and turned away apparently in great pain. Went
up to him: “ What is the matter with you?”—P. “I am in
great pain; I have a gathering in my thumb’ and have had
no ease these five days.” ‘Give me your thumb.” P. “What
do you want to do ?”—“ No matter; give it here.” Policeman
consents with a comical expression of countenance. I mes-
merise the thumb (which is bandaged) for perhaps five minutes,
placing it between the palms of my hands, and occasionally
making tractative passes. “ How do you feel now ?”—P. “My
thumb is very comfortable; I feel no pain: you have put me
into a perspiration all over: you are not mesmerising me, I
hope ?”—“ Yes, but I am; try if you can stir your thumb.”
P. “I can now the pain has left: I can move it without
pain.” “ Press with your fingers.’”* Policeman obeys with
fear and trembling: he tells me the pain and soreness has
been so intense he dare not touch the thumb: I urge him ;
he takes courage, and finds he can handle it without pain.
P. “ But my arm! I have not been able to straighten it these
five days: the inflammation runs up to my shoulder,” (he
traces its course.) ‘No matter, your arm shall be straight
in less than five minutes.” I take it from the sling, make
passes from shoulder to tips of fingers: the arm gradually
becomes straight to owner’s unfeigned astonishment. P. “Can
I move it myself?”—“Try.” He does so; bends his arm,
then shakes it up and down—tossing it about like a child
with a new toy. Ina word, so completely were both hand
and arm restored to Her Majesty’s service, that he would
have pocketed the sling but from advice to the contrary.

The scene was a curious one. I had many spectators, and
with the exception of the old beefeater, the passers by looked
on me as insane. An hour afterwards I met the policeman,
asked how the arm was; he replied first by taking the hand
out of the sling and brandishing it, then thanking me re-
peatedly for setting the thief-catching member all right again.

I may pass over a curious exhibition of so-called electro-
biology, for this sub-mesmerism cannot, in my mind, be pro-
ductive of any good, and may be of much evil; it may suffice
to mention that Mr. Capern biologized one side of a man,
depriving him, as he gave the word, of sight, smell, speech,
and motion on that side. The side unaffected was first mes-


298 Cursory Notes of a late visit to London.


merised by patient himself, who made a few passes down it
(the right side) with his left hand: the effort to speak with
one side of the mouth ludicrous enough, but unavailing.

Query,—would rubbing oneself down beforehand be an
antidote, pro tem., against biology. I wish one were found
out. Biology can only bring discredit upon pure mesmerism.

I will mention a curious thing I saw on my return to Ire-
land, at Mr. Dawson’s of Cullaynmore, county Carlow. One
of his daughters tied the end of a thread of about four inches
long round a shilling: the shilling was suspended inside a
tumbler glass. After a few seconds, shilling and string began
to pendulate (if there be such a word), until, striking the
sides of the empty glass, it actually struck the hour by the
clock, and then ceased to vibrate for a time, when it began
again, ending with a similar result. This was repeated at
several hours, when the shilling marked the time (i. e., the
last hour struck by clock) with like unfailing exactness. There
was no trick in this: one young lady whom I saw at her own
house the next day tried for the first time the experiment with
equal success. By the avay, I relieved her mother, a Mrs.
Kough, of Rilbride, that same evening, of pain in chest,
difficulty of breathing, and loss of voice, at a single sitting.

I tried the shilling experiment without any success. The
matter naturally set me thinking, as

lst. Why did the shilling vibrate? Evidently the experi-
ment was connected with those relating to the od (better sense
and orthography odd) force. It was in fact an odometer,—
silver and crystal,—case was plain ; still more, as in my hands
the odometer uniformly becomes motionless. Why? I have
my guesses on that point too, but won’t enter on it; it is
enough that both the persons who tried the shilling experi-
ment are very susceptible of mesmeric influence.

2nd. Why did the shilling strike the hour? A poser,—
but now for a conjecture. I have observed persons in the
mesmeric sleep singularly accurate about time: they will
generally tell the hour by a given watch without consulting
it or being capable of so doing. I speak of the non-lucid.
Could this occult faculty of time-keeping have been called
into action in the experimentalist, and thence communicated
to the shilling,—the string acting like the wire of an electric
telegraph? All fudge this, perhaps; yet the time-keeping
power of the somnambule is a link in some chain,—in what,
I leave to some quicker wit to discover. An odd link is a
fact, isolated though it be; and a fact or a piece of old iron
should never be thrown away. No man can say how unex-
pectedly he may find use for either.


Examples of painless extraction of Teeth. 299


Mesmerism is as yet a mystery : its facts almost as various
as numerous. A safe induction; almost impossible to be
come at, hence a general principle rarely to be arrived at.
One must live and learn with (mentally) the stomach of a
dog to digest bones, of a cow to ruminate the semi-digested
mass.

Trusting Your Grace will excuse these cursory notes of
my late excursion, I remain, my Lord,

Your faithful servant,
J. Peep.


IV. Examples of painless Extraction of Teeth: with remarks
upon the ignorance displayed by Mr. Druitt, in his Sur-
geon’s Vade Mecum. By Mr. Rawe, Lemaile, Cornwall.
Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.

‘«¢ Hamburgh, July 28, 1852.

‘** Electro-biology is the offspring of the old root, Mesmeria officinalis, and
which here is nearly rotten and forgotten.’ ’’

Extract from ‘‘a letter received by our correspondent from a celebrated pro-
fessor at Hamburgh.”—Provincial Medical and Surgical Journal, August 18,
1852. Editor, Mr. Walshe, of Worcester.

Dear Dr. Elliotson,—The capital operations performed
on mesmerised patients, and reported from time to time in
The Zoist, render the minor achievement of painless tooth
extraction rather insignificant. But I think well-attested
occurrences, even of this sort, possess some value as evidence
of the anesthetic power of mesmerism.

In the conversation which I had the honour of having
with you last autumn, you remarked, in reference to a case
I spoke of in which three teeth were extracted from a mes-
merised subject, that a person insensible of that would not
feel the cutting off of a limb. This confirmed an opinion pre-
viously expressed to me by a surgeon of this neighbourhood,
Mr. Fry. I beg to offer you a short account of what I have
met with in this way,

And remain, dear Dr. Elliotson,
Yours most respectfully,
Joun Rawe.


S. H., a young woman, aged 22, had suffered, during the
spring of 1849, very severely from pain in the teeth, and
submitted to the extraction of one of them. Three more
were carious: but, when their removal was suggested, she
affirmed that whatever she might endure she could not make
up her mind to have another tooth drawn. She had been the
subject of neuralgic pains, for which she had been mes-


300 Examples of painless extraction of Teeth.


merised with immediate relief, and consequently entertained
a very high opinion of its remedial value. When, therefore,
it was proposed to her to have her teeth removed while under
mesmeric influence, she readily assented, and, my relative,
Mr. Robartes, a surgeon-dentist, now practising at Plymouth,
being on a visit at my house, we determined on embracing.
the opportunity thus afforded us of testing the anesthetic
power of mesmerism.

After mesmerising S. H. about fifteen minutes, I made
some passes over Mr. R.’s hands, breathed on the instru-
ments, and requested him to proceed. The gum was lanced,
and the first lower molar on the left side extracted with the
forceps. There was no sign of consciousness. Being confi-
dent that the coma was sufficiently permanent, I requested
Mr. R. to wait until the mouth was rinsed out. He then
proceeded to extract a bicuspid on the same side, and then a
bicuspid on the opposite side. There was not the slightest
motion in the patient, and she appeared throughout in a
composed slumber. A short time after, when she was about
to be awakened, the teeth were placed in one of her hands.
On awaking, after a momentary look of surprise to find her-
self there, she observed the teeth and exclaimed, “Oh! they
are out!” and said she had felt nothing of it—an assertion
which the five or six persons present fully believed. This
young woman still keeps the teeth as a memorial of a painless
operation.

Since this experiment I have on five occasions produced
complete insensibility in two other individuals while teeth
were drawn. I will only further allude to one.

F. E., whose case of chlorosis and cure by mesmerism is
- reported in No. XXXIII. of The Zoist, having a painful
tooth, Mr. Wilkins, surgeon, of Wadebridge, agreed to ex-
tract it while she was under mesmerism. It happened that
Mrs. Balfour, the able authoress and lecturess, was at his
house at the time, and this lady with Mrs. Wilkins went into
the surgery. I believe their sensitive feelings prompted them
not to look at the operation: but, immediately after it they
saw the young woman in the same image-like state of insen-
sibility which had appeared throughout. Mr. W. remarked
that on this and two similar occasions he had observed that
the hemorrhage was unusually small. I suppose the undis-
turbed state of the circulation would account for this.

In a recent edition of the Surgeon’s Vade Mecum, by Mr.
Druitt, at the conclusion of a chapter on chloroform, is a
short article headed “ Mesmerism.” It would appear that
the author felt that he could not ignore it ; but, as an apology


Mr. Druitt’s ignorant tirade. 301


for his admission that mesmerism does, under certain circum-
stances, “ produce a kind of catalepsy accompanied with in-
sensibility to external impressions,” he strings together all
the hacknied slurs on the art, in a paltry paragraph, quite
out of keeping with the other contents of the work. It is
here quoted entire.


“‘Mesmerism.—There can be little doubt but that the ma-
neeuvres which are called mesmeric passes, if practised long enough
upon a person, whose credulity is great and strength of mind little,
(no matter whether the mind be weak originally or rendered so by
illness,) are capable of producing a kind of cataleptic condition, ac-
companied with insensibility to external impressions; and that, in
this state surgical operations have, in some instances, been performed
without the patient’s cognizance. But this one fact in mesmerism is
mixed up with so much extravagant pretension, and with so much
knavery and folly, besides that the very operation of mesmerising is
one that no virtuous woman ought to be submitted to, that we can-
not consent to admit the mesmeric sleep into the list of therapeutic
agents until it can be shewn that it has advantages over chloroform
and the other remedies which lay no claim to supernatural virtues.”


As to the assertion that the weak-minded are particularly
susceptible of the influence, my own experience, as far as it
has gone, is opposed to it. Credulity, if meant to signify a
belief in the power of any means used to affect the system,
is not to be despised in mesmerism any more than in medi-
cine: but there are abundant facts to prove that the mesmeric
coma is not dependent on it. I will mention one that has
come under my notice. About two years since I tried mes-
merism on a young man,—a journeyman miller, who, owing
to long-standing deafness and the isolation of rustic life, did
not know there was such a thing as mesmerism. 1 had known
him from a boy to be an honest, trustworthy fellow: and,
meeting him one day, just after his return from an ear-
infirmary nothing improved, I requested him by writing on
my pocket-book to call on me next day. He did so, and
answered my enquires of what had been done to him. But,
when I wrote, “ Have you ever been mesmerised ?” he could
not tell what it meant: and, after one or two attempts on my
part to explain, he still shook his head and said, “I can’t
tell what you mean.” I then requested him to look steadily
at my eyes, and made passes down in front. His eyes soon
became unsteady, and in about two minutes he was asleep.
At the end of an hour, I thought to dismiss him. But the
usual means of dispelling the sleep produced no effect on
him: neither did pricking with a needle. He was left to


302 Mr. Druitt’s ignorant opposition.


slumber another hour, and then by transverse passes and
blowing in the eyes was aroused.

Some of Mr. Druitt’s objections to mesmerism may be
dismissed as simply absurd: and all could be easily answered.
But it is to be regretted that such a prejudiced and erroneous
allusion to the art will probably be considered by many young
surgeons as containing sufficient for them to know of the
matter.

It is only a portion of our fellow-beings who can be suffi-
ciently narcotized by mesmerism for surgical purposes. But,
with those who can, the state induced is as far preferable to
that resulting from chloroform as sound sleep is to dead
drunkenness. The several precautions to be observed in
using chloroform, as given by Mr. Druitt, are no doubt very
proper. But they serve also to illustrate the superiority of
the mesmeric coma. Thus he says :—‘‘ The commonest acci-
dent is vomiting: if it occur during the inhalation, the pa-
tient’s head must be turned to one side to let the vomited
matter escape: if very troublesome afterwards,” &c.: and,
“Tt must not be used for operation for cataract ; after which
any accidental fit of vomiting might cause the whole contents
of the eye-ball to be forced out.” Mesmerism would not
produce vomiting, but might, on the other hand, be used to
remove any previously existing disposition to vomit or cough.
Again: “Epileptic patients are lable to have their fits in-
duced by the inhalation.” I have effected the mesmeric coma,
in different degrees, on nine individuals afflicted with cpi-
lepsy, and altogether about two hundred times ; none of them
ever had a fit during the sitting.

On the paramount consideration of safety to life, no re-
mark need be offered. a


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.


Mr. Druitt ought to blush at having his apparent gross
ignorance thus exposed by a gentleman not of our profession.
It would be disgraceful in him not to know, but I am per-
suaded that he does know, and that all the profession knows,
that the most fearful operations, so gigantic that neither he
nor any of the older surgeons whom he short-sightedly and
meanly hopes to please by this folly, has ever performed, or
ever will perform, have been performed in India without a
pang ; and severe operations in this country, in France, and
in America, also without a pang,—in mesmeric insensibility.


Phenomenon of Levity in the human subject. 303


Let him blush. But let him repent, and cease to aid in pre-
venting his afflicted fellow-creatures from obtaining at the
hands of the profession one of the greatest blessings placed
within the reach of mankind.

I prefixed another passage from this man’s book to the
eighth article in No. XXX. :—


““* The avoidance of pain.—This we need scarcely say, is an
object of the highest importance; not merely in order to lessen the
amount of physical suffering attending operations, but also because
severe pain has a most serious tendency to depress the nervous
system, and induce death from exhaustion; and because many pa-
tients have so great a dread of the knife that they ne off applying
to the surgeon till their case is almost hopeless. to the end of
1846 we knew of no means for effecting this very desirable object
save the previous administration of narcotics and long-continued
compression of the nerves supplying the part to be operated on;
means both of which are so uncertain and inefficient that no one ever
thought of employing them. We do not include mesmerism in the
list, because this so-called science is so intimately connected with
quackery, obscenity, and imposture, that very few respectable persons
would consent to meddle with it, even for a good purpose.”’*


Mr. Druitt is a Fellow, forsooth, of the Royal College of
Surgeons. Truly he deserves to be put upon the Council
and to sit by Mr. Lawrence, who is still so silly as to grimace,
and shrug, and sneer, and cut what he considers witty jokes,
when the blessing of mesmerism is mentioned, and, as well
as Mr. Druitt, would do well to follow the good example set
him by Mr. Wilkins, though a quiet country surgeon, and by
Mr. Robartes, though a quiet country surgeon-dentist.


V. Phenomenon of Levity in the Human Subject. By Non-
Wist, Edinburgh.


‘** Periculosum est credere, et non credere.
* * * *


Ergo exploranda est veritas multum, prius
Quam stulta prave judicet sententia.”’
Puaprevs, fabula x., De Credere et Non Credere.


TO THE EDITORS OF THE ZOIST.


GenTLEMEN,—In continuation of the subject of my com-
munication published in The Zoist for January last, I beg to
send you the accompanying extracts from a weekly periodical
entitled Notes and Queries, for the 3rd and 24th instant.


* The moral and intellectual state of the medical profession may be appre-
ciated from one of its members daring to publish such a paragraph.—J. Ex-
LIOTSON.


304 Phenomenon of Levity in the human subject.


“July 3, 1852.
** QUERIES.


“* Remarkable Experiments.

“A living man, lying on a bench, extended as a corpse, can be
lifted with ease by the forefingers of two persons standing on each
side, provided the lifters and the liftee inhale at the moment the
effort is being made. If the liftee do not inhale, he cannot be
moved off the bench at all; but the inhalation of the lifters, although
not essential, seems to give additional power.

“The fact is undeniable. I have never met with any one who
could explain it. Has it ever been, or can it be, accounted for ss

“W. CL.


‘(This curious fact was first recorded by Pepys, who, in his
Diary, under the date 31st July, 1665, (vol. iii., p. 60,) writes as
follows :—

«This evening with Mr. Brisband, speaking of enchantments
and spells, I telling him some of my charmes; he told me this of
his own knowledge, at Bourdeaux, in France.

*«*The words were these :—

** *Voyci un Corps mort.
Royde come un Baston,
Froid comme Martre,
Leger come un Esprit,
Levons te au nom de Jesus Christ.

*« * He saw four little girls, very young ones, all kneeling each
of them, upon one knee; and one begun the first line, whispering
in the eare of the next, and the second to the third, and the third
to the fourth, and she to the first.

“*Then the first begun the second line, and so round quite
through; and putting each one finger only to a boy that lay flat
upon his back on the ground, as if he was dead: at the end of the
words, they did with their four fingers raise this boy as high as
they could reach. And Mr. Brisband, being there, and wondering
at it, as also being afraid to see it, for they would have had him to
have bore a part in saying the words, in the room of one of the
little girls that was so young that they could herdly make her learn
to repeat the words, did, for fear there might be some slight used
in it by the boy, or that the boy might be light, call the cook of
the house, a very lusty fellow, as Sir G. Carteret’s cook, who is
very big: and they did raise him just in the same manner. This is
one of the strangest things I ever heard, but he tells it me of his
own knowledge, and I do heartily believe it to be true. I inquired
of him whether they were Protestant or Catholique girles; and he
told me they were Protestant, which made it the more strange to
me.’ ”

** July 24, 1852.
“ Lifting Experiment.
(vol. vi., p. 8.)
“In reference to the observation of your correspondent W. Cx.


Phenomenon of Levity in the human subject. 305


on the experiment of lifting great living weights, that it is essential
that the liftee should inhale at the moment the effort is made, but
not essential that the lifters should, I think it right to state that I
believe the very reverse to be the truth. I have seen the experiment
repeatedly made, but never with such success as to make me believe
for a moment that the ‘two very young and little girls’ could with
a finger each raise Sir G. Carteret’s big cook.

‘‘ The inhalation of the lifters the moment the effort is made is
doubtless essential, and for this reason:—When we make a great
effort, either in pulling or lifting, we always fill the chest with air
previous to the effort; and when the inhalation is completed we
close the rima glottidis to keep the air in the lungs. The chest
being thus kept expanded, the pulling or lifting muscles have re-
ceived, as it were, a fulcrum round which their power is exerted,
and we can thus lift the greatest weight which the muscles are ca-
pable of doing. When the chest collapses by the escape of the air,
the lifters lose their muscular power. The inhalation of air by the
liftee can certainly add nothing to the power of the lifters, or
diminish his own weight, which is only increased by the weight of
the air which he inhales. Those who are not satisfied with this
view of the subject, we must hand over to the mesmerists.


«DD. BREWSTER.
«* St. Andrews.”


The passage from Pepys’s Diary is curious, and shews
that the lifting charm was known and practised in France a
century and more before the Letters on Natural Magic were
published by Sir David Brewster. But for the experiment of
which he and Sir Walter Scott were eye-witnesses, we should
have smiled at Pepys’s credulity and given no credit to his
story. It may still be difficult to swallow Sir George’s Car-
teret’s big cook, who seems to stick also in the philosophical
gullet ; but, if the feat vouched for by Sir David himself be
admitted, namely, that the heaviest person of the party was
raised by the others with the same facility as if he was no
heavier than a feather, are we warranted in withholding our
belief from that of the little girls in liftmg the lusty artiste
as if he had been a denizen of Ayr or Cork. The explanation
now given by Sir David Brewster in his letter to the editor of
Notes and Queries would have been more satisfactory if the
performers in his experiment had exhibited that violent strain-
ing of their muscles which is manifested when our strength is
exerted, with the aid of an inflated chest, in raising a very
heavy weight. They lifted, we are told, the subject of the
experiment, as if he were as light as a feather, and without
any apparent effort at all,—the natural inference from which
is, that the liftee had become imponderable, and not that the
lifters were Samsonized. As Sir David has handed over to


306 Phenomenon of Levity in the human subject.


the mesmerists those who may not be satisfied with the only
explanation he can give of so unaccountable a phenomenon, it
is to be hoped that you or some of your correspondents will
undertake the further investigation of this singular physio-
logical fact.

We have seen how impressible subjects in the submesmeric
state, miscalled electro-biology, strain and labour to lift, for
instance, a pillow of eider-down when told that it is a sackful
of Australian nuggets; but hitherto we have not had the ex-
periment reversed, nor witnessed a ponderous sack uplifted
on the assurance that it was only a bagof feathers. The case
of one of the Okeys is so far in point, inasmuch as on one
occasion she raised from the ground, by a cord, with the
back of her hand, which was fully extended, not closed, a
weight far beyond her natural strength; but it is still very
problematical if she could have tossed the fat cook in the air,
like a pancake in his own frying pan. Possibly there may be
a limit to the quantity of deponderizing force, be it odic, gal-
vanic, or electric, with which the lifter can be charged; and
this is a fit subject for further enquiry. It would appear also
that the intervention of inorganic or inanimate matter vitiates
the experiment, as the charm is said to fail when the liftee is
laid on a board. Let this too be further investigated, and, if
a mass of lead or iron, or a dead subject, equal in weight to
the liftee, cannot be lifted as light as a feather, we must pre-
sume that it is a case of suspended gravity, not of increased
muscular strength. There is, however, one fact in favour of
the latter supposition, namely, that a limb of the liftee some-
times lags behind and shews its subjection to the law of gravi-
tation, when one of the performers fails to play his part: but
to this objection to the levity theory it may be answered that
one or more members of the body can be mesmerised, para-
lyzed,—and why not deponderized ?—without affecting the
rest.

To conclude.—As it is certainly more philosophical to
adopt the hypothesis of an extraordinary concentration of a
known physical force, than that of the existence and mys-
terious agency of an unknown and disputed fluid, such as Od,
we must be content, I presume, to accept Sir David Brewster’s
explanation. But, at the same time, no liberal-minded phi-
losopher will deny that there may exist certain occult powers
of nature which may have been + Rete by the sages of a
preadamite or antediluvian race, some traces of which may
have descended to us in practices common amongst the vulgar
of most nations, whilst the memory of their origin and principle
has been lost in the lapse of countless ages. We are told, in-


An instance of Introvision. 307


deed, that in those days beings of a celestial nature held
frequent converse with the then inhabitants of the earth, who
may have been instructed by them in those secrets of nature,
which have since received the name of the Black Art. Let
us reflect also that not many years ago we should have more
readily believed the fact related by Pepys, than that of in-
stantaneous communication with a far-distant friend through
the mysterious but now familiar agency of an electric wire ;
and may it not be on the cards, that some Sir Joseph Paxton
yet unborn may emulate the feat of the slaves of the lamp,
and transport a crystal palace from Hyde Park to Sydenham
on the tips of his digits.

To return to Sir David Brewster’s explanation. Anato-
mists may be able to say what sort of fulcrum is afforded to
the muscles of the arm by an inflation of the chest: but, with
all deference to that high authority in matters of science, I
would rather ascribe the effect to the suddenness and simul-
taneity with which the lifters make their effort, unaided by
any such fulcrum; as we know how by a slight but rapid
stroke of a hammer, a man can with the greatest ease drive a
nail into a plank, which he could not do by any pressure of
his hand.

Non-Wist.
Edinburgh, July 30th.


VI. An instance of Introvision, with the verification after death.
By Mr. Stoman, surgeon, of Farnham, and Mr. Mayuew,
late of Farnham. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘* The follies and falsehoods of Mesmer would have attracted but little atten-
tion, at least in the present day, but for the pretended wonders of clairvoyance.’
—Mr. Waxtey, Lancet, Sept. 11, 1852.


Tue readers of The Zoist will remember the case of intro-
vision by Miss Hewitt, recorded by Mr. Sloman and Mr.
Mayhew in No. XXXV. This other example is equally strik-
ing, and I have just received the account from America.

Joun E xiorson.
37, Conduit Street, London.


Fayetteville, Onondaga Co., State of
New York, July 7th, 1852.

My dear Doctor,—Perceiving in your report of Miss
Hewitt’s clairvoyant examination of Hopwood that Mr. Sloman
had mislaid his notes of a subsequent examination of another
person, I hand you my notes of the same, together with


|
|
|


308 An instance of Introvision.


notes of the post mortem, as they were given to me by Mr.
Saunders, who is Mr. Sloman’s assistant, and afterwards
approved by Mr. Sloman himself.

I have been retained for the last six months in this place
to treat a case of spinal disease, which is very satisfactorily
progressing, and I hope to be able to report the same in time
for your January number.

I am very respectfully yours,
To Dr. Elliotson. Joun MayHew.


On May 30th, 1850, at the request of Mr. Sloman, Miss
Hewitt and myself repaired to his private residence for the
purpose of clairvoyant examination. Neither she nor I was
aware who or what was to be the subject or character of the
examination till after she had been brought into the clair-
voyant state; when an individual was introduced whom I had
never seen before, have never seen since, and whose name
has never been made known to me. Moreover Miss Hewitt
knows not to the present day, while in her normal state, any
thing about the person then examined by her, either as re-
gards his name or in any other respect.

The subject took his seat in silence by her side. She took
his hand, and sat evidently in deep study of his case for five
or more minutes, when she relinquished her hold on his
hand, saying, “That will do.” The person examined then
withdrew, leaving present Mr. Sloman, Mr. Sloman’s student,
the clairvoyant, and myself. Miss H. now proceeded to state
the result of her examination, which I have arranged side
by side with the notes of the post mortem conducted by Mr.
Sloman and certified by himself.


CLAIRVOYANT. Post Mortem.
He will never be well any more. Died June 26, 1850.
Head very much affected. Brain soft through-
Brain on the top of left side is very much out, and thoroughly sa-
affected ; appears to be watery. turated with water.
The lungs are very much diseased—much Very much diseased.
white fur on them. On the right lung, one Very strong adhe-
large and two small ulcers, on the front near sions.
the top: on the left, several extending from Very full of ulcers.


the top more to the back part.


Blood in the vessels of stomach not very Pericardium full of
pure, causing an improper action of the heart. water; valves verymuch
. diseased; vessels en-

larged and choked up.


Cure of an Arm rendered useless by Lightning. 309


CLAIRVOYANT. Post MorTEM.
Several small tumors in the liver; one A large tumor pen-
larger one toward the bottom part of it. dant from the bottom


of the liver, similar in
substance to the liver
itself. There might be
others similar and
smaller, but they could
not be discerned.


Spine is much affected, but more towards A large tumor near
the kidneys. ‘There appears to be an abscess the spine, close to the
' or some large swelling inwardly, just above kidneys.

the kidneys, which causes much pain; left
kidney much affected.


A great deal of pain in the bowels—much Bowels in a very of-


unpleasant corruption towards the lower part fensive state.
f of them.
Bladder affected towards the top. Not examined.
Spleen very much out of order. Not examined.
Tightness at chest, cough, and great weak- Correct.
ness.
His disease in the brain has affected his Correct.
intellect a little.
He appears to have fits—wild, unsettled Correct.


kind of fits.


Mr. Sloman informed me that the post mortem, on ac-
count of the impatience of the relatives, was very hurriedly
taken, and they had no time to examine minutely or even to
take notes on the spot ; the above were arranged immediately
after.

Joun MayHew.


VII. Cure of an Arm rendered useless by Liyhtning.
Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


“In regard to the charge brought against the medical press of this country
by Dr. Esdaile in his preface, we can only say, that his remarks indicate a la-
mentable degree of ignorance. We assert, without fear of contradiction, that,
at the present time, the medical press of this country is as free as it ever has
been or ought to be. No better proof of the truth of this exists than the history
of the investigation of the phenomena of mesmerism. The adverse opinions of
VOL, X. Z


310 Cure of an Arm rendered useless by Lightning.


the medical journals having been uniformly expressed only after careful con-
sideration of the subject, and after the frequent immoral,’* &c.—Dr. BusHNAN,
editor of the Medical Times, April 17, 1852; p. 400.


Dear Dr. Elliotson,—The case of the arm struck by
lightning is as follows.

John Pressley, a boatman of this place, in telling me,
on Thursday, August 19, that some boat-racing was ex-
pected on the following Monday, lamented that he should be
unable to row as his left arm had been struck by lightning
about ten weeks before. He had shewn it when the accident
first occurred to a chemist in the place, who said that nothing
could be done, but that the arm might perhaps get well by
itself; however the boatman said that so far from its getting
better, it became worse, and during the recent stormy weather
it had become very painful. On that very day his wife had
cut his dinner for him, and he was unable to skin some fish
which he sold to a friend of mine, as that lady afterwards
told me.

That same evening at my desire, J. Pressley came to our
house, and his arm was mesmerised. Its appearance I no-
ticed before the operation began. It was drawn, rather
shrunken in some parts, and swelled in others. The middle
finger was extremely weak, and the third and fourth were
powerless and contracted, so that he could not unbend them.
The skin of the hand, besides being drawn, was of a dead
white in the affected parts, and the arm and wrist were numb
and weak from above the elbow-joint. The accident had
occurred when he was out fishing. In throwing the oyster-
dredge, which he held in this hand, he observed during a
flash of lightning that the iron was on fire, and directly after-
wards felt that his arm had been struck.

I mesmerised the arm without contact from above the
elbow: the sensation of “pins and needles” was felt imme-
diately, and in about ten minutes the elbow-joint was stif-
fened, and the arm rendered insensible to pain. On demes-
merising it the poor man found that he could unbend his
fingers. The next evening, Friday, the mesmerising was
repeated with the same effect. It was not done again till
after the boat-race, which occurred on Monday 23rd August ;
but on that day my patient not only rowed in a winning-boat,
but enacted the part of duck, and escaped his pursuers in a
very dodging duck-hunt, and afterwards rowed to Margate
and back.

* A servant girl of all work who had told a great fib, said, ‘* Well, and what


then? I thought I might as well tell a good bouncer when I was about it.””"—
Zoist. ,


Pee ee


Medical opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton. 311


The power of moving the muscles and the strength of the
arm were thus restored by twice mesmerising: but as a little
numbness remained in the fingers the process was repeated
three times after; and the arm and hand are now quite as
well as before the accident occurred. On the two last occa-
sions of being mesmerised, this strong boatman went to sleep
and became quite stiff in about five minutes.

The application of the mesmeric power to a limb struck
by lightning seems to me analogous to the application of
snow to a frozen limb, and it acts with as much certainty
and rapidity.

I am, dear Dr. Elliotson,
Yours very truly,
Herne Bay, Sept., 1852. S. E. De M.


*,* A case of a child rendered blind by lightning and
restored under the use of mesmerism by Dr. Storer will be
found in No. XIX.—Joun E.tiorson.


VIII. Medical Opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton.
Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘«Mr. De la Garde commenced his observations. ‘The wonders of reality
pour in with such a flood that the marvels of impossibility are admitted with them.’
‘ Should we combat these idle fallacies ? I think them best met by cold contempt.
The educated man who believes that an ignorant servant, who cannot with both
her eyes read “ slut,"’ visibly written on a dusty table, can, by virtue of certain
mysterious pawings, read a Greek chorus with her elbows,’ ‘ is beyond the reach
of argument. Besides, we place ourselves in the invidious position of assailants,
and may inadvertently substitute the austere spirit of martyrdom for simple silli-
ness. I leave psychologists to determine the mental condition of such persons.
Associate with them by all means, (I mean the patients, not the practitioners,)
for many of them are refined and amiable—but do not reason with them.’ ’’—
Meeting of Medical Gentlemen at the Devon and Exeter Hospital, August 13.
Provincial Medical and Surgical Journal, Sept. 1, 1852.*


MesMeERIsM is deeply indebted in England to the clergy. ~
The first English treatise on the subject was by the Rev.|
C. H. Townshend, and it soon went into a second edition.
The next was by the Rev. G. Sandby, and it also soon went
into a second edition. The third was by the Rev. T. Pyne,
and, being smaller, it soon went into a third edition, as I am
informed. The Archbishop of Dublin has long advocated
mesmerism in season and out of season, presented a handsome
donation to the Mesmeric Infirmary, and accepted the office


* However unwise are some things said, some wise things are done by the
Association : for at their meeting on the 3rd of June at Hull, lest their spirits
should be damped before dinner, the report says, ‘‘ As the dinner was close at
hand, it was agreed that Mr. B. W. Brown should adjourn the reading of his
paper on Intestinal Obstructions to the next quarterly meeting.’’—J. ELL1oTson.


Z2


312 Medical opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton.


of vice-president: in The Zoist is recorded one of the most
splendid cures by Mrs. Whately ever effected, not to say
with mesmerism, but with any human means—the cure of
» blindness of twenty-six years’ duration.* The late Bishop of
Norwich saw such good in it that he scarcely talked of any
thing else some time before his unexpected death, and told a
a friend of mine that Dr. Holland always laughed at him for
his conviction. The Bishop of Oxford does not conceal his
conviction and has often mesmerised, though he has not given
any support to the Mesmeric Infirmary, on the committee, of
which, however, is one of his brothers. The Bishop of Cal-
_ cutta, convinced, unlike a medical man, by his own eyes on
| witnessing Dr. Esdaile’s operations, advocates it against me-
dical sceptics and the Satanites (above, p. 287): and the
| Bishop of Jerusalem argues for it, while poor Dr. Macgowan
of Exeter, who, when he went to Jerusalem, figured so un-
fortunately in Mrs. Bird’s case,t pretends not to believe in it.
Clergymen in many parts of the country practise it as far as
they have time, following the example of their Master in
going about doing good and healing the sick. The only per-
sons with whom they have to contend are the medical men,
who in too many places offer them every opposition.
Nowhere has medical opposition been more bitter or un-
scrupulous than in Northampton. Many years, ago when a
lecturer named Spencer Hall was there, a Dr. Robertson of
the place opposed it at the lecture, and no man ever talked
greater nonsense or shewed a more determined hostility to a
sacred cause. A surgeon named Terry joined in the sad
and ridiculous exhibition, attacking me also in the local
papers, and adopting stale and absurd expressions and thoughts
from medical journals. These two practitioners have just
now come forward again and exhibited a spirit worthy of
times of the darkest persecution. Let us no longer say odium
theologicum to signify deadly hate: odium medicum must be
the term.
The following is the account which I have received of the
Nottinghamshire display—Joun Ex.iorson.


In the middle of April last Northampton was visited by an
itinerant lecturer or rather experimenter of the name of Froy,
who announced a lecture on “ Electro-biology,” with experi-
ments upon persons offering themselves from the auditory.
The lecture was thinly attended, and only one of the persons

* No. XXVI. + No. XXIIL., p. 236. t No. XVIII.


§ No. II., p. 201. 1 had cured a case with mesmerism after he and Dr.
Robertson had failed : but he did not mention this in the papers.


Medical opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton. 313


who submitted to be operated upon was found susceptible ;
but on a subsequent evening better subjects were procured,
and some very extraordinary effects were exhibited. The
lecturer, with much candour, professed his entire inability to
account for the result of his operations: he acknowledged
that the disks which he employed possessed no kind of virtue,
and by substituting for them, in some cases, small pieces of
card or paper, shewed that the susceptibility was induced
simply by fixing the eyes upon some given object, without
any regard to the material of which it might consist.

The following week another lecturer made his appearance
upon the same stage, and exhibited a variety of experiments
on many successive evenings. The lecturer had been pre-
viously announced as the Rev. Theophilus Fisk, but in his
stead appeared a Mr. Reynolds. This person, unlike his
predecessor, declared that the effects produced were to be
attributed almost entirely to the magical disk, (a small piece
of zinc and copper united,) of which he sold a considerable
number at the door of his lecture-room at the price of one
shilling each.

Mr. Reynolds, without deigning to give any explanation
or to propose any theory, declared that all his effects were
produced by electricity emanating from the mysterious little
circle upon which his subjects were required to fix their eyes
for a given time,—which electricity was then to be applied
and directed by certain passes and movements of the hand
known only to himself. The key to all this mystery he was
ready to commit to any person on the payment of one guinea,
and he actually succeeded in forming a large class for instruc-
tion in electro-biology on these terms. Mr. Reynolds asserted
that his new science was a totally different thing from mes-
merism, though the phenomena were only such as mesmerism
has again and again exhibited, and the method of producing
them evidently nothing else than the hypnotic process with
which all mesmerists are familiar.

He ventured to assert that he and his party had “ dis-
covered the principle of human life ;” and though maintain-
ing some kind of distinction between animal life and spiritual,
he virtually ignored the existence of the soul, and furnished
the infidel party with a new and specious argument against
its immortality.*


* The conviction that the phenomena of mind in man, and in all other ani-
mals from the microscopic animalcule in water to the elephant, which all will,
feel, and think, result from a peculiar composition and organization of matter
placed in certain external circumstances, and by nature vary, decay, and cease
for ever, with the variation, decay, and death of the brain or other bodily seat


314 Medical opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton.


These lectures having been repeated night after night and
week after week before large and still unsatisfied audiences,
the Rev. Mr. Millington, curate of St. Sepulchre’s, North-
ampton, in order to refute what he conceived to be errone-
ous, announced a lecture on the Phenomena of Dreams, Clair-
voyance, Mesmerism, and Electro-pathology, which he deli-
vered on the 18th of May to a large company in the Parochial


of them, excludes the belief of a future state, is erroneous. ‘ In Adam, (by the
condition of our nature),’’ says Bishop Watson, “ all die ;” “‘ suffer an utter extinc-
tion of being.”’ (Apol. for the Bible, Letter x.: and Miscel. Tracts, Sermon iii.)
I can conceive no power, force, or immaterial agency, except as a property
of matter. (I speak of nature, not of what is beyond nature—not of God, to
whom there is nihil simile aut secundum, for he is ‘‘ incomprehensible :’’—*‘ dif-
ficulties,’”’ “ incomprehensible maker.’’ Watson, Apol.) And why such a fancied,
and to me unintelligible, thing, should be necessarily immortal, is to me still
more unintelligible.

Locke says, ‘‘ All the difficulties that are raised against the thinking of
matter, from our ignorance or narrow conceptions, stand not at all in the way of
the power of Gop, if he pleases to ordain it so.’’ The faculties of brutes prove,
‘either that God can and doth give to some parcels of matter a power of percep-
tion and thinking, or that all animals have immaterial and consequently immortal
souls as well as men; and to say that fleas and mites, &c., have immortal souls as
well as men, will possibly be looked on as going a great way to serve an hypo-
thesis.’’—Second Reply to the Bishop of Worcester, p. 466, 8vo. edition.

Dr. Law, Bishop of Carlisle, in his Theory of Religion, &c., which went
through seven editions, asserts that the sentence of death passed upon Adam and
Eve meant nothing less than a fotal destruction of existence; and that the idea
of its implying a continuation of consciousness and real existence in some other
place than earth, is not sanctioned by Scripture, but is the philosophy of after-
ages.—p. 345. He adds, that Archbishop Tillotson, though a patron of this
notion, confesses it is not found in the Bible: and, after a critical and elaborate
examination of the words used in Scripture to denote soul and spirit, and their
various applications, he sums up the enquiry thus :—‘ But neither do ¢hese words,
nor any other, so far as I can find, ever stand for a purely immaterial principle
in man, or a substance, whatever some imagine they mean by that word, wholly
separable from, and independent of, the body,”’

‘* Bishop Sherlock employs strong expressions :—‘‘ Scholars may reason on
the nature of the soul, and the condition of it when separated from the body :
but the common hopes of nature receive no support from such enquiries. We
die and moulder to dust; and in that state, what we are, or where we are, nature
cannot say.” Discourses ii., p. 85, and vol. iv., p. 79.

Yet with these convictions a man may be a Christian and believe in a future
state. But he believes in a future state because he is assured of it in the New
Testament: and this is all sufficient for him. If he believes it for no other
reason, he raises the importance of the New Testament. For if he believes it from
fancying the existence of something immaterial, independent of matter and neces-
sarily immortal, he requires not the New Testament for his belief. ‘1 have no
hope,”’ says Bishop Watson, ‘“‘ in a future existence except that which is grounded
on the truth of Christianity :’’ (Anecdotes of his Life, &c., vol. i., p. 107 :) “ not
as any appendage to the nature I derive from Adam, but as the free gift of the
Almighty.” Ap., ib. He also says, ‘‘ When I went to the University, I was of
of opinion, as most schoolboys are, that the soul was a substance distinct from the
body, and that when a man died, he, in classical phrase, breathed out his soul,
animam expiravit ; that it then went I knew not whither, as it had come into the
body, from I knew not where nor when, and had dwelt in the body during life, but in
what part of the body it had dwelt I knew not.’”’ ‘‘ This notion of the soul was,
without doubt, the offspring of prejudice and ignorance.’’—‘ Believing as I do
in the truth of the Christian religion, which teaches that men are accountable for


Medical opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton. 315


School-rooms. In this lecture he asserted the truth of mes-
merism and exhibited its effects. He represented the nervous
fluid (which he supposed to be a modification of electricity)
as the connecting link between mind and matter. He endea-
voured to shew how, by this agent, the impressions of the
bodily organs were conveyed to the mind, and how a living
and immortal principle residing in the body employed this
fluid, as its minister, in maintaining the necessary functions of
animal life, and in accomplishing all the purposes of its volition.
He noticed the principal features of analogy between the
phenomena of sleep, dreams, somnambulism, &c., and the
effects produced by mesmerism, and deduced from all these
considerations an argument for the greatness and dignity of
the soul, its ultimate independence of the body and its future
and eternal existence in a far higher condition and with more
exalted faculties than are developed during the present life.

After this Mr. Reynolds’s lectures were discontinued for a
fortnight, but resumed for two evenings at the end of that
time ; and a third lecture was announced at higher prices in
the hope of obtaining a more select audience. On this last
occasion Dr. Robertson and Mr. Terry, medical men of
Northampton, attended, and with more zeal than courtesy
interrupted the lecturer; and though they could not deny
the reality of the effects produced, offered so much opposition
to the proceedings as to excite a great disturbance in the
lecture-room, and to provoke the indignation of many who
were present. Mr. Terry on this occasion thought proper to
allude to Mr. Millington’s recent lecture (on the phenomena
of dreams, clairvoyance, mesmerism, &c.), and to denounce
clairvoyance as “ the height of human absurdity.”

Desiring to perpetuate and to extend the memory of this
creditable demonstration, Mr. Terry the following week wrote
to the editor of each of the local papers a letter from which
the following paragraphs relating to mesmerism are extracted.


‘**Mesmerism has within the last ten or fifteen years got into sad
disgrace. The complete overthrow of Dr. Elliotson’s exhibition by
Mr. Wakley, M.P. for Finsbury, and his powerful and persevering
exposure of mesmeric fallacies in the Lancet, where he says, at
the conclusion of one of his very able articles, ‘What he had done


their actions, I trouble not myself with dark disquisitions concerning necessity
and liberty, matter and spirit; hoping as I do for eternal life through Jesus
Christ, I am not disturbed at my inability clearly to convince myself that the
soul is or is not a substance distinct from the body.’’—Anecdotes, &c., p. 14. sqq.

For my solemn convictions on all these subjects see my Human Physiology,
from p. 27 to 48. I conclude with these words: ‘‘The Christian doctrine
teaches the resurrection of what we obviously are—dodies, and that through a
miracle of the Almighty.””—Joun E:viotson.


316 Medical opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton.


was, in his opinion, perfectly conclusive with reference to the cha-
racter of the supposed phenomena, and that he did not consider
that a single additional experiment could ever be necessary in con-
nexion with such an enquiry,’ Lancet, September, 1848, added to
this the detection and confession of the two notorious females,
Elizabeth and Jane Okey, who had been, I think, about two years,
the most attractive performers on Dr. Elliotson’s stage, that they
had been all the while feigning mesmeric convulsion, &c., &c., so
imposing upon his credulity; these disasters, I say, discredited
mesmerism, and rendered it expedient to adopt a new name.”


The incorrectness of all these statements was pointed out
by the Rev. Joseph Cautley, of Thorney, in a letter to the
editor of the paper in which they appeared, in the following
words :—


“It is not true to say Dr. Elliotson’s exhibitions have been over-
thrown by Mr. Wakley. It is not true to say Elizabeth and Jane
Okey have been detected in, and confessed to having feigned mes-
meric convulsion, &c., and so imposed upon Dr. Elliotson’s credulity.
It is not true to say, ‘These disasters discredited mesmerism, and
rendered it expedient to adopt a new name.’

** The first assertion is not true, for Dr. Elliotson, whose word is
as much, at least, to be relied upon as Mr. Wakley’s, states in a
letter now before me,—‘ The two Okeys were perfectly respectable
little girls, whose disease and mesmeric phenomena were all real,
and respecting whom every word that I published was perfectly true,
notwithstanding the misrepresentations of Mr. Wakley,—which mis-
representations I have denied over and over again at full length in
my well-known farewell letter to my pupils and in The Zoist. i
defied Mr. Wakley publicly to refute my denial, of which he has
never once attempted to take any notice. The phenomena exhibited
in the Okeys have been observed by others in endless cases in Great
Britain, on the continent, and in Asia. The Okeys never once con-
fessed that they had imposed upon me or any one else, and have
long been respectably married.’

“Dr. Elliotson is one of the most manly, noble, truthful, and
kind-hearted men alive, and allowed by all to be one of the first, if
not the very first diagnostic physician of the age, and should not be
allowed to be written down by false imputations from such a man as
Mr. Wakley, who knows very well that if he did not write against
mesmerism, homeeopathy, hydropathy, and such new or partly new
practices, neither Mr. Terry, nor Dr. Robertson, nor any other of
the orthodox practitioners, would buy or read the Lancet, by which
Mr. Wakley gets his bread. I do, therefore, entirely deny Mr.
Terry’s assertions respecting Dr. Elliotson and the Okeys, and am
surprised that he should do so great an injustice as to state publicly
Mr. Wakley’s accusations without giving also Dr. Elliotson’s contra-
diction and challenge of proof. Mr. Terry is evidently well read
on the side opposed to mesmerism, and can quote from Dr. Cowan
and Mr. Wakley ; but on the side publicly advocating mesmerism,


oat


Medical opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton. 317


and publishing most able and interesting works upon this mysterious
agency, he seems (in charity I say so,) not to have read at all.”


Mr. Terry’s letter proceeds thus :—


“These delusive agencies (mesmerism, &c.,) act only through
the medium of the imagination, and in many cases dangerously
aggravate that morbid condition of nerve through which alone their
effects are produced. That there may not be here and there a case
of some nervous malady in which this or any other powerful mental
emotion may be productive of good, I am far from denying. There
are, I believe, on record, well-established facts, where even palsy
has been cured by terror, the afflicted person finding his house on
fire; and a man, crippled by gout, has ran away from an infuriated
bullock. The wonderful effects of charms, also, some few of which,
I believe are merely illustrations of the abnormal action of mind
upon our physical organs. The many and varied effects, however,
of strong mental emotion in the influence both upon mind and body
are common to every one’s experience. I would here ask some of my
highly-esteemed friends, upon whose judgment and truthfulness in
matters of the most grave importance I entirely rely, and who yet
so extensively patronise this and such like irregular proceedings—
‘Are we to do evil that good may come?’ Are we to practise a
decided fallacy on the vague chance of some one deriving benefit from
it? which I am told has happened in a case of deafness in this town.
Are we rationally and profitably employed in searching for a grain of
wheat in such a Aner of empirical chaff? It is not, however, the
practice of electro-biology to be reprobated, or the practice of rational
medicine to be sustained, that I think the most important part of
this discussion. The practice which I think most in danger is ‘ the
practice of sound thinking.’ The rejection of such and such like
quackeries, I consider a question of principle not of practice, a
question of morals not of etiquette, as has been well said by the
able and accomplished Dr. Cowan, of Reading. In reference to
nervous susceptibility, as the great agent to which I have referred, I
would observe that the medical term idiosyncracy, or peculiarity of
habit, whether of mind or body, expresses my meaning. Some
persons, we know, are powerfully affected by objects of sight, smell
or taste of which others take no notice, and every one is familiar
with the powerful though varied influence of fear, and other depres-
sing or exciting mental emotions. Should it be considered that I
have not sufficiently established the identity of mesmerism and
electro-biology, I would refer to a handbill lying before me, in which
I see, ‘the Phenomena of Dreams, Clairvoyance, Mesmerism, and
Electro-Pathology,’ announced as a lecture, ‘in evidence of the
capacity and dignity of the human mind.’ Now, on the subject of
clairvoyance, I must speak without reserve, and I do not hesitate to
say that I consider it the utmost pitch of man’s absurdity. No power
upon earth can make me believe that any human being can see through
a deal board or a stone wall ; or, that living in London, he can see
what is doing at Northampton. Persons entertaining such ideas,


318 Medical opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton.


set at defiance all common sense, and are acting under the influence
of pitiable, or else of wilful deception. They are well described by
Dr. Cowan, from whom I have already quoted, in a dissertation
upon another and not very dissimilar folly. ‘The man,’ he says,
‘who believes in this is a mystic, his creed is at variance with all
rational experience, and subversive of all previously acquired know-
ledge. He has lost the ballast of his reasoning faculties, and set at
defiance all those means by which the human mind is regulated. I
distrust his judgment upon every subject.’ Again, ‘Such belief is
but the symptom of a mind without stay or ballast, liable to be driven
hopelessly into every folly, ever ready to spurn to-day, what it yes-
terday believed.’ ‘Ido not attempt its refutation by merely point-
ing out its arithmetical absurdities and physical impossibilities, but
I banish it at once beyond the pale of discussion, and class it amongst
the fallacies too extreme for investigation.’ See Report of Speeches
on Irregular Practice, printed by Churchill, London, 1851. Clair-
voyance may well participate in this reproach.”

**In conclusion, I beg to state that in attending the meeting on
Friday last, I was influenced by an observation frequently made by
my friends, ‘ Why do not you doctors go and see?” We and those
I have named have done so, and are satisfied. In what I said at the
time, and in what I have now written ‘liberavi animam meam.’ I
shall be glad if I have thrown any light upon the subject; if not,
error must still prevail, and I will only add, ‘Qui vult decipi, deci-
piatur.’ ”


The principal points of this letter were thus answered by
Mr. Millington.


“Mr. Terry says, ‘No power upon earth can make me believe
that any human being can see through a deal board, or a stone wall.’
Has any one attempted to do so? Certainly I have not; yet the
remark is made immediately in connection with my lecture. The
stone wall against which the writer plants his borrowed* artillery is
a structure of his own imagination, which certainly he has no right
to impute to me. If he mean to say that the mind can apprehend
nothing but through the medium of its bodily organs, he asserts
more than he can prove, he shews an unworthy appreciation of the
living principle within him, and manifests a sad want of common
historical faith.

“«Mr. Terry acknowledges that wonderful effects may be brought
about by the influence of the imagination. He says this is the me-
dium by which these delusive agencies (mesmerism, &c.) act ; where,
then, is the cause? But how can imagination be the medium ?
Does imagination strike immediately upon the nerves or contract the
muscles? Does it descend into the foot to set it in motion? Does
it act directly and mechanically upon the body? He says again,
‘In reference to nervous susceptibility, as the great agent to which
I have referred, &c.’ Here, then, susceptibility is advanced as the


* Borrowed from Dr. Cowan’s work on a different subject.


Medical opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton. 319


great agent ; but how can susceptibility be an agent? The capacity
of receiving an impression is one thing; the means by which that
impression is produced is another. The wax may be as soft as you
please, but that will not enable it to assume any shape or impression
without external agency. Every man is susceptible of pain or plea-
sure, but that susceptibility will not of itself procure him either the
one or the other. But Mr. Terry says susceptibility is the agent ;
and above mesmerism is the agent, and imagination is the medium /
Your readers will form their own opinion of a cause that can produce
no better arguments than these; they will judge for themselves how
far the man who can write thus is competent to charge another with
having ‘ lost the ballast of his reasoning faculties.’

“Mr. Terry asks, ‘Are we to do evil that good may follow ?’
What evil does he anticipate? He can adduce no instances of injury
from mesmeric treatment, widely and wildly as it has been practised ;
there would be still less danger if died vem would investigate its
principles, and apply them in a systematic and careful manner.

** Directing this argument against the old system of medicine,
he might say with equal reason—because men have been blistered
and bled to death—because they have died under surgical operations
—because their constitutions have been ruined by violent medicines,
therefore we ought to have no surgery, no medical treatment at all.
Neither he nor any other sensible person would agree to this conclu-
sion.

“Again, he says, ‘Are we justified in searching for a grain of
wheat in such a bushel of empirical chaff?’ The happy finder of the
wheat—the deaf restored to hearing—the paralytic to the use of his
limbs, will answer, ‘ Yes.’ If cures are the wheat and failures the
chaff, it will be found that the practice of mesmerism has yielded,
even in its present undeveloped character, quite as large a crop of
wheat, in proportion to the chaff, as any field that was ever sown
with pills and powders under the old system.

“«Mr. Terry says there are facts on record where palsy has been
cured by terror, and a man crippled by gout has run away from an
infuriated bullock: here, as in every other case, he makes no attempt
whatever to account for the effects produced. The theory of electro-
pathology accounts for everything of the kind; it shews the mind as
the cause, electricity as the agent, susceptibility as the contingent.
The mind, that cannot act upon gross matter, employs the electro-
nervous fluid in its communications with the body; this fluid is ex-
cited by the emotions of the mind, and the more violent those emo-
tions, the more intense will be the energy put forth, and the more
extraordinary the effects produced.

**In conclusion, Mr. Terry ‘hopes he has thrown some light
upon the subject ;’ and modestly adds, ‘if not, error must still pre-
vail.’ I trust not; others may yet succeed even where he has failed.
Mesmerism has for a long time been ‘banished beyond the pale of
argument ;” like all new and important discoveries, as vaccination,
the use of chloroform, &c., it has to contend with old fashioned
prejudices ; but it is now rapidly gathering strength, and will, ere


320 Medical opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton.


long, be generally recognized as a science not only deserving in itself
of the highest consideration, but capable of conferring the greatest
possible benefits upon the human family.”


Mr. Terry did not venture any reply to these letters, but
a fortnight afterwards forwarded to the editors of the two
papers a letter from his friend, Mr. Langdon, whom he desig-
nated “the scientific and highly-gifted house-surgeon of St.
Bartholomew’s Hospital.” This gentleman’s remarks, so far
as they relate to mesmerism, were thus answered by Mr.
Millington.


“Mr. Langdon’s remark about the earth’s rotundity obstructing
the line of vision between distant objects, is no argument against
clairvoyance, inasmuch as it is not asserted that the organs of sight
are employed by the clairvoyant. The eyes do not see through the
earth, nor through deal boards and stone walls; but there is a sym-
— knowledge and perception in the mind independently of the

odily organs. Mr. Langdon cannot understand this, and therefore
he will not believe it. He might with as much reason deny (and
perhaps if he had never seen a compass, he would deny) that there
is any power in the earth to influence the magnetic needle, because
he cannot certainly tell whence that power proceeds, nor how it acts.

“Mr. Langdon glories in his ‘ old-fashioned prejudices,’ and
says, ‘It could not be wondered at, if as a surgeon I hesitated to
believe (there is more meaning in this than he intended), that disease
could be cured by a look or a movement of the hand, after the ex-
perience of my daily practice.’ He should rather say the want of
experience. He would judge of mesmerism by his daily practice, in
a sphere from which it is altogether excluded. He cannot believe
that disease can be cured by any other than the old remedies, drugs,
blisters, phlebotomy, and surgery, simply because he has tried no
others: his remark only proves that his opinions are, to a certain
extent at least, rightly characterized as old-fashioned prejudices. If
he had real experience in mesmeric practice, he would see, as I have
seen, diseases of long standing yielding to the touch whose virtue he
derides ; he would find acute disorders and grievous pains relieved in
a few minutes, after having baffled ordinary doctors for as many
years ; he would be aware of many things belonging to his profession
which he has never yet seen, only because he has never looked for
them. After hinting that the phenomena of mesmerism may proceed
from Satanic agency, he sums up by declaring his opinion that the
‘ whole misnamed science is a mixture of falsehood and delusion.’
Let me tell him that its advocates are, to say the least, as highly
distinguished for scientific knowledge, as honourable and pious and
truthful as the best of its adversaries, and that no abuse or ridicule
will avail to injure a cause, which only gathers strength from all
candid investigation and honest argument.”


While this correspondence was going on, other events
occurred to shew the reality of mesmerism and the folly and


Medical opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton. 321


prejudice of those who, instead of studying its phenomena
denounce what they cannot deny, and ridicule what they
cannot understand.

Mr. Millington’s account of these circumstances is as
follows :—


«On the 15th of June last, a boy, aged 14, who had attended one
or more of Mr. Reynolds’s lectures, and, as he asserted, had been
operated upon by him, after exhibiting unusual excitement for two or
three weeks, was suddenly seized with insanity of a most alarming and
violent character. He had lately surprised his parents by his wilfulness
and disobedience, and had evinced a strong propensity to appropriate
to himself whatever he could lay his hands upon. Any worthless
rubbish that he could purloin from his neighbours was brought home
and treasured up with care, and the complaints of those who had
suffered from his depredations became so frequent that, after beating
and punishing their son in various ways, they sent for a policeman
in the hope of frightening him into better habits. At length one of
the neighbours remarked to the father, that the boy did such strange
things, he must surely be wrong in his head. The mother, who had
had some misgivings, replied, (alluding to the recent experiments in
electro-biology,) ‘I hope no one has been acting upon him.’ The
boy, hearing this, sprang up, and exclaiming, ‘They have, they
have,’ instantly broke into a state of violent madness.

**T was sent for on the following morning, and found the lad
tied by his hands and feet, gnawing at the bandages, swearing, and
tossing himself furiously to and fro. He had been in this state all
the night, and had been visited by a Mr. Dodd, a surgeon of North-
ampton, who ordered him to be thus restrained, and his head to be
bathed with vinegar and water. The boy asserted that Mr. Reynolds
had made him fly, and that he had been flying ever since. He also
said that the operator had taken him to India, and that he was still
in India when he left the lecture room, and had often been there
since.

“The boy seemed to be endued with extraordinary strength
during the time of his insanity: he ran with great swiftness, and
leaped over places where none could follow him ; and once, under
the impression of flying, he scaled the walls of the house, and was
seen seated upon the gable of the roof.

** After he had been in this state a week, getting rather worse
than better (as his parents said), wearing out the whole family, who
could neither work nor rest, and exciting a great commotion in the
neighbourhood, the father brought him before the magistrates at
Petty Sessions. I had in the meantime written to Dr. Elliotson,
who with the utmost promptitude and kindness replied as follows :—


‘* «Dear Sir,—I have no doubt that all will end well. Pray let
some healthy person mesmerise the youth twice a day, very slowly,
very calmly, and very kindly, taking one hand and squeezing it, and
slightly rubbing it, as we should do to a child when we might wish to


322 Medical opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton.


encourage and shew kindness to it, while very slow wep are made with
the operator’s other hand from opposite the forehead to opposite the
stomach. Breathing very slowly upon the eyes and nostrils and lips
at the end of the half hour may be extremely beneficial. Persever-
ance in this, in spite of all difficulties, will succeed. No violence
or harshness of either voice or look should be allowed from any one.
If possible, nobody but the mesmeriser should touch the patient or
be close to him. Kindness and gentleness from every person are
absolutely necessary.

***T was sent for to an exactly similar case lately, and presently
brought on the most perfect calm and restoration by putting every
other person aside, and breathing slowly and perseveringly all over
the patient’s face and bosom.

***This disturbance is a common effect of mesmerism badly
undertaken. It frequently happens that disturbance arises if more
than one person operates on the same individual within a short time
in the purely mesmeric way: but the violence of electro-biology is
too much for the nerves of some. Pray write again and inform me
how you go on. . . . I entreat you not to be uneasy about the youth,
because I am satisfied that all will end happily, but mesmerism must
not be trifled with in this way.

***] remain, dear Sir, yours very truly,
**Joun Exiiotson.’


** This letter the parents submitted to the magistrates, but as
they had not been able to procure the services of any person in fol-
lowing its directions, they proposed that the boy should be sent to
London, and as I happened to be in town at the time, a communication
was addressed to me there on the subject. I returned the following
evening to Northampton, and finding it impossible to engage the
assistance of any person more competent (in regard to health and
strength) than myself, I resolved to mesmerise the boy according to
Dr. Elliotson’s instructions.

“I mesmerised him the first time on Thursday morning (June
14th). With some difficulty I persuaded him to let me take him
gently by the hand, and thus soothing and coaxing him, induced
him to sit down opposite to me for a little time. At first he was
very troublesome, snatching at my watch, biting at my fingers, and
trying every now and then to jump up and escape from me, and at
the end of about twenty minutes he started up, sprang out of the
window and ran away.

*** During the day he became more tranquil, and in the evening
I again mesmerised him, put him to sleep, and left him in bed. On
Friday he was much better, and, after being again mesmerised, ap-
peared a second time before the magistrates by their desire. Mr.
Reynolds and myself were also present to answer any enquiries that
might be made, and the father having given his account of the whole
of the circumstances, I briefly stated all that had occurred within my
own observation, and declared my opinion that the restraint and harsh
treatment to which the youth had been subjected had been the means,


Medical opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton. 323


not only of retarding his recovery, but of increasing his malady. Mr.
Dodd defended his treatment of the boy, saying that restraint was
absolutely necessary, and that four men were required to hold him
while his hair was cut off; but the mother testified that all this vio-
lence had made him worse, and that kind and gentle treatment, to-
gether with mesmerism, had produced a most beneficial effect, adding
that ‘Mr. Millington was the best friend the boy had.’

“Dr. Robertson and Mr. Terry had also seen the boy, and the
latter told his mother, who repeated it to me, that ‘if he recovered
without going to the lunatic asylum it would be a miracle.’ I took
this opportunity of remarking, that if the doctors, instead of ignor-
ing the powers of mesmerism, had condescended to study its laws
and effects, they would not be so utterly at a loss how to proceed in
cases of derangement arising from the abuse of an influence so strange
and powerful.

“The magistrates having remarked upon the very great improve-
ment that had taken place since the boy’s first appearance before
them, recommended the parents to leave the case in my hands, and
having expressed my confident hope of effecting a speedy cure, the
parties withdrew.

“It is fair to Mr. Reynolds to say that he denied having operated
upon the boy at all, but the lad persisted in his assertion, and became
so violent on being contradicted in this matter, that the magistrates
desired he should be led out by a different door from that by which
he had entered, in order that he might avoid passing near Mr. Rey-
nolds, whom he threatened to assault with a stick which he carried
with him.

“On Friday evening I again put the boy to sleep, and during
that night his arms and legs were every few minutes convulsed by
spasmodic working of the muscles ; but though causing much dis-
turbance and alarm to those who observed him, he did not awake
until late the next morning, when he seemed nearly well. I mes-
merised him for the last time on Sunday night, after which no traces
of his malady remained beyond great lassitude and debility, the
natural consequence of his excited and restless condition.

** On the evening of the day of our appearance before the magis-
trates I was sent for to another case of madness, caused by ‘ electro-
biology.’ One of Mr. Reynolds’s constant and most susceptible
subjects, having been operated upon on the public race-course by a
companion, had suddenly been seized with the most violent raving
madness. He had been brought home with difficulty, and at the
time I saw him was lying upon a sofa, held by four men. His
struggles, his roaring, and his wild appearance were frightful ; but
these symptoms subsided at short intervals into a death-like calm;
and from the improvement that had taken place in this respect during
the two hours that had elapsed from the time of his first seizure,
and from what I had read and observed of other cases, I encouraged
his friends to hope that this state of derangement would be of short
duration. Being requested to mesmerise the young man, I began to
do so, but was interrupted by the appearance of Dr. Robertson, who,


324 Medical opposition to Mesmerism at Northampton.


having enquired into all the circumstances, desired that he should be
put to bed. It being — to the doctor that mesmerism seemed
y


the most promising remedy that could be employed, he replied that
he entirely set his face against it, as against everything else that was
wicked and delusive : that it was powerless to do good, but would
probably make the young man worse. He took this opportunity of
delivering a philippic against all mesmeric proceedings, declaring that
mesmerism was often applied to the vilest and most abominable pur-
poses, and that a case would shortly be made public through the
courts of justice in which it had been thus shamefully employed. I
may here say, by the way, that I have watched the papers for a
report of this case, but have not yet been able to find it.

“On Saturday morning I heard that the young man was much
better: the violent character of his attack had passed off, but the
mind was still affected, and he was now in a state of idiotey. This
lasted many days, and, but for the interference of the Rev. Thomas
Storer, incumbent of St. Andrew’s Church, Northampton, supported
and encouraged by the kind advice of Dr. Elliotson, who, though a
stranger to all the parties, responded most readily to every appeal
for counsel and assistance, the young man would have been removed
to the lunatic asylum. Happily this step, which would have retarded
if not prevented his recovery, was averted, and in the course of a
fortnight the young man entirely recovered his senses, and was able
to resume his usual occupations.”


It seems very surprising that, after the curative powers
of mesmerism had been so strikingly exhibited in the first of
these two cases, and its beneficial results made known, any
medical men should have been found so prejudiced and un-
reasonable as to forbid its application in the second, especially
when they had no remedy to propose in its stead: and yet
more surprising that after one of their patients had escaped
the lunatic asylum they should still have been willing to allow
the other to be sent thither. It is quite possible that, had
either of these persons been placed in confinement, they
might have become confirmed lunatics, and never again left
the walls of the prison to which with so little consideration
they had been consigned.

A. B.


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON.


I have heard upon good authority that, in consequence of
Mr. Millington’s noble advocacy of mesmerism, Dr. Robertson
and Mr. Terry, with others influenced by them, withdrew their
subscriptions from the fund for providing a curate for the
parish, which is very poor, and in which the schools and all
other good works for the benefit of the poor depend chiefly


Prolongation of Life by Mesmerism. 825


upon the exertions of the curate, and great indeed have been
his exertions and most exemplary has been his conduct.

Too conscientious to give up mesmerism, which he saw
was a truth and a blessing, Mr. Millington resigned his curacy,
though he had no other appointment. This was conduct
worthy of a place in the history of virtue and of science. On
his taking this noble step, much indignation was excited.
Some of the most influential men of the town waited upon
him, and offered to make good all deficiencies, and to guarantee
the parish against all loss, if he would continue there. On
this he agreed to withdraw his resignation. But his vicar,
though he had himself no objection to mesmerism, refused to
allow this unless Mr. Millington would promise to have no
more to do with it—a stipulation which he of course rejected ;
so that he will be compelled, notwithstanding the efforts which
have been made, and in opposition to the wishes of the pa-
rishioners, to leave the parish.


IX. An instance of the Prolongation of Life by Mesmerism,
and great benefit from it in Epilepsy. By Wma. Forses
Lavriz, M.D., Dunstable.


‘* Who does not remember, that towards the end of the last century, the so-
called age of philosophy, crowds of all ranks flocked to the cemetery of St.
Medard, at Paris, to witness miraculous cures of paralysis upon the tomb of a
saint? People were, however, soon undeceived, and the cemetery was closed by
order of the magistrates.

‘*We all know how glaringly the juggleries of mesmerism were exposed in
France by a scientific committee, presided over by the celebrated Berthollet, after
four years’ careful investigation.

‘*It is well known that homceopathy, which has had so many foolish sup-
porters throughout Europe, is dying away, destroyed by its own absurdities.

‘* The votaries of animal magnetism and clairvoyance still find dupes here and
there, though, especially in France, they are daily brought before courts of law,
and punished for swindling.

** In fine, no one is unacquainted with the fact, that the tenets of phrenology
have been exaggerated and disfigured; that they have come down to sleight-of-
hand deception ; and that their vagaries have been confuted by sound logical rea-
soning, and the ridicule which they richly deserve.”—Lancet, March 27, 1852.
An article by the Chevalier Le Molt* to prove that hydra-electric chains and belts
are useless things.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Srr,—I have long considered that the value of mesmerism
in prolonging life was as much to be regarded as its efficacy
in a more immediately curative point of view.

The following case will illustrate its beneficial effects in
the prolongation of life.

I was sent for one evening in January, 1849, in great

* A merry friend says that the rara avis chattering such trash is molting.—
Zoist.


VOL, X. AA


326 Great benefit in Epilepsy from Mesmerism.


haste to see Mrs. G ——, a lady in a very delicate state of
health, who had for many years been suffering from dilata-
tion of the heart, and who was subject to a usual concomitant
of this affection—frequent faintings. On my arrival at her
residence, I found her quite cold and apparently lifeless, no
vapour from the breath being apparent on a looking-glass
which was held to her lips.

I immediately mesmerised her, and after persevering for
some time, the cheeks changed from a deadly whiteness to a
rosy glow, and the general warmth of the body was quite
restored. From that time she gradually improved in health,
the mesmeric process being continued by me daily.

Although she is at the present time, as she always has
been, in a very infirm state of health, she is still living, and
I have invariably found mesmerism invaluable in restoring
her, when the distressing faintings connected with the organic
disease under which she labours have manifested themselves.


Elizabeth Jackson, of Sundon, Bedfordshire, zt 38, has
now, September Ist, 1852, been under treatment by means
of sub-mesmerism for a year and a half. She has had epi-
leptic fits ever since she was born, her mother having had them
very severely before her, so that they are in every respect
hereditary.

When seized, she used to have foaming at the mouth, to
fall down suddenly, and feel as if she should lose her reason.
The fits, she says, used to be upon her for a week together.
A sensation would come on all in a moment, as if water were
rolling round the abdomen; this was accompanied by a feel-
ing of nausea, violent eructations, and occasionally great
pain from excessive flatulence. The appearance of the hands,
which were frequently drawn together for five or six hours,
so that she could not move them, was perfectly frightful ;
indeed her general character and entire expression of face was
so horrible, as to represent exactly what one would imagine
to be that of a person possessed with an evil spirit. She
has been mesmerised in my house once a week for a year
and a half. During this period she has only had two
fits of any consequence for a year and a half; whereas she
was in the habit of having at least one or two, and some-
times three or four, fits in a week. So susceptible was this
person when first she presented herself to my notice, that I
could bring on a fit in a minute ; but now it requires a quarter
of an hour, and a greater number of manipulations to pro-
duce any change whatever. Indeed the only alteration from
the normal state now perceptible is a fixedness of the eyes


Dublin Mesmeric Association. 327
and of the frame. There is no other appearance of a fit, nor
are there any movements or contortions of any kind, nor any
nausea or flatulence. The patient also says that she feels her
health, strength, appetite, and spirits improved to an extra-
ordinary degree, and the poor creature expresses herself as
extremely grateful for what I have done for her.

It is worthy of observation, that she was so susceptible at
first that she shewed the effect of the metal the moment it
was placed in her hand, by frightful contortions of the features
and writhings of the limbs, but now she does not appear to
suffer from it at all; indeed no perceptible change manifests
itself until pressure has been made upon the forehead several
times by my hand.

On one occasion at an early stage of the treatment, at the
request of a gentleman, a patient in my establishment, I in-
terrupted the crisis (the fit) which I had produced, by pat-
tings of the back and gentle succussions of the person. This
however, as I had feared, produced a more severe, and in fact
a far more violent and dangerous crisis, so that I have never
on any occasion dared to repeat the experiment, but find the
true curative plan is to bring on the crisis, and leave the
patient to go through it. In short to go with nature, and
not against her.

So severe were the epileptic seizures in this case, that
people who had been in the habit of seeing her said they
aad never seen any one worse. In fact so hopeless a case did
it seem to be, that I was quite laughed at and scornfully
treated for ever undertaking to attempt in such a case any
thing of a remedial nature.

The patient now says she feels so much better, that she
thinks by and by she shall have no fit at all.

I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
Wo. Forses Lavriz, M.D., Edinens.
Hydropathic Establishment,
Dunstable, Bedfordshire, Aug. 23, 1852.


X. Dublin Mesmeric Association,


A meetineG of the Dublin Mesmeric Association was held on
Monday evening, August 9, in Mr. Porter’s large rooms,
Great Brunswick Street, for the purpose, as stated in the
circular calling the meeting, “of submitting to the members
a statement as to the present position of the Society.” At
eight o’clock, Capt. Falconer Miles, president of the Asso-
ciation, was called to the chair. Mr. J. Pitt Harris, A.B.


828


Dublin Mesmeric Association.


(in the unavoidable absence of Mr. I. M‘Donnell), acted as
secretary.

The CuarrMan, in rising to address the meeting, was
received with much applause. He said they were called to-
gether for the purpose of having laid before them a statement
of the proceedings of the Association since its establishment
in December last, It was not necessary for him to enter into
elaborate details of what might be effected by mesmerism in
its higher branches, but rather to refer to some facts, to shew
the work they had accomplished in their Infirmary. Having
attended to the excellent lectures of Messrs. Davey and
Jackson in the Rotundo last year, he had come to the con-
clusion of using mesmerism as a curative power, and he
thanked God he had done so with the most complete success.
After visiting the Mesmeric Infirmary in London, he had
determined to aid in establishing an Association in this city,
with the ultimate object of opening a similar Infirmary in
Dublin. In pursuance of this object, a few friends met last
December in Anglesea Street, where they formed the Asso-
ciation, having drawn up such rules and regulations for their
guidance as, he felt satisfied, on inspection, and they were
open to the perusal of all, would meet their cordial approval.
They had many difficulties to contend with, many opponents,
but they went boldly forward, and the work performed would
be laid before them that evening. He presumed that all pre-
sent had seen their prospectus, a copy of which he then held
in his hand, in which the object, the sole object of the Asso-
ciation was set forth. It was there stated that “the Com-
mittee wish it to be distinctly understood that their object is
not to devise any scientific theory, but simply to extend the
knowledge of certain important facts, and facilitate the bene-
ficial application of that knowledge, in the relief of suffering,
and the cure of disease.” They did not put forward mes-
merism as a remedy for all diseases, nor as interfering with
or antagonistic to medical men, but merely as an agent cal-
culated to be of vast good in many diseases, such as nervous
or chronic, and which medical men generally admitted were
not to be subdued by drugs alone. After referring at some
length to the many objections made to the practice of mes-
merism, he said he thought that highly intelligent meeting
would agree with him that the Association had left nothing
undone to guard themselves against the charges and suspicions
of their opponents. About the 8th of March last, they found
themselves in a position to open the Infirmary for patients
twice a-week, and they went on, thank God, most success-
fully, as they would see by the Report which would be read


Dublin Mesmeric Association. 829
to them. After a little time they were enabled to appoint
two paid operators (male and female), in addition to the gen-
tlemen who acted gratuitously, which enabled them now to
open that Infirmary daily. It should be recollected that
theirs was all up-hill work, for patients seldom came to them
until they were pronounced past the physician’s aid, notwith-
standing which they had performed several cures. They did
not work for gain, but were solely prompted by a benevolent
feeling towards their fellow-men; neither did they work in
the name of Satan, as had been stated by some, but in the
name of God, and by their fruits he was perfectly satisfied
that they should stand or fall. The Infirmary had been at
work but a very short time when it was visited by several dis-
tinguished citizens, including the Archbishop of Dublin, who,
he was happy to tell them, expressed themselves highly pleased
with what they had seen. The Chairman then referred to the
case of a patient, named Doyle, who was recommended by
His Grace the Archbishop of Dublin, and who was suffering
from partial insanity, caused by a fall from the top of a house
some years since, and who, during the week before being
operated upon, had attempted to destroy his children. This
man was only mesmerised three times, in all fifty-five minutes,
when he was perfectly cured, and able to resume his work, as
borne testimony to by the Archbishop of Dublin. He then
alluded to another case, that of John Ryan, who was recom-
mended by one of their subscribers ; this man had a pain in
his back for seventeen weeks, which incapacitated him from
walking or attending to his work; after being twenty-one
days in hospital, he left it, as he himself stated, “ worse than
when he went in ;”’ he was brought to him (Capt. Miles), and
he only mesmerised him once when he said he felt that he
was a new man; he sent him home in a car, but on the fol-
lowing day the poor man was so much improved that he was
able to walk from his, house at Ball’s Bridge to his (Capt.
M.’s) residence at Cullenswood ; on the next day he was able
to walk to the Infirmary, and in four days he was perfectly
restored to his health, as he himself would inform them.
[Ryan here stood up and fully corroborated the statement of
the Chairman, remarking that he was “ now as strong and
well” as he was twenty years previously.] After mentioning
some other interesting cases of cure, the Chairman said that
on taking up his note-book that morning, he was forcibly
struck with the number of various diseases he had had in
hand since he commenced mesmerising, and he had the gra-
tification of stating, that out of that number he knew of but
one in which the greatest benefit had not been derived. Here


830 Dublin Mesmeric Association.
he enumerated the cases as follows :—inflammation of lungs,
cancer, gastric fever, tic douloureux, sciatica, deafness, mumps,
sore throat, neuralgia, influenza, rheumatism, ear-ache, tooth-
ache, abscess, sprained foot, stomach-ache, cough and colds,
palpitation of the heart, disease of heart, partial insanity,
epilepsy, pains in the back, spinal disease, diarrhea, ophthal-
mia, cataract, general debility, extreme mental nervous disease.
Before he concluded he wished to allude to a fact which might
be considered of some importance. An idea had gone abroad
that cures could not be effected without putting the patient to
sleep; now this was a mistaken notion; out of the numerous
cases he had taken into hand there were very few instances in
which he had put the patient to sleep, so that persons would
see this objection should not prevent them from availing them-
selves of the benefits of mesmerism whilst in their wakeful state.
It was now strongly urged upon them to open a Mesmeric
Infimary for the higher classes, somewhere about Stephen’s
Green, where patients would be received on paying a small
fee to defray the necessary expenses. The difficulty was to
get a place for the purpose, so many unfair prejudices existed
upon the subject ; but he had no doubt that with the support
and codperation of the respectable meeting he saw around
him, they would overcome this difficulty as they had already
done many others of a more formidable nature. After some
further observations, the speaker concluded, amidst loud ap-
plause, by calling upon the Secretary to read the list of cures
from the Infirmary book.

Mr. Harris then read a list of sixty cases; which had
been treated in the Infirmary, out of which twelve had been
perfectly cured, and the remainder, the majority of whom
were still under treatment, had been much benefitted.

Mr. Joun Gray, of Windsor Terrace, Kingstown, moved
the first resolution, as follows :—‘“ That we have heard the
statement of our President, and the Report of the working
of the Infirmary by the Secretary, with much satisfaction,
evidencing as they do a far more successful progress of the
practical uses of mesmerism than the most sanguine could
have anticipated previously to the formation of this Associa-
tion.” He said he felt called upon to attend that meeting to
bear his testimony to the exertions of their worthy President,
to whom the Society owed he might say, its present proud
position. He (Mr. Gray) was the first, he believed, in this
city to stand upon a public platform to bear testimony to the
benefits of mesmerism, as evidenced in his own person.
Mesmerism he could assure them, was making rapid strides
in Dublin of late. He attended the lectures of Lafontaine,


Dublin Mesmeric Association. 331
who was a really clever man, but he laboured under the
difficulty of not speaking our language; then we had Mr.
Adair, and subsequently Messrs. Davey and Jackson, who
had done much to spread the truths of. mesmerism ; for we
had no such lecturer as Mr. Jackson, no such operator as Mr.
Davey. In conclusion Mr. Gray paid a high compliment to
the Chairman for his zeal in the cause, and resumed his seat
amidst loud cheers.

Mr. Poot seconded the resolution, which as well as those
subsequently moved, were unanimously adopted. He said,
they were called impostors; if so, it should be admitted they
were impostors in very excellent company; they had joined
with them men of all creeds and classes, including nobles of
the land, clergymen, members of the learned professions,
and he was happy to add, medical men of the first standing
in their profession.

Mr. Aitkin referred to the progress which mesmerism had
made in India, under Dr. Esdaile, and on the Continent of
Europe; he then combatted the objections raised by its
opponents, and concluded by proposing the next resolution,
as follows :—“ That the success here shewn fully warrants us
in calling upon all the friends of humanity to co-operate with
our Association.”

Mr. Jounston briefly seconded the resolution.

Mr. Rogers moved and Mr. TieHe seconded the third
resolution :—“ That those gentlemen who have so unremit-
tingly devoted themselves as operators in the Infirmary are
entitled to our warmest thanks.”

Capt. Miles having been then moved from the chair,
which was taken by Mr. Gray,

Mr. J. Pirr Harris, A.B, after a suitable preface, in
which he entered into an able and eloquent defence of mes-
merism as a curative power, moved the following resolution,
which was seconded by Mr. Crawrorp, and carried by accla-
mation :—“ That our sincere thanks are due, and are hereby
given, to Mr. Miles, our President, for his constant attend-
ance at the meetings of our Committee since its formation, as
well as for his untiring and successful labours as operator in
the Infirmary.”

Major WotseE zy rose and stated that, as an old soldier,
whose motto was deeds not words, he hoped he would be
excused for intruding upon the time of the meeting, but he
could not let that resolution pass without standing up publicly
to offer his thanks to Mr. Miles for the rare display of prac-
tical philanthropy he had evinced in spreading the knowledge
of mesmerism; he had also to thank him on behalf of a


332 Books received, Notices to Correspondents, &c.


member of his own family, who had been much benefitted
through its healing influence (cheers).

A vote of thanks, moved by Mr. O’Farrell, seconded by
Mr. Rogers, was then passed to Mr. Harris for his kindness
in acting as Secretary to the meeting, and to Mr. Porter, for
placing his rooms at the disposal of the committee for the
evening, and the meeting separated, evidently highly pleased
with the proceedings.


BOOKS RECEIVED.


Buckland’s Handbook of Mesmerism. Third Edition.
We have already recommended this.


Barth’s Mesmerist’s Manual. Third Edition, enlarged.

No book of the size contains a greater amount of various mesmeric informa-
tion.

The Mesmeric Guide for Family Use. Containing instructions for the Appli-
cation of Mesmerism as a Curative Agent. By S. D. Saunders.

This is a much smaller book than the other, and is as it were a collection of
good receipts for mesmerising individual cases.


A Letter to Dr. Lyon Playfair, C.B., F.R.S.: being a medical commentary
on the recent results of the Analogies of the Buxton Tepid Baths ; to which are
added a statement of the improvements now in progress at Buxton, with Dr.
Playfair’s Analytical Report. By Wm. H. Robertson, M.D., Senior Physician
to the Buxton Bath Charity.

The Medical Report of the Female side of the Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum,
Middlesex. By J. G. Davey, M.D.

The Russian Bath ; published with a view to recommend its introduction into
England for Hygienic as well as Curative purposes. By Mathias Roth, M.D.,
physician to the Hahnemann Hospital ; author of the ‘‘ Prevention and Cure of
Chronic Diseases by Movements,” &c., &c.

Examen Phrénologique ou Analyse et Synthése des principaux traits du carac-
tére primitif et actuel de Vincenz Priessnitz. Fait a Freiwaldau, Septembre
1849. Troppau, 1852.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


In our next will appear an Account of a Cure of a singular Nervous Affec-
tion: and one of the effects of mental impression upon a Cat. By Dr. Elliotson.

Cures by Mr. Phelps, late of the Bristol Mesmeric Institute.

Successful issue of a severe Case of Fever treated with Mesmerism by Dr.
Ashburner; and an account of the unprecedented conduct of a surgeon who
was not attending the case.

Remarkable Facts, and Cures, by Mr. Barth.

More instances of Clairvoyance in Alexis Didier and Ellen Dawson.

Cure of an enormous and condemned Bursa, by Mr. Capern.

Cures by Mr. H. S. Thompson.

A Letter from Dr. Collyer in San Francisco, California, successfully assert-
ing his priority of claim to the practice of the so-called Electro-Biology : with
notes upon the subject by Dr. Elliotson.

A fact in Electro-Biology, as it is called, by Mr. Hannent.

A Cure of St. Vitus’s Dance, with other facts, by Mr. Colbourne, of Stur-
minster.

Cures and Clairvoyance, by Mr. Chase, of Shaftesbury : and some others.


*,* It is earnestly requested that all communications be sent four weeks
before the day of publication.

==============================================================================

THE ZOIST.


No. XL.


JANUARY, 1853.


I. Cure of Ovarian Dropsy, accompanied by most severe vomit-
ing and pain and other sufferings, with Mesmerism and
Galvanism, by Dr. Motherwell, Melbourne, Australia :
together with remarkable Clairvoyance on the part of the
patient as to both the nature of the disease and the method
of curing it. Drawn up by Dr. Motherwell and the
patient, and communicated by Dr. Elliotson. With a
note on Professor Brande’s conduct by Dr. Elliotson.


‘* Mesmerism, as it is called, has occasionally taken root, and at one time,
but for an accident which we shall presently notice, threatened to thrive and
prosper.’’—‘‘ Many of our readers have probably witnessed the silly and dis-
graceful exhibitions in this line of practice which some years ago were displayed
in London, and are therefore aware of the means by which the magnetized are
brought under the ‘influence.’ It is always necessary that the magnetizer himself
should be charged with the fluid, and that the magnetizees should be susceptible
of its influence, which, be it observed, all persons are not: nor can all persons
be magnetizers ; some want power and others faith; in short, there must be
a due share of folly or of imposture, or both, on the one hand, and of credulity,
cunning, or morbid irritability, on the other: and then all goes right. The
magnetizer, with his wand of office, performs certain antics before the patient,
&e.”—'* A few years ago some lamentable attempts were made to revive it in
London; not by quacks and impostors, but by regular practitioners, and even
by persons who enjoyed no inconsiderable share of public respect and favour.
They reaped the bitter fruits of their crEDULITY AND FOLLY: but the MANIA
HAS SPREAD INTO THE PROVINCES, WHERE IT STILL RAGES WITH UNABATED
Frury.’’—A Dictionary of Science, Literature, and Art, &c. Edited by W. T.
Branbe, F.R.S., L. and E. of Her Majesty’s Mint, Honorary Professor of Che-
mistry in the Royal Institution of Great Britain, Professor of Chemistry and
Materia Medica to the Apothecary’s Company: assisted by others. Second
Edition. 1852.


To Dr. Elliotson.
Collins Street, Melbourne, June 12, 1852.
My dear Sir,—I beg leave to send the accompanying
statement by Miss Smith of her disease, long-continued ill-
VOL. X. BB


\
H
!
1
1
!
i


334 Mesmerism in Australia.
ness, and other sufferings; and its treatment and cure by
mesmerism and galvanism pointed out to me while she was
in the mesmeric sleep. If you think it worthy of a place in
the “ truth-telling” Zoist, I shall feel obliged by your forward-
ing it to the editor. It is perhaps too long for insertion, but
I thought it better to give you a full detail, and then leave
it to your judgment to omit any part that you did not think
of sufficient importance to be published. I can only say
that, upon my honour as a gentleman and a member of our
noble profession, i¢ is true in every particular that I have
written, without the least colouring or exaggeration.
Believe me, yours very truly,
J. R. MorHerwe tt.


Narrative by Miss Smith.


“To the Editor of The Zoist.
“ Melbourne, May, 1852.

“ Far be it from me to pretend to assert what mesmerism
is: but on its beneficial effects I will not be silent, consider-
ing that a public acknowledgment of relief is a duty incum-
bent upon me. Why should I shrink from complying with
a request, when I have reason to believe and hope that the
result is caleulated to benefit my fellow-creatures, and do
justice and credit to the reputation of one, so desirous of
doing good as he who has been the main instrument (through
the merciful interposition of Providence) of performing so
wonderful a cure? In short, I feel it but a slight remunera-
tion I can make to be regardless of, and willing to bear with,
the censures of those who can be faithless to the merits of
mesmerism ; and by an appeal to conscience, I know that my
motive is wholly founded on gratitude and philanthropy.

“1 have truly hitherto led a suffering life, as those with
whom I have been closely connected could affirm. I was
placed by my guardian, being deprived of parents when three
days old, at the age of five and a half years, at school. Up
to that period (of course I assert only what I have been told)
{ was a very weakly child, always ailing and full of misfor-
tunes, having repeated inflammations in the eyes; and at the
age of four I had a severe fall, when I broke my left leg and
put out the right wrist. From my weak state of health I
required the greatest care. Two winters successively I had
an attack of inflammation of the lungs; and, as I advanced
in the various branches of scholastic engagements, I was
induced to great perseverance by an assurance that in a few
years I should be entirely dependent on my own exertions.
In this attempt at superior attainments I was frequently dis-


Commencement of the disease. 335


appointed. For, owing to a weakness in the left side, I was
permitted by the surgeon (a Mr. Lomas, brother to our
governess) to devote only half the time allotted to our various
undertakings. At the age of eleven I first suffered the con-
stitutional change, which kept on without intermission for
fifteen days, and for the two following years I had not a
return. All who saw me during that interval firmly believed
I was in a decline, as every sign of it was evident.

“T was then thirteen, when I had the misfortune to lose
my only female friend, the wife of my guardian. Circum-
stanced thus, I was removed from school, and I took the
charge of nine small children as instructress in a very com-
fortable family. I was there upwards of twelve months, con-
stantly an invalid, suffering much with pain in my side and
retention of urine, which, it is proper for me to remark, I
was troubled with at the time the constitutional change first
appeared, as well as on various occasions afterwards. I was
at this time under the care of Mr. Wright, of Bridgford,
who recommended me to leave my situation and try another
air. I complied with great reluctance, and for a short time
was with a friend at Mansfield, Notts, where I was attended
by a Mr. Hurt. Retention of urine still troubled me, and
he discovered great swelling of the abdomen, and had a slight
idea that I was dropsical. At this time my legs swelled much,
and at last broke out in pimples resembling small blisters,
which continually discharged, but could not be healed by
any ointment that could be applied. I then tried simple
means. I bandaged the legs from the toe to the knee with
cold water cloths kept constantly upon them, and also kept
the bandages wet, drinking at the same time elm-bark tea
and milk and lime water mixed.

“T then took another situation, which I occupied four
years and three quarters. The disease in this time had made
such rapid progress that I could not continue my undertak-
ing: and, as I had been so long under one surgeon without
any relief, dissatisfaction was felt by my employers, for I was
still under Mr. Bently Wright, of Bridgford, as the village
in which I resided was only two miles from my previous
situation.

“Mr. Wright then gave me a note to Dr. Williams of
Nottingham, who prescribed for me during some weeks while
I remained in Nottingham with a friend. I became ulti-
mately too ill to attend for advice from the Doctor, and he,
considering it a surgical case, gave me a recommendation to
the hospital: and, though I was not under his immediate
care, he seldom visited the hospital without seeing me.

BB2


336 Mesmerism in Australia.

“T was placed first under Dr. Storer and Mr. Attenborow,
who tried various remedies with me, applying mercurial plas-
ters on the tumor, iodine, and blisters, and an issue in the
arm for six months. This was then dried up and exchanged
for a seton. I ought to remark that my eyes were at this
time much affected as well as my spine being very weak, for
which I believe the application of iodine was of service ; I also
suffered much pain in the back of the head.

“The catamenia were now beginning to lessen exceed-
ingly: and, the pain increasing much, I took very powerful
draughts at each paroxysm for relief. I was now troubled
with incessant vomiting, particularly after taking any nour-
ishment. Every means was tried to stop it, but to no pur-
pose: and, other opinions being called in, I was next placed
under Mr. Wright and Dr. Hutchinson, who (as I became
unable to swallow food) fed me with a tube and a syringe
down my throat; sometimes exchanging it for a small glass
funnel put to the nostrils, and the milk poured down by a
teaspoonful. At one time this was continued night and day
every second or third hour, the vomiting still troubling me
occasionally. I was then all but given up, and my friends
visited me, as was believed, for the last time. I was then
fed by injections of beef tea and milk: and nothing given
down the throat whatever. For five weeks I had nothing in
my mouth but a moist sponge, or a piece of linen rag dipped
in vinegar.

“ At the end of this time (viz., five weeks) I was able to
retain my food, and take 10 oz. of wine with } lb. of biscuits
each day. The tumor during this time remained about the
same size. I was in the hospital twelve months all but a
week. When I left it I was under several doctors, being a
member of the dispensary at Grantham. Here there was
much dispute as to what my disease was. A letter was sent
to Dr. Williams, requesting his opinion of its nature while I
was in the Nottingham Hospital. I now hold the reply,
which states that I had extensive ovarian disease, irritation of
the bladder, and diseased eyes.

“ After various consultations and unpleasant examinations,
it was unanimously agreed that it was an ovarian tumor, and
that nothing, saving an operation, would restore me to health.
Still none agreed that it was of a proper size to justify an
operation at that time. But the pains increased, and so
great were my sufferings that without the application of black
drop and chloroform I could not have existed. Drs. Brown,
Sylveston, and Mather; surgeons, Messrs. Jeans, Shipman,
Robbs, and Eaton, saw me repeatedly ; but I was more par-


Arrival in the Colony. 337


ticularly under Mr. Jeans and Mr. Shipman. I also had the
opinion of Mr. Cade, of Breaston, who coincided in opinion
with the above medical gentlemen.

“It was now May, 1851, and they agreed that, for the
establishment of my general health, a voyage would be
serviceable, for I was quite unable to earn my own livelihood.
This idea greatly prompted my friends to decide on emigra-
tion; in order that if my health could be established I might
be enabled to bear the intended operation. The catamenia
only just appeared ; but regularly. I suffered exceedingly all
the voyage, with vomiting, retention of urine, cramps in the
legs, and violent spasmodic affections at the chest.

“On my arrival in the colony, I was placed under the
care of Dr. Sullivan in the Colonial Hospital, the case
having been refused on application at the Town Hospital on
shewing the note before spoken of from Dr. Williams, which
states that I left the hospital at home quite uncured. I was
under Dr. Sullivan from October 4th, when I landed, up to
November 5th, when I was at length admitted into the other
hospital, and placed under Mr. Thomas, who strongly advised
an operation. I was examined in the presence of Dr. Wilmot
and my own surgeon. Dr. Wilmot recommended galvanism,
having, as he said, seen beneficial results at home in the
complaint under which I laboured. I had violent attacks of
spasms all the time I remained in the hospital, which was ten
weeks. I left as an out-patient, still under Mr. Thomas, but
found that the disease gained ground so rapidly that I was
not able to maintain myself.

“Tt only now remains for me to allow my conduct and
deportment to be the criterion by which I testify the heart-
felt gratitude I owe to my kind, kind friends who have so
interested themselves in my welfare as to place me in the
hands of one to whom I can never tell how much I owe him,
since his disinterested kindness, care, and exceedingly skilful
treatment (as I gain strength) have so far relieved me of a
painful disease, as to allow me to do my duty in that state of
life into which it shall please God to call me. In expressing
gratitude to the creature, think not that I am unmindful of
the debt of thankfulness I owe to the Creator: for He has
not only blessed the means used for my recovery, but has in
a wonderful manner verified his promise made to the father-
less one in Psalm xxvii., and raised up a succession of kind
friends whose unwearied support and comfort I trust I shall
never forget.

“1 now leave the remainder of the surgical treatment to
my doctor: and rest assured that you will hear nothing but


338 Mesmerism in Australia.
facts : for the permanent relief I have received is too evident
to allow of unbelief.

“Evizaspetu N. Smitu.”


Narrative by Dr. Motherwell.


I was called upon by the Rev. Mr. Strong, Mrs. Strong,
and Mrs. Simpson, and requested to visit this poor sufferer,
who I was informed had been discharged as incurable from
the hospital, and was then dependent on the care and charity
of those kind friends. The surgeon under whose care she
was at the hospital had promised to visit her occasionally as
an out-patient ; but he was very busy and told one of her
friends who called upon him, “that her case was hopeless,”
and he had not called to see her. In these circumstances
I was asked to visit her, since she was then suffering fearful
pain, and urgently imploring for something to give her rest
or sleep.

As she has stated, she had been for many years afflicted
with an enormous swelling of the abdomen, supposed to be
connected with the left ovary, and causing intense pain by
its pressure on the surrounding parts. Severe spasmodic
contractions of the lower extremities, especially the left leg ;
irritability of the stomach, frequent vomiting; generally con-
stipation, but sometimes a fit of diarrhea; strangury and
irritability of the bladder, but sometimes retention of urine ;
sleepless nights; unceasing pain and excessive debility ; all
indicated the shattered state of her constitution, and ren-
dered her life wretched.

When I saw her she had taken sixty drops of laudanum,
which had been rejected by the stomach. I administered
chloroform, which rendered her insensible to pain while its
action was kept up, but no longer.

I then gave her half a drachm of the liquor opii sedativus
every hour for four hours. It stupified her while she re-
mained under its influence. Next morning, the pain being
as bad as ever, I gave her a grain of morphine every hour
for four hours. This too stupified her: but, as soon as its
narcotic effects had passed off, the pain returned. And now
the stomach had become so irritable that nothing solid or
fluid was retained. Parched with thirst, she was afraid to
drink on account of the pain and distress of vomiting. I
then tried that evening for half an hour to mesmerise her,
but without producing any effect. I ordered her to take
effervescing draughts during the night. On the following
evening I tried again for half an hour to mesmerise her, but


Immediate benefit of Mesmerism. 339


no effect was produced at the time. As she was complaining
of pain in the lower part of the abdomen, I ordered her to
have a hip-bath.

Next morning she told me that she had slept a little
during the night, and was surprised to see some slight stains
on her clothes like the catamenial fluid. She remarked that
it was strange that the hip-bath could have produced such an
appearance, as she had oftentimes used it every night for
several weeks without any such effect. She was not disposed
to give mesmerism any credit for this change. She had
heard of mesmerism and had been mesmerised once or twice
in England : but a sanctimonious friend of hers, of the Hugh
M‘Neile school, had told her it was highly improper, and she
was dissuaded from a further use of this “ Satanic agency.”
Again, on shipboard, while coming to this colony, a female
friend of hers had upon two occasions soothed her very much
by mesmerism, and I believe induced sleep.. But the learned
doctor on board, and some of the most self-sufficient of her
fellow-passengers, had denounced it as humbug, and any per-
sistence in it was discouraged.* I only heard of these par-
ticulars after I had mesmerised her several times, as, up to
this period, she did not put any faith in it. Neither did the
friends who came to ask me to see her, their expectation
being that I would try what medicine would do for her; and,
when it failed, they did not make any objection to my trying
to mesmerise her, but never expressed a wish for me to give
it a trial.

Well, en avant, slight as these stains were, they inspired
me with hope,—they helped to rouse my energies. I tried
to mesmerise her for half an hour on the third evening, with-
out producing any effect at the time: but, strange to say, oh
ye sceptics! she slept better that night after I left her; and
the stains on the night-dress were much larger, and of a very
dark, almost black, colour. I tried to mesmerise her the
fourth evening, and in about twenty minutes she appeared to
be getting very drowsy: the eyes closed, and she soon passed
into the mesmeric sleep. After some time had elapsed, I
spoke to her, and she answered me. I asked, Was she com-
fortable? and she said, “ Oh yes; I am so happy! free from
pain: ’tis long since I have had such quiet.”

The voice was changed ; it had not the querulous, whin-
ing tone which long-continued sickness gives to even the


* A gentleman in Cheltenham was lately anxious to find a mesmeriser, for
established means rendered him no relief. But he wrote to a friend that mes-
merism had been driven out by the divines, who called it devilish, and by the
doctors, who called it humbug.— Zois?.


340 Mesmerism in Australia.
most resigned and patient. The countenance was calm and
serene; the rigid lines which pain and suffering had im-
printed upon it had relaxed and disappeared. On this and
many other occasions in her mesmeric sleep she has poured
forth with fervent zeal her most humble prayers and thanks
to an almighty and merciful God for all his blessings and
mercies bestowed upon her.

Ah! Hugh M‘Neile, if you had but heard her! Satan
could not so have prompted her !

I allowed her to sleep for some time, and then, again
addressing her, I told her, “That persons in the mesmeric
sleep were oftentimes able to see what was the nature of their
disease, and to point out the means of cure; and that I
wished her to ¢ry and see if she could do so.” After the
lapse of a few minutes spent apparently in deep abstraction,
she began to smile ; she laughed, she grasped my hand, and
said joyously, “Oh, doctor, I see that you can cure me. I
can scarce believe it, but yet I see it. Oh! it appears to be
too good news to be true: to think that I shall get rid of this
tumor which has been oppressing me for so many years:
what will the doctors say?” I told her to tell me what was
to be done, and that I would doit. She said, “ Yes, you
must galvanize me and I shall soon be well: I shall be well
in a month’s time.” I asked her, “ Would not mesmerism
do?” and she said, “No; you will have to use galvanism as
well as the mesmerism. You should mesmerise me every
day until I get something stronger, and then you should
galvanize me over the tumor.”

I mesmerised her every day for an hour or so. The
stomach began to retain its food, and henceforth she herself
directed while in her mesmeric sleep the treatment that I was
to pursue. She desired me to “give her enemas of warm
water every day, but no medicine, as she said it would only
sicken her.” The bowels soon began to act regularly of their
own accord, and the enemas were discontinued.

After I had mesmerised her eight or nine times, she told
me one evening that I might begin to use galvanism, and
directed me how to apply it:—one handle of the galvanic
machine to be placed at the back of the neck, and the other
to be rubbed over the abdomen, which was larger than if she
had been pregnant nine months. Upon percussion it did not
sound very dull at any point as if there was a solid growth,
but was rather tympanitic over the stomach and colon. Fluc-
tuation could be observed, but not so distinctly as in ascites,
and there was an elastic feel upon making pressure on the
distended abdomen. .


Prediction of the escape of the fluid. 341


I began to galvanize her each day, and continued it for
twenty minutes—the time specified by her. I may mention
that everything directed by her was told to me while she was
in the mesmeric sleep. I repeated the galvanism the next
day, and continued it for five days, mesmerising her every
evening.

One evening she said, “Ah, doctor, don’t you see the
good that galvanism has done? See how it has loosened the
tumor.” I told her that I could not see it; and she seemed
surprised that I could not, as she said she saw it quite plainly.
She told me that this tumor was caused by a large collection
of water, contained in bags, and that it had originated in a
bruise which she had received in the loins when eleven years
of age, but which she did not think much of at the time.
While she was in the hospital here, one of the surgeons
wanted her to submit to an operation, telling her it was the
only chance of saving her life: but she would not consent,
and oftentimes in the mesmeric sleep she recurs to that pro-
posed operation, saying, “ Ah, doctor, if I had submitted to
that operation it would have killed me; I see it plainly
enough.”

After I had galvanized her for the fifth time, she said
when mesmerised in the evening, “ Ah, doctor, I see I must
submit and suffer, but oh what agony and pain I must en-
dure!” I asked her what she meant. She replied, “ Oh
to-morrow will be a critical day for me.” I said, “ How so?”
and she replied, “ At the time you are galvanizing me the
tumor will burst, and I shall suffer great pain.” I asked
her, “ Where will it burst ?” and she said, “ Into the bowels.”
I suppose she must have been cognizant by some means that
I was incredulous, as indeed I was; for she added, * You
will see to-morrow, doctor, that I am right: you don’t believe
me now, but you will see to-morrow.” I asked her, “ Was
there any danger?” and she replied, speaking in a far more
calm and tranquil mood than I was in, “ Oh yes, it may kill
me: if it bursts upwards it will kill me.” “ How so?” said
I. “TI shall be suffocated in a few minutes,” said she. “Can
I do anything to prevent this danger?” “ Yes,” said she:
“you ought to put a bandage very tight round my waist now
to keep the tumor pressed down, and do not take it off until
the tumor has burst.” I put a broad bandage on, and, when
she awoke, she wondered very much at being swathed up in
such a manner.

I did not tell her what she had told me, but merely de-
sired her not to stir the bandage until I removed it. I left
her that night, but, feeling alarmed at the possibility of such


342 Mesmerism in Australia.
impending danger to her, I was anxious to have with me, when
I galvanized her on the morrow, some persons of known re-
spectability and standing in society, and therefore requested
Mrs. Simpson, Dr. and Mrs. Howitt, to be present at one
o’clock the next day when I would galvanize her. On the
next day, after I had been galvanizing for about ten minutes,
she screamed loudly, writhed about in pain; something ap-
peared to have given way in the abdomen, and a gush of
water poured from the rectum. Again she screamed, and
writhed about ; another gush of water issued from the bowels,
and another, and another, and another, until the bed and
mattress were saturated with fluid and it streamed on the
floor.

We had no means of measuring the quantity, but she
told me when mesmerised that evening that eight pints of
water had come away; and, judging from what we saw, there
must have been that quantity at the least. Of course the
size of the abdomen was decreased. She told me that even-
ing that she should suffer from debility, and constant diarrheea,
during the next day, but that I could do nothing for her ex-
cept to give her a little brandy and water when she was faint,
and in the evening to give her an enema of water with some
turpentine in it, which would quiet the bowels. I would
gladly have left her for the night in the mesmeric sleep on
this as well as on many other occasions, but, as I could not
depend upon the people in whose house she was lodging that
they would not annoy or play some tricks on her when in the
mesmeric sleep, I was obliged always to waken her up before
I left her for the night.

I told her my reasons for always waking her up, and she
said I was quite right, as she saw that they would teaze her
with questions if she was left in the mesmeric sleep: but,
said she, you can put me to sleep with chloroform just before
you leave, and that will do me great good. “Sleep, doctor,
is better to me than food for a few days.”

Next day I found the abdomen more swollen and tympa-
nitic than I had left it on the previous evening, and in her
mesmeric state she told me that this was owing partly to
debility, but partly to a portion of the tumor which had not
burst: and added that I must galvanize her again on the fol-
lowing day. I did so, and similar occurrences took place as
upon two days previously, but in a minor degree. There was
a scream of pain, a sensation of something bursting in the
abdomen, and more gushes of water from the rectum. About
a fortnight had now elapsed since I first mesmerised her: I
did not galvanize her again, but continued to mesmerise her


Clairvoyant announcement of worms. 343


every evening. To my enquiries, if she would be well in the
month’s time she had predicted, she replied, “ Yes ; but there
is an abscess forming in the womb, and until that breaks I
shall not be well. I shall suffer a good deal from the pain
and irritation of that abscess, and it will cause retention of
urine frequently before it breaks. You must have fomenta-
tions of hot water frequently applied over the lower part of
the abdomen, and when the urine is retained you must
remove it with the catheter, or by putting me into the mes-
meric sleep, during which it will then pass off of its own
accord.”

I removed the urine with the catheter on several occa-
sions as she directed, and twice I put her into the mes-
meric sleep when she was suffering from the retention, for
the sole purpose of seeing if the bladder would empty itself
without instrumental aid: and each time it did so. She told
me four days previously that the abscess would burst on the
following Thursday evening, and that the catamenia would
appear regularly afterwards. On Thursday evening the ab-
scess broke when she was mesmerised: a quantity of purulent
matter came from the vagina, and she told me on the follow-
ing morning that she was unwell—poorly : the catamenia had
appeared. A month had now elapsed since I first mesmerised
her, but as she was very weak I continued to mesmerise her
for some time longer, though not regularly every evening as
before.

One evening she said, “ Doctor, I see a number of worms
in the bowels, and they keep me weak and delicate; they
keep the bowels in a state of irritation, and I cannot get
strength while they are there. You ought to give me thirty
drops of turpentine three times to-morrow, and you will see
these worms come away dead on the day after” I told her
nothing about the worms when she was awake, but sent her
the turpentine with directions how to take it. She took it,
and told me that evening when mesmerised that the worms
were dead, and that they would come away next day. Next
day a mass of dead worms came away from the bowels.

Some days afterwards she was attacked with severe vomit-
ing which continued for several days. She said that every
thing which came from the stomach was so acid that it set
her “teeth on edge.”” When she was mesmerised I asked
her the cause of such acid vomiting, and she replied, “ Oh,
doctor, I got so much vitriolic elixir to drink in water on
account of my thirst from Dr. in England, that my
stomach has been injured by it, and I think that this is an
effort towards its recovery.”


344 Mesmerism in Australia.

Six weeks had now elapsed, and the abdomen began again
to swell. I asked her when in the mesmeric sleep what was
the cause of its now swelling as she told me she would be
cured in a month; and she replied, “ Why, doctor, I was
cured of the tumor within the month, but there was a small,
little bag of water which did not burst when the others did :
it was so small then that I did not perceive it, and it would
not have been of any consequence if I had been stronger ;
but I have been kept so weak and delicate, with that abscess
in the womb, with these worms, and that severe vomiting,
that this bag has commenced to fill again with water; but, if
you galvanize me once any time before I am again poorly
and mesmerise me afterwards in the evening, this bag will
burst, and I shall not be troubled with them any more be-
cause I shall then be stronger.”

I did as she directed, galvanized her once, and, when she
was mesmerised that evening, this bag of water burst, and its
contents were discharged by the rectum as before, except that
at the former time it burst while she was being galvanized,
and now it burst while she was mesmerised, after the galvan-
ism had been applied, and without the pain as on the two
former occasions.

Suffice it to say that she is now well, walking about, and
recovering her strength daily. About three months have
elapsed since I first saw her. I send a statement of her case
previous to the time that I saw her, written by herself, which,
if you choose, may be prefixed to this statement.


Oh, ye lecturers and practitioners, and all the host of
hireling and mendacious scribblers, who strive to pervert the
truth and calumniate those who labour in its support! how
you would have blushed with shame, if such a feeling existed
in your callous hearts, on beholding this poor sufferer verify-
ing in her own person the great truths and facts of mesmerism
—its great curative powers—its wonderful prevision, and then
reflecting how, in besotted ignorance and self-sufficiency, you
were misspending your time in decrying what is good and
beneficial to your fellow-creatures, actuated thereto by the
base motive of pandering to the prejudices and preconceived
opinions of a mass of would-be-great men, too indolent to
examine for themselves, and too proud to learn from others :
or, what is worse and less pardonable in you, by the baser
motive of venting your malignant spleen and coarse invective
upon those so immeasurably your superiors in intellect and
philanthropy.

J. R. MorHEerwe.t.


Mr. Brande’s silly conduct. 345


NOTE BY DR. ELLIOTSON TO THE MOTTO OF THIS ARTICLE.


It is melancholy to see a man of Mr. Brande’s years and
standing as a lecturer and compiler,—for he is a very slow
man, destitute of all pretension to originality or genius,—
make such an exhibition of want of information, of bigotted
and supercilious prejudice, and cool vulgarity. In 1842,
when he edited the former edition of his book, he favoured
the world with the very same sentence as in this second edi-
tion of 1852, except that then he wrote not some years ago
were displayed, but which have lately been tolerated—not
a few years ago, but within the last five years—not were made,
but have been made—not they reaped, but have unfortunately
reaped—not but the mania has spread into the provinces, where
it still rages with unabated fury, but and the mania has again
subsided, and will now probably remain dormant.*

Poor gentleman! to think that he assured his friends at
the Royal Institution and the public in general that the
mania had subsided and would probably remain dormant,
and is now obliged to confess that it still rages in the pro-
vinces with unabated fury! and he might add, and rages in
our East Indian colonies most furiously, and among our very
antipodes, as the present article shows, and, what is really
horrible, that, though it has spread so widely, it has not, like
that other pestilent plague—the cholera, left the places which
it first infested, but rages far more furiously than ever in
London, where a well-supported Mesmeric Infirmary has been
flourishing for four years and a Mesmeric Quarterly Journal
has now completed its tenth year of giant vigour.

When Mr. Brande first inveighed against mesmerism as a
pretended influence, and against its demonstrations as silly and
disgusting exhibitions, requiring a due share of folly or of im-
posture or both on the one hand, and of credulity, cunning,
or morbid irritability on the other, and a wand of office and
certain antics on the part of the mesmeriser, and productive
of the ditter fruits, clearly to myself, of my credulity and folly,
—wonderful phenomena and satisfactory cures were recorded
in the Lancet by Mr. Wakley from his reporter and deputy-
coroner, Mr. Mills, before he thought it more calculated to his
interest to write against the great truth,—by Professor Herbert
Mayo in the London Medical Gazette,—by Dr. Lardner in
Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton’s Monthly Chronicle,—by Cham-
bers in his Edinburgh Journal,—by myself in my Farewell
Letter to the Students of University College, &c., &. But Mr.


* I used the original sentences for a motto to Article 15, No. XX.


346 Mr. Brande’s silly conduct, and


Wakley had turned round and written what he must bitterly
repent having written, and Mr. Brande imitated him servilely
in every particular. During the ten years which have since
elapsed, all the stupendous facts, phenomena, and cures of
The Zoist have been given to the public—all Dr. Esdaile’s
gigantic surgical operations have been performed, together
with very numerous other surgical operations in so many
places: and yet Mr. Brande has the foolhardiness to ignore
them all, like the man who is said by the poet to have shut
his eyes and cried out, The sun! you talk of the sun! why
where is it? I cannot see it. There is no sun: and if there
were one and I saw it, I would not believe it.

How must the Reverend secretary of the Royal Institu-
tion, Mr. Barlow, laugh in his sleeve, for he is a full and
open believer in mesmerism, and has not only seen the phe-
nomena repeatedly at my house, but been allowed by me
repeatedly to bring his friends also to see them. How must
Mr. Mansfield, the lecturer upon metals at the Royal Insti-
tution, laugh, for he is not only a firm believer in mesmerism,
but is most anxious for the world to be satisfied that he by
induction discovered that the individual phrenological organs
of the brain can be excited mesmerically,* and pronounces
The Zoist to be a glorious periodical.t

The notable professional opinions given publicly by Mr.
Brande upon certain matters with which he ought to be
conversant, particularly upon a certain stove, cannot, he is
aware, be forgotten,{ and ought to make him careful how he
gives equally unsound, very ridiculous, and, what is more,
very offensive, opinions upon a subject of which he is per-
fectly ignorant.

The offensiveness of Mr. Brande’s language might lead
my readers to suppose that we had once quarrelled. So far
from it, I had never come across him in my life when he
published the tirade in his first edition: and, after this, I
actually attended a course of his lectures on chemistry by
virtue of four guineas; chatted and shook hands with him
several times at the Institution, and met him at dinner in the


* See No. XXXVIII., p. 226. t No. IV., p. 470.

t Nor will Mr. Brande’s ludicrous destruction of a poor guinea pig at his
lecture upon chloroform be forgotten. Like all antimesmerists he is equally
ardent for chloroform and hostile to mesmerism: and promised to exhibit to a
Friday evening assembly how beautifully and easily he would stupify a guinea
pig, make it bear mechanical violence unconsciously, and then shew it restored
to health and sensibility. But the little fellow never came out of its stupefaction,
and was borne away lifeless. “Mr. Brande forgets that the world knows of all Dr.
Esdaile’s gigantic painless and successful operations in India under mesmerism,
which never killed any body.


Dr. Mantell’s unworthy conduct. 347


most friendly way, never mentioning the subject or shewing
by my manner that I thought of his attack. Yet while I
have been preserving this amicable bearing he has republished
every virulent expression.

This is a bad example for the rising generation who attend
the Royal Institution. But I have not found a greater pro-
portion of unworldly, high-minded, truth-loving, of truly
rational and good men, among men of science, than among
any division of the humble classes. Selfishness, vanity, sub-
serviency, and vulgarity meet us in every scientific and literary
society, and cliques and parties for unworthy purposes prevail
in the very highest of them.

To those who cannot understand honest indignation against
evil doers, I offer the following quotation from the Chevalier
Bunsen, the Prussian Minister, in his Hippolytus and his Age,
just published :—

“As to my own taste, since nothing human is perfect, I prefer
good, strong indignation infinitely to an impotent indifference, and
to mawkish hypocrisy. The man who will not attack a falsehood
will not defend truth; and he who dares not call a knave a knave
(whether he be his bishop, or brother bishop, or not) will not treat
tyranny as tyranny, when the cause of Christian truth is attacked
by force. Yet it was for doing this that the Martyrs died, from
Hippolytus to Ridley. Nor do I see how any man can speak too
strongly, when he is defending truth against wickedness. This was
not the vein of the Middle ages. Thomas Aquinas was not deemed
less wise or less holy by Dante and others of his worshippers, for
having intimated clearly enough what he thought of tyrants like
Charles of Anjou.”

Joun ELxiotson.


II. An instance of the great power of Mesmerism over Inflam-
mation, and of either clairvoyant personal prediction of
disease or of the extraordinary force of imagination. By
Dr. Exxiotson.


‘* As the alchemists of old, who in their crude and visionary research for the
philosopher’s stone, instituted experiments which drew attention to the wonders
of chemistry, and laid the foundation of experimental philosophy, in like manner
the mesmerists and animal magnetizers of our times, while practising on the cre-
dulity of their patients or audience, may elicit vital phenomena, which, investi-
gated by men of superior minds and honest intentions, may shed important light
on some of the most mysterious laws of vitality and organization. At present
we can only exclaim with the great French philosopher, La Place, ‘ Ce que nous
connaissons est peu de chose: ce que nous ignorons est immense.’’’—G. A.
MantTe Lt, LL.D., F.R.S.: Address delivered to the Members of the Western
Medical and Surgical Society of London by him as President, Oct. 15,* 1852.
See Medical Times, Oct. 30, 1852.


* After Dr. Mantell had uttered this absurdity and unprovoked insult, he
died on the 10th of November.—Joun Exviotson.


348 Great power of Mesmerism over Inflammation.


On Thursday the llth of August, 1847, Dr. Ashburner,
being ill and about to leave town for Bath, requested me to
mesmerise his cook, who was in good health but had for some
time predicted in her mesmeric sleep-waking that she should
have an inflammatory attack on the 16th, similar to others
which she had experienced. In her ordinary state she had
no foreknowledge of her illness.

Her name was Sarah Ann Noyes: and her age thirty-
five.

I mesmerised her into sleep-waking on Saturday the
13th: and she then told me that for four years she had been
subject to attacks of illness :—had frequently suffered severely
from pain in the left side and back, with a feeling of their
being enlarged, and as if her clothes were too small for her
at the back: that during the last two years she had fre-
quently experienced a severe inflammatory eruption with in-
flammation of the eyes, which would become very red, and
discharge a thin hot fluid in profusion: that Dr. Marshall
Hall saw her, and asserted that all the symptoms arose from
her stomach, and ordered salts and rhubarb, which she could
not continue on account of the violence of their action: that
after a time she entered into Dr. Ashburner’s service in
September, 1846, and, on her having another such attack—
the fourth, that he advised mesmerism, but she would not
consent : that Dr. Ashburner therefore sent her to Mr. Corfe,*
the apothecary of the Middlesex Hospital, who put a plaster
upon her right side, gave her medicine for some weeks, and
some external application which produced very severe irrita-
tion : that Mr. Corfe wished her to go into the hospital, and
she consented and was placed under Dr. Ashburner and Mr.
Arnott: that the irritation caused by Mr. Corfe’s external
remedies ceased, but the inflammation of the eyes was ex-
treme : that she was cupped five times, had nine blisters behind
her ears, was bled in the arm once, had eight and twenty
leeches around her left eye, and her mouth kept in a state of
soreness from mercury for thirteen weeks :+ that while in the
hospital she had many attacks of cramp in the stomach, and
after each the eyes were worse the next night: that, notwith-
standing this severe discipline, her eyes remained bad, and she
resolved to leave the hospital: that she went into the country
and improved, but her eyes became inflamed in five minutes
whenever she worked or read: that after she returned to


* See his awful violence against mesmerism and his absurd Satanic views in
Nos. XXIII, pp. 233-4; XXIV. pp. 405, 411-12.

+ Dr. Ashburner informs me that Mr. Arnott also applied belladonna around
the eye and gave large quantities of colchicum. *


Prediction of the disease. 349


Dr. Ashburner’s her eyes became as bad as ever: that they
were bandaged, and she took medicine for three weeks to no
purpose, and at length was glad to be mesmerised: that
Dr. Ashburner kindly mesmerised her on the 7th of June,
and she fell asleep in ten minutes and slept for two hours,
and in a week was able to hem a fine cambric handkerchief
without the least ill effect: that the eyes were not specially
mesmerised, but they always felt better as soon as she awoke :
that she was mesmerised daily and was allowed to sleep for
two hours on the average up to the 7th of September, when
I saw her: that she now seldom had any cramp of her sto-
mach, and had never from the first been so long free from it:
that her side and back were well, and her eyes were well :
that the reason why she had so long refused to be mesmerised
was that a practitioner, named Cornelius, in Goswell Street,
spoke continually to her against mesmerism, calling it a
low thing and one that could not cure any body: that Sir
Benjamin Brodie and Dr. Marshall Hall were in the habit of
visiting a Mr. Garrett, with whom she lived, and were always
speaking to the family against mesmerism, and succeeded in
turning them strongly against it, setting it forth as abomin-
able, till the family had positively a horror of it : and that when,
after her recovery, she shewed herself at the Middlesex Hos-
pital, the assistant-apothecary, a Mr. James, only laughed at
her, and asked if she did not feel as if she should not go to
heaven.

She predicted to me with great sorrow, as she had already
so often foretold to Dr. Ashburner, that she should have an
attack of violent inflammation of the eyes, face, neck, &c., and
upon the next Tuesday—the 16th of the month. She was
perfectly well, and, both before I sent her into sleep-waking
and after she awoke again, she was perfectly unaware of
what was to happen and was very cheerful. I mesmerised
her that and every subsequent day late in the afternoon, and
found and left her well on the Saturday, Sunday, and Monday.
But, at my visit on the Tuesday she was in great tribulation,
saying that she had one of her old attacks of inflammation of
the face and eyes and was very ill. This was the fact. I
mesmerised her into sleep-waking, and left her to wake out
of it spontaneously. On the following day matters were much
worse: her eyes were quite closed; and on my raising an
upper eyelid the redness proved to be intense. Spots and
patches of inflammation appeared over her arms and body, as
I found was the case in her former attacks. Her suffering
was great while not in the sleep-waking. By throwing her
VOL. x. ce


350 Superior efficacy of Mesmerism.


into this state daily, and doing nothing more, the violence
began to abate in a few days, and she was soon restored to
health by mesmerism only.

This was a great improvement upon blood-letting, blister-
ing, and mercurialising—her subjection to which, however,
was her own, I must not say fault, but misfortune: for the
ignorant displays of hostility to mesmerism made by three
medical men had influenced her to her own injury; and on
their shoulders rests all the blame of her great suffering from
both disease and remedies.

As soon as she was well, I allowed her to come daily to
my house to be mesmerised: and she continued for a great
length of time, remaining quite well up to the latest period of
my hearing of her, after she had for some reason or other left
Dr. Ashburner’s service. Mesmerism should always be con-
tinued for some time after patients have recovered.

Her gratitude was such that the poor woman gave a
sovereign to the Mesmeric Infirmary, and allowed her name
to appear, despising the fear of persecution.


I have introduced into the heading of this article the
words clairvoyant prediction of the disease, or extraordinary
force of imagination. Clairvoyant prediction respecting a pa-
tient’s own disease is a common occurrence, but sometimes
that which appears to be so is probably nothing more than
the effect of a mental impression.

Those who self-sufficiently scoff at the phenomena of
mesmerised subjects are altogether ignorant that every phe-
nomenon is recorded of persons on whom no mesmeric pro-
cess has been practised. One of these is prediction of the
occurrences of the patient’s own disease, and often also the
indication of the measures suitable to the case. Gall, who,
residing in Paris, that hotbed of medical and all kinds of
quackery, disgusted with mesmeric charlatans around him,
would not believe any of the striking phenomena of mes-
merism, though he admitted the peculiar influence of one
person upon another, relates the following case :—

“M. Joseph de Roggenbach, at Friburg in Brisgau, told
me in the presence of many witnesses that he had been a
somnambulist from his infancy. In this state his tutor had
frequently made him read: made him look for places on the
map, and he found them more readily than when awake: his
eyes were always open and fixed: he did not move them but
turned his whole head. Many times they held him, but he
felt the restraint, and endeavoured to liberate himself, yet


Gall’s belief in Mesmerism. 351


did not awake. Sometimes he said he should wake if they
led him into the garden, and this always happened.”—Fonc-
tions du Cerveau, t. ii., p. 510, sqq.*


* Gall believed in mesmerism but discredited the possibility of the transpo-
sition of the senses, and sympathy of sensation between different persons, and
of clairvoyance. He never examined into the subject as I have done, and all the
clairvoyants whom he was prevailed upon to see failed to satisfy him: and I do
not wonder at this, for both Paris abounded in mesmeric impostors and extortionate
mesmerisers, and some distinguished men who have written upon mesmerism
have poured forth most transcendental and high-flown fancies, incapable of proof and
unintelligible to men of plain understanding and freedom from visionary exaltation.

He thus expresses his belief, recounting his own susceptibility. Having,
while in contemplation, passed one of his hands over his forehead, backwards
and forwards several times, with his fingers over the hairy part of the front
of his head, he remarked a gentle warmth, like a vapour, between his hand and
the upper part of his cranium ; he felt a heat ascend towards his shoulders and
cheeks, heat in his head, and chilliness in his loins. The same thing having oc-
curred several times arrested his attention; and he repeated the experiment,
always with the same results. If he continued to move for some moments with
his hand suspended, the same phenomena occurred. ‘‘ The eyes become painful,
the tongue no longer articulates, twitchings of the face occur, respiration grows
laborious, and sighing and oppression follow ; the knees tremble and totter; and
some hours of repose are required to restore him perfectly. He has often, by the
continued movement of the hand, produced similar phenomena in persons not
previously aware of them. He has produced even deep and prolonged fainting ;
he has, in regard to this peculiarity, a particular affinity with persons of both
sexes who have fine and rather curly hair. They act upon him in this manner,
and he is able to distinguish, by this singular impression, if it is an individual of
this description or not, who at a distance, in a numerous assembly, moves his
hand over the superior anterior part of his cranium. On the other hand, he can
act upon persons of this constitution only. The rapidity with which he loses his
senses, and especially the disagreeable impression produced by an inexplicable
depression, have prevented him from pushing this and obtaining further results.”

Gall goes still farther: even adopting the hypothesis of a fluid. ‘* We ac-
knowledge a fluid which has an especial affinity with the nervous system, which
can emanate from one individual, pass into another, and accumulate in virtue of
particular affinities, more in certain parts than in others.”” ‘‘ We admit the exist-
ence of a fluid, the subtraction of which lessens, and the accumulation aug-
ments, the power of the nerves; which places one part of the system in repose,
and heightens the activity of another; which therefore may produce an artificial
somnambulism.”’

‘‘ We should in general regard the magnetic fluid as a great exciter of the
nerves, able to produce favourable or injurious effects in diseases, and like other
fluids subject to certain laws, the knowledge of which must be the basis of mani-
pulation. It must, therefore, always be a very important object to the naturalist,
provided he guards against his own illusions and those of others.’’—4to. work,
vol. i., p. 135, &c., &c.

‘* How often,” he says, ‘‘in intoxication, hysterical and hypochondrial at-
tacks, convulsions, fever, insanity, under violent emotions, after long fasting,
through the effects of such poisons as opium, hemlock, belladonna, are we not,
in some measure, transformed into perfectly different beings, for instance, into
poets, actors, &c. Just as in dreaming, the thoughts frequently have more deli-
cacy, and the sensations are more acute and we can hear and answer ; just as in
ordinary somnambulism, we can rise, walk, see with our eyes open, touch with
our hands, &c.: so we allow that similar phenomena may take place in artificial
somnambulism, and even in a higher degree.”’

Dr. Foissac states that, ‘‘Some days before the death of Gall, which took
place August 22, 1828, that great man, who in his lectures and later works had


cc2


352 Petetin’s cases of Clairvoyance


This and numerous other curious cases of natural som-
nambulism, with an account of my early mesmeric patients,
will be found in my Human Physiology, chap. xvii., on Sleep,
and in the Appendix on Mesmerism.

Dr. Petetin, of Lyons, published many highly interest-
ing cases of singular nervous affections, characterized by
catalepsy and other phenomena with which we mesmerists are
now all perfectly familiar, in the midst of our brethren who
are enveloped in a cloud of darkness and disregard his inte-
resting book, entitled, Electricité Animale, prouvée par la dé-
couverte des phénoménes physiques et moraux de la Catalepsie
hystérique et de ses variétés; et par les bons effets de I Elec-
tricité artificelle dans le traitement de ces maladies. Paris et
Lyon, 1808. It is very scarce, but Miss Wallace kindly
presented me with a copy.

He details cases of convulsions, coma, want of feeling
or other external sense, neuralgia, catalepsy, and other symp-
toms of intense and exquisite hysteria, and, with the loss of
one or more of the five senses, the display of the phenomena
termed transposition of the senses, and clairvoyance in a
high degree and the more common variety exemplified in
this article relative to the future changes of the patient’s
own disease. The wonderful phenomena which we observe
as effected by mesmeric processes Dr. Petetin so described
that in reading his work I could fancy myself observing
the two Okeys and other mesmeric patients whom I have
seen during the last fourteen years. There was not only no
mesmerism in his cases, but he was an obstinate unbeliever
in mesmerism. Had he mesmerised his patients, he would
soon have cured them and saved them much length of disease
and much of the suffering occasioned by his remedies, and
saved himself much trouble.

The following is a detailed example of what Petetin ob-
served :—


“The attack of catalepsy began at eight o’clock in the morning


spoken against mesmerism, finding his end approaching, begged me to take a
somnambulist to him for consultation. Paul Villagrand, whom I fixed upon,
without letting him know the name or the disease of the person to whom I took
him, discovered in Dr. Gall an organic disease of the heart and a great tendency
to palsy. He therefore prescribed a blood-letting in the arm, sinapisms, a
tisane of rosemary, and the employment of mesmerism. Two circumstances
prevented this treatment from being adopted: first, Gall had been frequently
bled for some time, and was very weak ; secondly, Gall, whose talent of obser-
vation still retained some of its original activity, had been struck with the large
size of the organ of Cunning in the somnambulist, and therefore concluded that
Paul had managed to learn beforehand what was his disease. One remedy only,
in my opinion, might have prolonged a life so valuable to science: that was
mesmerism : it was not even tried.” —pp. 413—415, of a work quoted at p. 356.


and other wonders independent of Mesmerism. 353


only, and was always preceded by two slight convulsive movements
of the arm; and the patient was unable to complete the sentence
which she had begun, but which those around her took care to re-
member, in order to be certain once more whether she completed it
on returning to her natural state.

“I announced myself as usual by speaking to the ends of her
fingers. ‘You are lazy this morning, doctor,’ she replied. ‘I am,
madam; and if you did but know the reason you would not thus
find fault with me.’ ‘Ah, I see it; you have had the head-ache
ever since four o’clock, and it will not cease till six; and you are
right in doing nothing for it, since all human means are useless, and
it will have its course.’ ‘How long have you been a doctor?’ ‘ Ever
since I had the eyes of Argus.’ ‘Can you tell me which side my pain
attacks?” ‘The right eye, temple, and teeth: I foretell that it
will pass to the left eye, that you will suffer greatly between three
and four o’clock, and that at six you will be free from it.’ ‘If you
wish me to believe you, you must tell me what I have got in my
hand? I immediately applied it to her stomach, and she answered
without any hesitation, ‘I see through your hand an antique medal.’
I opened my hand, absolutely petrified: her sister-in-law looked at
it, and turned pale and faint. On recovering herself, she enclosed
a piece of paper in a brown and semi-transparent sweetmeat-box, and
gave me the box behind her sister-in-law’s chair. I enclosed it in
my hand and presented it to the stomach of the patient in silence.
‘I see a box in your hand, and in this box a letter addressed to
myself.” The legs of her terrified sister-in-law trembled: I opened
the box without delay; and found a letter folded four times, ad-
dressed to the patient and with the Geneva post-mark.

** My astonishment suspended my pain for a few seconds and
prevented me from knowing what I was about. The tremor of the
sister-in-law appeared very natural. If she had been still more
affected I should not have thought of assisting her, for I remained
stupified above a quarter of an hour. On recovering my senses, I
asked the sister-in-law where she had obtained the letter which she
had enclosed in the sweetmeat case. She informed me that she had
found it in a book which she was reading while waiting for my
arrival: that she had taken it out of the patient’s library, and that,
in opening it, the letter had fallen to the ground; and that she had
picked it up and put it in her pocket to give it the patient on waking.
I took the book and examined it, as if I ought to find the impress of
the letter upon it, so incredible did this new prodigy appear to me.
But ought I to have entertained any doubt after my own experience ?
Did any body but myself place in my hand the antique medal which
I had taken with the view of taking advantage of the first op-
portunity which might present itself of placing it upon the stomach
of my patient and seeing whether she would be able to describe it,
as she had done other objects which I had presented to her ?

“I enquired of the patient at what o'clock her fit of catalepsy
would terminate. ‘At eleven.’ ‘At what o’clock do you think the
evening paroxysm will take place?’ ‘At seven.’ ‘Then it will be


354 Petetin’s cases of Clairvoyance


much later than usual?’ ‘It will: but that is a course which will
be established: and after to-day my fits will take place regularly at
eight in the morning and seven in the evening: the morning attack
will last three hours; and the evening attack two hours only.’ ‘I
fancy that something fatigues you: your countenance is changed 2”
‘ My uncle is coming in.’ ‘ You are turning your back to him, and
a screen higher than he is conceals him from you: why does he not
come in? ‘He is chatting with my husband: and I would lay a
wager that my uncle has his blue coat on.’ ‘I will tell you as soon
as I see him. Then you do not like your uncle?’ ‘Indeed I do:
but in my present state he fatigues me, and you will oblige me by
making some excuse to get rid of him.’

‘**] invited the sister-in-law to take the hand to which I was
speaking, and continue the conversation with her. I was anxious
to return home, in order to give a little repose to my head which
stood in need of it, and to gratify my curiosity. On turning the
screen, I saw the uncle in his blue coat, and I asked him to retire
with me into the next room. Instead of taking my own scarlet
cloak, I took the husband’s blue cloak. It was no sooner on my
shoulders than the sister-in-law told me, at the desire of the pa-
tient, that I had made a mistake in the cloak, and taken her hus-
band’s. We were all three petrified: the sister-in-law, who rose
instantly, became an additional figure in the group, and I exclaimed,
‘If this disease increases, she will soon see through walls.’

“IT had just strength enough, on reaching my own house, to
write down my experiments and the conversation which I had carried
on with the patient: to make my camomile tea in the hope of re-
lieving my head: to plunge myself into the arm chair which I
always used when suffering my head-ache, and to cover myself well
up, with my feet at the fire, pale and looking like death. On this
occasion my remedy failed ; and I was obliged to go to bed. Between
two and three o’clock all my pain was fixed in the left eye and
temple: I made violent efforts to vomit up some gulps of gastric
juice, which the Messrs. Purgons among the doctors regard as the
cause of all head-ache. I fell upon my pillow, overcome with pain,
and went to sleep. The prognostic of my patient was verified: at
six o’clock my head was perfectly well, and I seized the opportunity
of paying her a visit.

“* Before leaving my house, I placed, in readiness for what might
happen, a small letter at the top of my bosom: I covered it with
my cloak, and did not get to her before half-past six. The party
was very large: but I knew every person except one. A very small
fire was made in the drawing room, and the patient could not be in-
convenienced by it as it could not be seen by her, and served merely
as a central point to the company. I placed myself opposite the
lady, and begged permission to keep on my cloak. The stranger
resumed the conversation where it had been interrupted: he came
from Paris, and gracefully and very cleverly related a striking court
anecdote which had not before reached the provinces. The husband,
who had promised me that no stranger should be present during his


at


and other wonders independent of Mesmerism. 35


or


wife’s illness, noticed my astonishment, rose, and whispered to me
that the gentleman who conversed so well was an intimate friend,
who had been made acquainted with his wife’s complaint, but who
did not believe a word of it, and had particularly requested to be
present at one of the attacks.

“If I scrutinized the elegant orator attentively, he returned the
compliment: and although we resided in the same city, we were
perfect strangers to each other.

“At the stroke of seven, the patient, all attention, full of her
natural gaiety and excited by the amusing reflections which the nar-
rator made upon the various matters which he detailed, experienced
two convulsions of her arm: and in this short space of time her eyes
closed, her countenance expressed astonishment, her colour went,
and a fit of catalepsy transformed her into a listening statue. The
friend was frightened, broke from the circle, and called loudly to her,
but could discern in neither her features nor her whole person any
sign of her hearing: her countenance remained the same: he looked
uncomfortably first at the patient and then at me: but did not ven-
ture to ask me any questions.

**] advanced my arm chair that I might sit nearer to the patient.
Her head being always turned to the same side, I could see her
profile only. I threw back my cloak that the upper part of my
person might be visible. ‘Ah, how long, doctor,’ said she, ‘ has it
been the fashion to carry letters in the bosom?’ I extended my arm
that I might reach the pit of her stomach with the point of my
finger; and, bringing the fingers of my other hand together, I replied
in my usual tone, ‘Madam, you possibly are mistaken.’ ‘No; I
am certain of what I see; you have a letter not larger than this in
your bosom: measure it.’ While saying this, she changed the po-
sition of her head, directing it towards me: she advanced her arm,
stretched out the left forefinger, and with the right, which she
placed above it, determined with the greatest accuracy the place it
occupied. All eyes were now upon me. I opened my waistcoat :
and the letter came into view. The friend seized it that he might
place it upon the finger which expected it. She had no sooner
touched it than she added, ‘If I were not discreet I would tell you
its contents: but, to prove that I have read it, there are only two
lines and a half in it, and in very small hand.’ After having ob-
tained permission to open it, every person saw that it consisted of
only two lines and a half, and that the letters were small.

‘The friend suddenly passed from the extreme of astonishment
to the extreme of distrust, took a purse from his pocket, laid it
upon my chest, and pushed me towards the patient. ‘ Doctor,’ said
she, ‘don’t trouble yourself: you have at this moment upon your
bosom Mr. B.’s purse: it has so many louis d’or in one half, and so
much silver money in the other: but let no body stir: I will tell
the chief things that each of the party has in his pockets. She
began the inventory of her sister-in-law, who was nearest to her,
and said that the most interesting thing in her pocket was a letter.
This lady was the more surprised, because she had received the letter


356 Petetin’s cases of Clairvoyance


that evening only from the courier, and had mentioned it to nobody.
My patient passed on to the others, and laid bare the contents of all
our pockets with equal accuracy, cracking a joke whenever there was
room for one.”—Electricité Animale, pp. 55—66.


Dr. Petetin noticed facts recently communicated to the
world by Reichenbach. In speaking of one of his patients
he says :—

“I had a magnetized steel bar in my pocket, capable of being
entirely hidden by my hand. I approached the patient (in one of
her cataleptic attacks) and, after having bent one of her hands in
order that she might hear me (this patient seemed to hear only when
words were whispered at the ends of her fingers), I turned the hand
and presented the south pole at the distance of three or four inches
from the pit of her stomach: her countenance changed immediately.
I asked at the ends of her fingers how she felt? ‘ Better in regard
to my stomach ; but I warn you that unless you devise some means
to moderate the next paroxysm, which will begin half an hour
sooner than usual, I shall die.’ ‘In what respect do you feel better
in the stomach?’ ‘In a pleasant sensation produced by a luminous
fluid which escapes from the iron you are holding, and which pene-
trates into my stomach.’ I turned my hand and presented the north
pole. The patient instantly shrieked, and fell into convulsions,
which obliged me to change the pole without delay: and, when they
had ceased, I asked her the cause of them. ‘I entreat you not to
point the end of this iron to my stomach: the flame which proceeds
from it is much too active: but the other is as beneficial as this is
injurious to me.’ I satisfied the impatience of my colleagues and
the bystanders by letting them see the magnet : and they were struck
as much as myself with this new prodigy. I say new, because I
had never before thought of trying the magnet with this patient.

“I begged her to attend to the fingers which I held at a little
distance from her stomach, and say whether she saw light proceed
from them also. She said, ‘ Yes, but with this difference, that the
light was weaker and did not produce the same effect upon her
stomach.’

** Practitioners upon whom we can rely declare that the magnet
is useful in nervous diseases: but what nervous diseases, the degree
of strength which it should possess, and the method of employing
it, are not yet well enough known for us to employ it in difficult and
urgent cases.””"—pp. 245-7.

Of course the phenomena of clairvoyance observed by him
were disbelieved by the medical profession like the mesmeric
phenomena in the present day. M. Foissac in his Rapports
et Discussions de ? Académie Royale de Médecine sur le Mag-
nétisme Animal, Paris, 1833, a work which every one who
studies mesmerism should possess and may find at the book-
sellers, gives an account of Petetin; and I make the follow-
ing extract :—


®


i)


and other wonders independent of Mesmerism. 357


“Petetin was perpetual President of the Medical Society of
Lyons: he published various works on electricity, galvanism, and
extraordinary medical cases: but those which chiefly merit the atten-
tion of the learned are his Mémoires sur la Catalepsie (1787), and
l Electricité Animale (1808), which was not published till after his
death. The facts related by him are so astonishing that they would
not be credited at present, if they were not certified by the testi-
mony of many physicians who witnessed them, and if the practice
of mesmerism in the present day did not add to their reality by pro-
ducing thousands of similar facts. However, modern physiologists,
forgetting the respectable character of the author and the universal
esteem in which he was held during his life, have endeavoured to
make it believed that these works were but dreams: I think, on the


contrary, that they deserve the utmost attention of all enlightened
persons.”


“We must notice that, although Petetin disbelieved in mes-
merism, he states in his Mémoires, first part, p. 56, that the impo-
sition of the hands, the application of the iron conductor upon the
stomach, the use of the baquet and magnetized trees, excited con-
vulsive movements and somnambulism, with all the phenomena
which accompany it.””—pp. 297, 298.


In the Preface to his Electricité Animale, Dr. Petetin
regrets that his first work—his Mémoires—appeared when
every body was thinking of Animal Magnetism and its won-
derful effects: that it was easy to foresee that the facts which
he related would be confounded with those of the crisiaques
(persons thrown into convulsions or crises by animal mag-
netism), and that his work would be considered to resemble
the numerous writings of Mesmer and his disciples, and would
experience the same fate and fall into oblivion: that the event
realized these fears: but that his love for mankind and truth
induced him to make a second effort to excite attention to
the facts which he had published. This second effort was
the preparation of his work on Animal Electricity.

In the next page to that in which he thus writes, he allows
that mesmeric processes can produce all the phenomena of
catalepsy, somnambulism, clairvoyance, &c., which he had
observed without it.—Avertisement, pp. ix. x.


I have called the present case an instance of clairvoyance,
or the power of imagination, because I cannot prove that the
attack did not result from a mental impression—from a fancy
that it would take place. Throughout The Zoist I have stated
my conviction of the power of imagination being marvellous,
far greater than is generally conceded by medical men; and
that, if a mesmerie effect has once been produced—an effect
unquestionably of mesmeric agency—we cannot be sure when


358 E. Okey’s Clairvoyance and remedial instinct.


it recurs, even under mesmeric processes, that it is not the
result of imagination if the patient is aware of mesmeric
means being employed in order to induce it.

Whether imagination could induce a violent inflammation
of the eyes with a severe eruption on the skin on a certain
day fixed upon by the patient long before, I will not say.
But that the idea of a fit of convulsions, pain, &c., occurring
on a certain future day and hour is sufficient to excite it at the
very time foretold, I have no doubt: and many such apparent
predictions are of this nature and no predictions at all, but
results of a strong imagination. Still clairvoyance at large
is an established fact, and there is no reason to suppose that
it should not take place in reference to changes in the health
as well as to other circumstances unconnected with the health :
nay, we can conceive the probability and possibility of clair-
voyance of this kind far better than of other kinds, which
are in our present state of knowledge most mysterious. That
this kind of clairvoyance, which is a feeling of the condition
of the individual’s system, does take place, appears to me
certain. A remarkable instance occurred in Elizabeth Okey.
She once predicted that at a certain hour of a certain day,
distant some weeks from the day of the prediction, she should
be seized with a violent pain in the left side, and that to cure it
she must be bled in the arm to a certain number of ounces
and take a certain number of grains of calomel. I made her
prediction known in the hospital, and left directions that at
the predicted hour, if she were taken ill, the nurses should
give information to the resident medical officer. I was laughed
at by the antimesmeric party among the students, who were
led ‘by Mr. Liston, Dr. Taylor the Apothecary, Dr. A. T.
Thomson, Dr. Davis,—all now dead and gone. On the very
morning, and at the very hour forenamed, she was seized
with a violent pain in the left side. I was soon at the hos-
pital. Her countenance expressed the greatest agony: her
pulse was very rapid; her whole body hot: her tongue white :
and there was a universal sweat. I ordered her to be bled in
the arm till the pain was relieved, and a dose of calomel to
be taken every two or three hours, as she had directed.
The blood proved extremely inflammatory ; was buffed and
cupped. We weighed the blood, and found the quantity
abstracted which had relieved her amounted exactly to the
quantity which she had so long before directed to be ab-
stracted. The next day her gums were affected by the ca-
lomel, and I gave no more; but found that the quantity
taken up to this moment amounted exactly to the quantity
which she had directed to be given to her. Imagination,


Stupid obstinacy of soap-boilers. 359


surely, could not have effected all this. I vouch for the truth
of all these particulars. The facts of the case related in the
preceding article by Dr. Motherwell were evidently not the
result of imagination. I therefore see no reason to deny
that the attack which took place in M. A. Noyes was clair-
voyantly predicted : yet, if, having had similar attacks, she fan-
cied in her mesmeric state that she should have another on a
certain day, this might result from the fancy, though originally
the attack had nothing to do with fancy. She also foretold
that through the use of mesmerism it would be cut short and
be cured far sooner than the former attacks: and it was so.*


III. Cures of Sciatica, Neuralgia of the Sacrum, and Insanity,
by Mr. J. Phelps, late mesmeriser at the Bristol Mesmeric
Institute. Communicated by Mr. A. J. Ellis, of Bristol,
through Dr. Elliotson.


‘‘The development of the manufacture of soda has proved a most powerful
stimulus to that of soap, which when freed from its dependence on the uncertain
and limited supply of barilla and kelp, made such strides as could not have been
anticipated. Mr. James Muspratt, who was the first in England to carry out
successfully, and on a large scale, Leblanc’s method of preparing soda from
chloride of sodium (sea-salt), informs us that he was compelled to yive away
soda by tons to the soap-boilers before he succeeded in convincing them of the
extraordinary advantages to be derived from the adoption of this material. As
soon, however, as he had effected this, and when the soap-boilers discovered how
much time and money they saved by using artificial soda, orders came in so
rapidly that Mr. Muspratt, to satisfy the demand, had his soda discharged red-
hot into iron carts and thus conveyed to the soap-manufactories. From that
period a constant race was kept up between soap-making and the artificial pro-
duction of soda; every improvement in Leblanc’s process was followed by an
extension of the soap trade, and it is a curious fact that the single sea-port of
Liverpool exports annually more soap at present than did all those of Great
Britain previous to the conversion of chloride of sodium into carbonate of soda.
The manufacture of soap has, on the other hand, been a powerful stimulus to the
preparation of soda and of the important secondary product, hypochlorite of
lime (bleaching powder), which are so intimately allied with almost all branches
of chemical trades; thus soap occupies one of the most important pages in the
history of applied chemistry. The increase in the consumption of this article
has led, moreover, to the discovery of new materials for its production. It has
opened new channels to commerce, and thus it has become the means as well as
the mark of civilization.”’"—Jury Report of the Great Exhibition—art. Soap.


7, Apsley Place, Redland, Bristol,
August 11, 1852.
Dear Dr. Elliotson,—When Mr. Phelps was attending


* The Okeys, especially the elder, made many predictions of remarkable
changes and phenomena in their cases: and these were marvellously verified.

Among my cases recorded in The Zoist, I may refer my readers to No.
IV., p. 429, in which Miss Emma Melhuish accurately predicted the exact number
and hours of her fits, and the hour at which she should recover from her long-
continued and violent delirium: to No. III., p. 314, in which Master Salmon
accurately predicted the number of fits which he would have before his cure: to
No. IV., p. 457, in which Miss Spong did the same.


ew


360 Mr. Phelps’s Cures.


me last winter, he mentioned these and some other cases.
I requested him to give me some notes of them in order that
I might send them to you for communication in The Zoist.
I have accordingly drawn up the enclosed principally in his
own words, and hope they may arrive in time for the October
number.

Mr. Phelps is a tailor, and has long since been a “ tem-
perance advocate.” He has mesmerised in many parts of the
country while on his professional tours for the advocacy of
temperance, and was employed at the Mesmeric Institute
here while it was in action. He is a kindly, benevolent man,
and puts his heart in his work when mesmerising. I em-
ployed him during the winter to mesmerise a poor woman in
our neighbourhood who had (apparently) a cancer in the
womb, and she was much relieved at first, pain ceasing or
being alleviated whenever she was mesmerised: and at one
time I had really hopes of a cure, the discharge having ceased,
and the poor woman being able to walk, Latterly, however,
the pains and discharge returned, and, mesmerism failing to
relieve as rapidly as before, she lost heart, and is now in the
Bristol Infirmary, where I understand an operation has been
meditated, so that I presume there is no cancer. She is
however now much too weak to undergo any operation, and
has been weaker since she left off mesmerism.

Mr. Phelps’s daughter, a dress-maker, is at present mes-
merising Mrs. Ellis with perceptibly good effect.

There is a lady in this neighbourhood who is affected with
« singular nervous disease and has been so for years. She
has tried mesmerism from many persons, but it has generally
produced aversion to the mesmeriser, and recurrence to her
nervous fits. On one occasion when she was rigid and with .
her eyes closed, her physician, who entered the room with-
out her knowledge, attempted to make a few passes across
her feet, which were rigidly connivent, when she arose me-
chanically, and attempted to box his ears. I mesmerised
her myself, thinking that as I certainly had but small mes-
meric power I might suit her better. The first time I tried,
I laid my hand flat on her epigastrium for one minute, and
within five minutes she had a nervous fit, striking herself on
the spot mechanically and speaking an unknown tongue, as
usual with her, although she is perfectly sensible the whole
time and is aware that she utters only unintelligible sounds.
The next day but one I tried again, taking care to touch only
with the palm of the hand, the fingers pointing off. But in
thirteen seconds a fit was induced; she jabbered and struck
herself over the spot incessantly, and, when I attempted to


Cure of Sciatica. 361


demesmerise by blowing, it only seemed to make matters
worse. Since then I have not attempted to operate on her.
At one time she experienced relief from the action of a fine
quartz crystal, but she could not bear more than three slow
passes at atime. The crystal, however, began to irritate her
before she left off using it. Latterly relief has been given
her during her fits of rigidity, which come on instantaneously
in any position but leave no muscular fatigue, by waving a
handkerchief with some chloroform on it before her. She
feels then able to “ unfold herself,” to use her own expression,
and two or three inhalations destroy the rigidity entirely.
With best wishes.
Very truly yours,

J. Elliotson, Esq., M.D. Avex. J. Ex.is.


I. Case of Lameness.

Mrs. Jane Horgan, 52 years old, of 33, Philadelphia
Street, Bristol, had been ill for eighteen months before being
mesmerised, and during that time she was confined to the
house. In June, 1850, she was under the care of Dr.
Norton, of Bristol, for six weeks, who told her that he had
vainly tried all in his power to do her good. She then went
to Bath Hospital for nine weeks, where she was informed
that her complaint was sciatica and “ spasms of the nerves,”
and was bled, blistered, leeched, and cupped without any
relief whatever : after which treatment she returned to Bristol
a perfect cripple. She was unable to get out of bed without
assistance, and had to be helped down stairs by her daughter,
who lifted one leg at atime. She could get about a room on
crutches.

In January, 1852, Mr. Phelps was taken to see her by an
opponent to mesmerism, who merely wished to try his powers
without any intention of doing her good. She agreed to
submit to the operation, and was soon asleep. She states
that she felt great action in her limbs, especially on the left
side, which was the part in which she suffered most. Tii/
this time she had hardly slept at night. But sleep soon re-
turned while she was under mesmeric treatment, which was
now regularly continued as its effect had been proved bene-
ficial. Mr. Phelps’s engagements, however, only allowed
him to mesmerise her once a week, so that although the
treatment lasted nearly seven months, the actual amount of
attendance was not more than is usually received in four
weeks.

Mrs. Horgan felt her leg and side improve after every
mesmeric sleep ; and, after five months’ treatment, she walked


362 Cure of Neuralgia.


for the first time for two years a quarter of a mile to Mr.
Phelps’s house with one crutch; repeating her journey with-
out any crutch at all. She is now able to walk about the city
without any aid, and believes that but for mesmerism she
would have lived a suffering life and died a cripple.

The original statement from which this is drawn up is
signed by her husband, Mr. William Horgan, with an ex-
pression of thanks to Mr. Phelps for the cure of his wife.

The reader will not fail to remark in the history of this
case the curative action of small doses of mesmerism dis-
tributed over a length of time, with long but regular in-
tervals.

II. Violent pains in the sacral region.

Mrs. Ricketts, of 6, Narrow Plane, St. Philip’s, Bristol,
49 years old, the mother of seventeen children, and fresh-
looking, was seized suddenly while dressing on 9th June,
1851, with violent pains in the left leg near the sacrum, as
far as Mr. Phelps could collect, but there may be some error
as to the precise seat of pain. The pain was so intense that
she groaned aloud and fell on her bed in a violent perspira-
tion. Her brother-in-law, who was in the adjoining room,
concluded from what he heard that she was suddenly death-
struck. The pains continued without intermission, and ren-
dered the poor woman nearly frantic. She pulled her hair
out by the roots, and bit at those who attended her. She
states that she never had an hour’s sleep for seven weeks. Her
leg was constantly bathed in very hot water and rubbed day
and night. Mustard plasters, leeches, and blisters were tried
without any relief.

Mr. Phelps heard of her sufferings through a casual en-
quiry after her health on meeting her husband, and then
proposed mesmerism. She was soon thrown into the coma,
and was perfectly unconscious, but was greatly agitated in
her left leg, bowels, and face. Indeed her abdomen swelled
so enormously that the mesmeriser was frightened. Blowing
upon it, however, reduced the swelling, so that when she
awoke at the expiration of an hour there was no ground for
alarm. That night she slept two hours, and had less pain.
She was mesmerised twice a week for five weeks, and slept
better and had less pain after each mesmerisation. A? the
end of three weeks she discarded her crutches, and slept all
night. Her catamenia, which had been suspended during
her illness, returned during the mesmerism. She is now
quite well and active.

The original statement, from which the above was drawn
up, is signed by her husband, Mr. Thomas Ricketts.


és


Se as


Cure of Insanity. 363


III. Insanity.
Eliza Cumberpatch, of Welsh Back, Bristol, about 20
years of age, was very violent, tore her dress, broke looking-


. glasses and furniture, talked strangely, repeating old plays,


speaking of vessels coming in, and conversing with imaginary
enemies. Her insanity had been coming on many months,
but the violence had only lasted a few weeks, when she was
first mesmerised in the autumn of 1851. Dr. Rogers, who
has a lunatic asylum, had been consulted and she was to
have been sent to him.

She was staying at a friend’s house, and, in order to
mesmerise her, Mr. Phelps was introduced on pretext of mes-
merising the friend, over whom he made a few passes, and
then asked her to try them. She was so susceptible that she
passed off into the sleep in three minutes; and she was per-
suaded afterwards to have the mesmerism repeated for “ weak-
ness,” having no idea of the true reason till her recovery,
which ensued in three weeks, the treatment being continued
for from three quarters of an hour to an hour and a half
every other day.

She was violent and exceedingly excitable even during the
sleep, although occasionally quiet or only restless. Energetic
passes subdued her. She would occasionally see vessels in
her sleep. At other times exclaim violently in such language
as, “I shall see you down beneath my feet. Scorpions !
shew me where they are!” It soothed her to excite Bene-
volence and Constructiveness, the latter giving her a desire
to work and thus overcome the idleness to which she had
been yielding, although naturally an active or industrious
girl. An effort was made to subdue the overaction of Com-
bativeness, and after the first fortnight the excitement of
Firmness and Conscientiousness was found of service.

She was very susceptible of the mesmeric influence, some-
times falling asleep as soon as Mr. Phelps took her hand;
and he was able to command her immediately by a pass.
Mrs. Spiller, the person with whom she was staying, was a
kind, firm woman, and materially assisted the mesmeriser by
her judicious behaviour towards the patient. After her re-
covery she said that she “felt better and firmer in herself.”
Her catamenia, which had recurred fortnightly before and
during her attack, now became monthly and have continued
regular. Mr. Phelps has found that the regularity of the
catamenia is generally secured by mesmerism. One girl,
whose catamenia had ceased for five years, became regular
after three weeks mesmerising.


364 Mr. Wakley’s effrontery.


The following is a letter from the brother of the patient
to Mr. Phelps :—

** Welsh Back, Bristol, May 6, 1852.
“* Dear Sir,—Nearly eight months have elapsed since your last
visit to my sister, she having no more need to be mesmerised ; for
she is perfectly recovered from that dire malady which she had been
so long subjected to. Had it not been for your kind care and prompt
attention to her case in your exercise over her of the mesmeric
power, she would, I most firmly believe, be as insane and as bereft
of reason now as she was the first time you saw her. Only three
weeks were required to bring about this happy change from darkness
to light, the blackest darkness that can ever befall a human being on
earth. Had we hearkened to the entreaties of friends, though much
against our own wishes, we should have been compelled to consign
her to an asylum for our own safety. I doubt whether she would
have recovered by this time. No, I believe she never would. For
you know, Sir, she is very susceptible of feeling ; on coming to her-
self and finding out where she was, the thought of it would have
broken her heart. I should have lost an only sister, and never seen
her smile, when in health, any more. To you, Sir, we owe a debt
of gratitude which we never can repay. I would that the knowledge
which you have of mesmerism were more fully spread. Oh! I wish
that I knew of a channel through which I could convey the glad
news, the great benefits which are to be derived from this evil-
spoken-against science, especially to those persons who have friends
similarly situated to my sister. I would make you known; I would
beg them to try it for themselves, and derive the advantages that might
accrue. I would tell them of my sister’s case,—a fact, a stubborn fact
to all opponents, but a glorious fact to the truth of the science, that
there is in it a mighty curative agent, that no one can gainsay or resist.
** Accept of my kind wishes, and best thanks from my dear
mother, sister, and friends. That you may still be made a further
blessing in the use of your happy art to many more of our suffering

fellow-creatures is the sincere wish of us all.

**T am, Sir, yours very respectfully,

‘James CUMBERPATCH.”’


IV. Striking Cure of a singular Nervous Affection.
By Dr. Ex.iorson.
‘A Lover of Truth.—The absurdities and indecencies of what is called
mesmerism have been so completely exposed in the columns of this journal that
it is unnecessary to renew the subject. We thank our correspondent, however,


for his communication.”-—Mr. Waxuey, Lancet, November 6, 1852; p. 434.
Answers to Correspondents.*


On the 8th of February, 1851, I visited Miss Elizabeth Ross
at the house of her father, the eminent optician, No. 2,


_* Where these indecencies are exposed I know not. Will Mr. Wakley
point them out ? This assertion is mere effrontery under a consciousness that it


Cure of a singular movement. 365


Featherstone Buildings, Holborn. I found her sitting up in
bed; her body, head, and arms moving involuntarily and
irresistibly backwards and forwards incessantly, as often as
fifty times in a minute. The motion was really of the body,
which carried the head and arms with it. The breathing was
sometimes rapid, sometimes natural: and she fetched a deep
sigh about every minute; but sometimes the sigh occurred
sooner, and then the interval before the next was longer.
If she lay down, the same movement went on: but I was told
that it always ceased during sleep. Her pulse was quick and
weak. She looked very ill and very distressed.

All this, I heard, had been going on above a year and a
half, with intermissions. She did not seem to be of a vigor-
ous or even healthy constitution.

The family informed me that she had been “a feeble
child,” but had gained strength as she advanced to fourteen
or fifteen years of age, and from this period to eighteen or
nineteen was generally employed in active exercise. At the
latter period, however, without any apparent reason, she be-
came low spirited ; lost her appetite, and lost her strength,
especially in the back, and frequently felt exhausted almost
to fainting. She was troubled with giddiness and sharp pain
in the front of the chest ; and any exertion produced pain in
the right side. After a twelvemonth she had cold creeping
sensations, alternating with hot flushes.

At length, in August, 1849, the extraordinary movement
made its appearance. It began in the lower part of the chest,
then extended to the higher, carrying with it the shoulders
and arms, and ultimately carried the head also. It was
rather greater when she was sitting than when she was lying.
She became exceedingly sensitive and excitable: but the
uterine and alvine functions were undisturbed. But she was


is wise for Mr. Wakley to be silent henceforth upon mesmerism: since, after
having killed it, extinguished it for ever, and proved us all to be fools and worse,
and all our patients barefaced impostors, he, biting his nails and his lips, be-
holds mesmerism flourishing everywhere—all our accounts of mesmeric phenomena
confirmed, and wonderful and blessed cures and alleviations of pain effected
hourly by it in all quarters.

The Lancet declared that my mesmeric cure of a genuine cancer was one of the
grossest puffs, and boasted that hundreds and thousands of cases of cancer had
been cured by pressure. Where are they? Where is pressure used successfully
against cancer ? in what hospital, metropolitan or provincial? This false asser-
tion also was sheer effrontery: and what has resulted from it but disgrace? (No.
XXVIII., p. 377.)—It falsely accused me of being a homeceopathist: and it
never retracted the falsehood, though fully exposed (No. XXXV., p. 265).—It
falsely asserted that I was expelled from University College. 1 told the Editor
that he knew this was a falsehood. But he has never retracted (No. XXXV.,
p- 302). All this shows great short-sightedness. For the hour is sure to come
when truth and integrity are required of every man.

VOL. X.


DD


366 Cure of a singular movement.


subject to attacks of vomiting that lasted several days. These
movements had continued nearly twenty months, with four
intermissions of a few weeks.

The first attack of the movement lasted in round numbers
six weeks, and was followed by an intermission of two.

The second lasted sixteen weeks, and was followed by an
intermission of six.

The third lasted ten days, and was followed by an inter-
mission of four weeks.

The fourth lasted fourteen weeks, and was followed by an
intermission of four weeks.

The fifth had lasted thirty weeks, when I first visited her.

But her health was constantly bad. Her sleep was not
sound, and was often disturbed with dreaming. In the inter-
missions she was very much troubled with a cough, which,
however, continued in some degree at all times. After some
violent hysterical attacks she once lost her voice for four
months to within a fortnight of my first visit. The more
rapid the movements the more frequent and sudden was ob-
served the sighing to be; and sometimes it amounted toa
sudden catch of the breath.

The family medical attendant, Mr. Robins, of Bedford
Street, Covent Garden, administered for twenty months all
the medicines which he could think of as likely to be bene-
ficial, watching their effects most assiduously: but without
the least abatement of the symptoms.

About this time, Mr. Collins, the miniature painter of
Somerset Street, who knew mesmerism to be a great truth,
and had made a beautiful drawing of Miss Emma Melhuish
in her extatic delirium of holy rapture* that was exhibited at
the Royal Academy, hearing of the case from Mr. Ross, advised
him to make a trial of mesmerism. The father had no faith
in the reality of mesmeric effects, but promised to speak to
her medical attendant upon the subject. Mr. Robins, highly
to his honour, at once acceded to the proposal that I should
be consulted upon the subject, and that mesmerism should
be employed if I considered it advisable.

I accordingly met Mr. Robins, and advised a steady and
continued employment of mesmerism as the only thing at all
likely to effect a cure, though I had no objection to any me-
dicine that she was taking being continued: and it was con-
tinued a little while, though it had done no good. In order
to instruct them I mesmerised her myself for half an hour at
this visit, but produced not even sleepiness: yet she grew


* See No. IV.


Mesmerism commenced. 367
comfortably warm during the process. The next morning de-
cided improvement appeared: for the movements no longer
carried the head with them, but only thrust the shoulders,
arms, and chest forwards.

Had I not been asked my opinion upon the propriety of
mesmerism, I should not have spoken of it. For it is my
rule never to mention mesmerism either in consultation with
others or when I see a patient alone. This injurious rule has
been forced upon me by finding some patients or their friends
fancying, and, to the disgrace of the profession, some me-
dical men pretending, that mesmerism is a black, occult,
satanical art—as though a human being could do anything
preternatural, and as though the manipulations of mesmerism
were less a natural process than the turning of an electrical
apparatus, or friction: and other patients and their friends,
and, to the disgrace of the profession in regard to common
sense, common information, or common honesty, other me-
dical men, opposed to mesmerism as an imposture, an un-
reality, and an absurdity.

Mr. Robins, still more to his credit, consented to mes-
merise her, and operated daily for a week. A sister took her
in hand for a week. From that time her mother mesmerised
her daily for two months.

The improvement which had begun after my single mes-
merisation steadily advanced under the hands of Mr. Robins
and Miss Ross, so that the movements ceased entirely in about
a fortnight from the commencement of mesmeric treatment, and
have never returned.

The movement had shewn itself first in the lower part of
the chest and extended till it included the shoulders and
then the head: and its declension followed the inverse
course, first ceasing to implicate the head, and lessening
downwards.

No sleep was induced for the first week, notwithstanding
the complaint had decidedly lessened very much. But at the
end of a week she began to sleep, and presently slept for
half an hour. At the end of a fortnight more, and ever
afterwards, she always went to sleep in five or ten minutes,
and remained asleep for two or three hours.

After the second mesmerisation the movements were sus-
pended for two days, and the arms trembled incessantly.

She described the state as different from common sleep,
inasmuch as she was cognizant of all that passed. She al-
ways woke up spontaneously and refreshed, and slept better
at night than formerly.

However cold she might be when mesmerisation was begun,
Dpd2


368 The cure effected.


she invariably grew warm under it. This effect always shews
a powerfully beneficial influence to be exerted: and care
should always be taken that the room and the operator and
his hands, and, if possible, the patient also, be thoroughly
warm before the process is commenced.

Whenever the process was commenced, even though she
were pretty still, she began starting, and continued to start
till the movements declined under the passes.

Her general health underwent an immediate and pro-
gressive improvement. Her appetite returned; she slept
soundly and ceased to dream; she lost her depression of
spirits; she no longer had attacks of vomiting; she regained
her strength; and has continued up to the present moment
in good health.

I was indifferent to the medicines which Mr. Robins was
giving. All medicines had failed up to that very moment :
and all medicines I knew must fail.

This case is another of the innumerable answers to the
silly twaddle of too many medical men—successful, either sly
and quiet or bustling and talking, money-makers, plausible
scribblers, dogmatizing lecturers—that mesmeric cures are re-
ferable to faith and imagination only. Not only had the father
no faith in the effects of mesmerism, but the patient was
absolutely prejudiced against it, and felt surprised at finding
herself improve. The improvement proved such that she
soon spontaneously acknowledged its power and its benefit,
and was anxious for its administration.

It was very properly continued for six months, and thus
the cure rendered permanent.

I am never in a hurry to publish my cures, and a year
and three quarters have now elapsed since Miss Ross reco-
vered. The particulars were drawn up for me by an elder
sister twelve months since, and sent by Mr. Ross with the fol-
lowing note :—


«2, Featherstone Buildings, Holborn,
** December 6, 1851.

“ Respected Sir,—I herewith send you the promised description
of my daughter’s case, and beg to return my most sincere thanks
for the advice you have given, which I feel assured has led to the
eure of a most distressing complaint.

**T remain, Sir,
** Your much obliged and obedient servant,
** Dr. Elliotson.” * ANDREW Ross.


( 369 )


V. Two Cases of wonderful relief from Pain. By the Rev.
Tuomas 8. Miiirneton, of Northampton. Communi-
cated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘* He warned his hearers against the homoeopathic and mesmeric frauds : and
observed that a medical man might, if properly disposed, benefit his patients re/i-
giously and morally.’’—Lancet, Oct. 9. Introductory Lecture, by Dr. Aldis, at
the Hunterian School of Medicine, Oct., 1852.*


Northampton, Nov. 25, 1852.

Dear Dr. Elliotson,-The power of mesmerism in the
cure of nervous disorders is so well known that I should
hardly have ventured to trouble you with the following cases
but for the peculiar circumstances connected with them, and
for the suddenness of the relief afforded by mesmerism after
every other remedy that could be thought of had been tried
in vain.

A shoemaker, a tall robust man living in the town, had
for the last sixteen years been subject to violent neuralgic
pains in his forehead. The paroxysms occurred twice every
week, generally on Fridays and Sundays, and lasted from
about five o’clock in the morning (the time of his awaking)
until night. His sufferings were so severe as to be quite
notorious in the neighbourhood, and occasioned the greatest
distress to his family and to all who witnessed them.

When I first saw him, some time in last May, his eyes
were closed so that he could with difficulty raise the lids or
bear the light even for a moment: he could scarcely walk or
stand, and described the pain as of a knife worming its way
from one temple to the other. I immediately began to make
contact passes from the centre of the forehead to the fingers’
ends. Jn about a minute he opened his eyes and declared
himself much better: within five minutes the pain was gone
from the forehead and had lodged, though with much less
severity, in the back of his head ; I removed it thence with
two or three passes to the shoulder, and then with a single
movement of the hand he was relieved from it altogether.

This was on Friday, and the following Sunday (the day


* In the Notices to Correspondents, Oct 2, 1852, p. 318, the Lancet says ;
‘« J. R. We cannot recommend our correspondent to enter as a student at the
Hunterian School of Medicine :” and on Oct. 9, p. 339, admits a letter from
‘*a Medical Pupil,’’ who is glad that the Lancet has given such advice, because
having entered as a pupil he found a lecturer and dingy benches but no students
in a room, and then, after entering a cellar and ascending a ladder, found a class
of studeuts, one of whom was asleep; and on a second visit found neither lec-
turer nor audience, and was told by the porter that the lecturer had been, but
had left, as he found nobody to lecture to.

This was very unkind of the Lancet after what poor Dr. Aldis had written
against mesmerism.


370 Pain extraordinarily relieved.


on which his paroxysm usually returned) was one of the hap-
piest and most comfortable he had ever spent. The next
Friday he was again attacked, and when I entered his room
(being sent for) a crowd of persons had assembled to witness
the cure. He was relieved as speedily as before, and his
attacks have become less and less frequent ever since. He
now comes to me as soon as they occur and is relieved almost
instantaneously, and the last interval between the paroxysms
was of rather more than four weeks’ duration. Thus instead
of nearly one-third of his waking time being passed in a
state of extreme torture, (the debilitating effects of which
were so great as almost to incapacitate him from work during
the intervals,) he now suffers only for a few minutes once in
a month. He would probably have been wholly cured long
ago, but for my occasional absence from Northampton, and
for the grief and trouble he has experienced on the loss of
two children within a very short period. He has never been
mesmerised except at the times and in the manner I have
described, and being entirely sceptical as to the power of
mesmerism was only induced to try it by the persuasion of
his wife : his astonishment at the result could only be equalled
by his delight and gratitude.


A similar case to the above, though not terminating so
favourably as yet, is that of an elderly female, who has been
suffering for twenty-five years from pain in the head and eyes,
accompanied sometimes by sickness. This person had for-
merly lived for eight years in the family of a physician in this
town, who has distinguished himself by his opposition to
mesmerism, and had since been for fifteen weeks in the
Northamptonshire General Infirmary. She had been blis-
tered and bled and treated in every way that medical skill
could suggest for the cure of her malady, and was rather
worse than better. The paroxysms frequently occurred twice
in a week, and seldom less than three times in a fortnight ;
and the effects produced upon her system were such that she
was, of late, never absolutely well or free from pain.

When I called to see her she was almost blind, and could
scarcely stand or move. Contact passes, as in the former
case, removed the pain immediately, and in a very few mi-
nutes she declared herself “ better than she had been at the
best of times for many months past.” For three weeks sub-
sequently she was not only free from any recurrence of the
pain, but enjoyed such health and spirits and kept so un-
usually well at night, that the change 1 in her appearance was
observable by all who knew her.


Miss Martineau and the Quarterly Review. 371


She has since had a return of her pains; but I am satis-
fied that the beneficial effect so quickly produced might be
rendered quite permanent in this, as well as in the former
case, if the patient could be regularly and properly mes-
merised for a sufficient period.

Is it not a very sad and painful reflection that where so
much relief may be afforded by an agency which most per-
sons are capable of exercising, it should be so difficult to
procure its application? There has been so much opposition
to mesmerism in this town, that few are willing to practise
it: it has been ridiculed as a nonentity, an “ airy nothing,”
and at the same time condemned as dangerous and hurtful !
Its beneficial effects are, however, known to many who are
equally sensible that it can do no harm except where repeatedly
and grossly abused. I am constantly applied to by sufferers
from among all classes of the people, and have frequently
afforded relief, or effected perfect cures, in cases of deafness,
head-ache, rheumatism, &c., &c.; but my health will not
allow me to practise mesmerism, and it 1s with much pain
and reluctance that I am often compelled to refuse assistance
where I feel convinced it might be effectually rendered by
any competent person at the cost of a little time and trouble.

Would that we had one medical man among us who would
candidly investigate the truths of mesmerism, and boldly
follow the example of those by whose noble and resolute
efforts in other parts of England this beautiful and valuable
science is being constantly applied to the benefit of our suf-
fering fellow-creatures !

I am, dear Dr. Elliotson,
Yours very truly and obliged,
Tuos. S. MiLuineton,
Late Curate of St. Sepulchre’s, Northampton.


VI. Cure of Lock-jaw in twenty minutes, of Ophthalmia, and
Epilepsy. By Mr. Hueuess, of Bolton.

*¢ She has done her best to forward the desired end; but neither her own cure,

nor even that of her favourite cow—given up by the veterinary faculty—has been

able to Convince the ‘ ignorant of the educated classes’ that mesmerism in any of


its shapes is more or less than a gross imposture.’’—Quarterly Review, June,
1852; p. 168. Review of Miss Martineau’s History.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Lock-jaw.
Sir,—I take this opportunity of forwarding you the case
of cure of lock-jaw, which is confirmed by Capt. Hudson, of


372 Cures of Lock-jaw and Ophihaimia.


Liverpool, who has had a personal interview with the man,
then employed by my brother Robert. Some twelve months
ago his arm was caught in a paper machine, and both burnt
and bruised. Having three miles to walk to his doctor to
have it dressed, he one day caught cold by getting wet, which
brought on a severe illness. He was attended by two me-
dical men. Lock-jaw was expected to come on, and did so in
a few days: he then gave up all hopes of his recovery. Having
heard of his case, I went to see him: found his jaws firmly
fixed, and, as he told me afterwards, the whole of his body
was as it were contracted. I told him my errand, and pro-
mised him relief by mesmerism in a few minutes. He at
once consented, and I commenced mesmerising him in the
usual way. Heé soon experienced relief, and opened his jaws
to the great astonishment of himself and wife. Likewise the
contraction and hardness of the bowels, &c., gave way, and
he sat up in perfect composure without pain, and conversed
as though nothing had been the matter. His health improved
rapidly, and he was soon convalescent and at his work again.
I may say that his medical attendant told him that he never
knew but one case of a similar nature recovered from better,
and that one was not so bad.

The man wishes not to have his name published: but will
give you his address, , Lomax Bank, Little Lever.

Contrast the above with the following experiments that
have been tried in the Tonga Islands for the cure of lock-
jaw, viz., that of inflicting on the wretched patient a pain
which shall be more excruciating than the one which he then
endures, thus restoring the equilibrium. It is said to have
been successful, but the operators complain that they can get
few to submit to it.


Inflammation of the Eye.

Mrs. Edwards, wife of a travelling preacher, then resid-
ing in Derbyshire, about two years ago caught an inflamma-
tion of the eye. After her medical attendant had exerted all
his powers in vain for four weeks, he told her he had done all
he could for her. She then determined on coming to Bolton
and placing herself under the care of an experienced medical
man of the Eye Institute. She had been here five days, but
no improvement had taken place; when I first heard of her
situation. I immediately went to see her. She was in a dis-
tracted condition: had almost lost her reason through ex-
cessive pain. Her eye to all appearance was a lump of liver.
She had had about two dozen leeches on around the eye and
about a dozen blisters, without any- improvement. More


Cure of Fits of Insensibility. 373


being ordered by her medical man, I advised her to leave
them alone, and said I would remove the inflammation by
mesmerism, which I commenced in the usual way. Ina few
minutes she said her pain was gone, and continued easy for
two hours, during which time she ‘slept. She had been a
perfect stranger to sleep since the commencement. Before
she reached Bolton a quantity of deposit had collected upon
the pupil of the eye, producing blindness of that eye. Her
medical attendants told her she would be blind of it as long as
she lived, and likewise gave her no hopes of the other; for
they expected she would lose the sight altogether before the
inflammation could be stayed. Under the influence of mes-
merism she gradually improved, and the inflammation was
gone in three or four days. Mesmerism was continued for
some time to remove the matter from the pupil of the eye.
This was accomplished. Having got her sight she rejoices,
and is a true convert to mesmerism.

Before discharging her doctor, she considered it her duty
to make known the secret to him. He had not been aware
before that she was mesmerised, but had wondered at the
delightful change. He attributed it to her imagination! if
he were right, that would be more wonderful still.

Dr. Chadwick of this town attended both cases.


A boy about eleven years of age, of this town, was af-
flicted with fits of insensibility for eight years, and had been
discharged from the infirmary as incurable. Having acci-
dentally met with him, I offered my services to cure him by
mesmerism. After it had been continued for a fortnight
without any change, he commenced rapidly to improve, and
was almost well at the month’s end. He now promises to be
a useful son to his mother, whereas before he was one per-
son’s care.

Having now given you three cases I leave them to your
own disposal, aud could cite many more, but I fear I am
now trespassing too much upon your valuable time.

I remain, yours truly,


JoserH HuGues.
Bolton, Oct. 11, 1852.


(


VII. Rapid Cure of Inflammation and its effects. By H. T.
Humprureys, one of the Society of Friends.


374 )


“In alluding to medical heresies, such as homceopathy, hydropathy, and
mesmerism, it was remarked by the lecturer that the best antidote to all such
delusions was a close attendance in the wards of an hospital.’’—Medical Times,
Oct. 17, 1852. Opening Lecture of the Medical Session at Guy’s Hospital by
Dr. Alfred S. Taylor, Oct. 1852.*


Kilmacow, Waterford, 25th 11 mo., 1852.

Respected Friend Dr. Elliotson,—I take the liberty of
sending thee a short account of a cure I effected lately, not
that it is anything very wonderful in itself, but that the great
body of facts is composed of contributions from different in-
dividuals.

On the 6th inst., E. M., a man, upon whom I had fre-
quently acted in the suggestive state and two or three times
thrown into mesmeric sleep, came to me about 7} p.m. that
I might mesmerise him for the purpose of my trying some
experiments. He told me before he sat down that he had a
small swelling under the left arm-pit, which was very sore,
and wished me to cure it if possible; consequently when I
had induced sleep I directed his attention to it. He said he
thought it arose from, or was connected with, a sore in the
hand between the forefinger and thumb, and that a few
passes would remove it. I made a few passes: after which
he said, “O thank you, Sir; it’s melted away now.” I took
no farther trouble at that time; but on the morning of the
8th he again came to me, and complained of both hands,
which were much swollen and inflamed and covered with pus-
tules. I induced sleep again, and asked him about them.
He directed me to make passes along the arms. I made
passes slowly along the arms from the shoulders and off from
the finger-ends, and to my surprise and delight in less than
ten minutes the swelling and inflammation were gone, but the
pustules remained. Expecting these would heal in a few days,
I dismissed him; but on the 13th he spoke to me in the
evening and complained of their being very sore, though the
swelling had not returned at all. I again put him into mes-
meric sleep and asked him what was best for them. He said,


* To shew how a close or a loose attendance upon the wards of an hospital
would prove an antidote to a conviction of the truth of mesmerism, would puzzle
a greater conjuror than Dr. Alfred Taylor, as mesmerism is never employed in
them. An attendance upon the wards of any hospital would make a man of
feeling sigh for some such mighty curative and assuaging power as mesmerism, on
witnessing the fearful number of deaths and of patients discharged from it un-
cured and unrelieved. This is the same sagacious gentleman who informed the
readers of his Medical Gazette that nobody reads The Zoist but the impostors
who publish their cases in it. See No. XXVII., p. 309.


Original contempt of Lithotrity by surgeons 375


“ Mesmerised water.’”’ I then woke him, and mesmerised
about a pint of water, which I gave him. On going out into
the dark he declared that the water emitted a blue light. I
did not see him again till the evening of the 15th, when he
shewed me his hands, from which the pustules and sores had
departed, leaving their traces in the shape of new skin on
the spots where they had been. He averred that this had
been the case since the morning of the 14th; but, admitting
that it was not so, and that the cure was not perfect before
the moment of my seeing the results, it was still wonderfully
rapid.

A friend of mine has urged me to send thee this case for
The Zoist, and I do so at his request, though I do not think
it is worthy of insertion in that valuable journal. Thou art,
however, heartily welcome to print or burn this communica-
tion just as thou may think best: if the former, thou may
print my name if thou wilt; in short, make any use thou
may wish of this letter.

Permit me to subscribe myself,
Thy ardent admirer,
H. T. Humpnreys.


VIII. A Case of Trance, Insensibility to mechanical causes
of pain, Clairvoyance, and Monomania, in Siam.* For-
warded by Dr. Elliotson.


“The extraction of calculi from the bladder without breaking them up, was
practised in Egypt from time immemorial: the French surgeon who accompanied
Buonaparte in his expedition saw the operation performed there.’”’ ‘‘ In the year
1506, Antonio Benevieni performed the operation of percussion, for the intro-
duction of which, in modern times, we are indebted to “Baron Heurteloup.’’
**In 1671, Ciucci, an Italian surgeon, speaks of a tenacula tricuspis, with which
the calculus was seized and broken up into fragments.’ ‘‘ Sir Philip Crampton
mentions the history of an Irish gentleman, in 1559, who was cured of stone by
some instruments passed into the bladder and employed to break up the calculus.’’

‘The first idea of endeavouring to cure stone in the bladder without having
recourse to the knife, seems to have presented itself to M. Civiale in the year
1817. He was then a medical student of very limited means, and employed, I
believe, as an externe by M. Dupuytren. Having made a few experiments, and
constructed some models in wood, he made an application to the French Minister
in July, 1818, for pecuniary aid towards constructing his instrument ; and at the
same time forwarded a short memoir with drawings, entitled, Some details of a
Lithotriptic. The Minister of the Interior sent, as is the custom, M. Civiale’s
memoir to the Faculty of Medicine, who appointed Barons Percy and Chaussier
to report on it: but these gentlemen took no notice whatever of the poor student’s
invention. His memoir remained forgotten in the archives of the Faculty.”


* Extracted from Journal of Three Voyages along the coast of China in
1831, 1832, and 1833, with notices of Siam, Corea, and the Loo-Choo Islands.
By Charles Gutzlaff. To which is prefixed, an Introductory Essay on the Policy,
Religion, &c., of China, by the Rev. W. Ellis, author of Polynesian Researches,
&c. London: 1834.


376 Case of Trance, Insensibility to mechanical


‘«M. Amussat, in April, 1822, described, in a few lines, an instrument which
he had invented for crushing stone.’’ ‘‘ He was soon followed by M. Leroy, now
better known as M. Leroy d’Etoilles. In June, 1822, M. Leroy produced his
instrument, and in April, 1823, he produced a much better instrument.’’ ‘‘ The
appearance of this little instrument drew M. Civiale from the silence which he
had hitherto observed ; for it is necessary to remark that up to May, 1823, he
had not published a single line on lithotrity.”” ‘‘In January, 1824, M. Civiale
addressed to the Institute a memoir, which was immediately referred to Barons
Percy and Chaussier, the same reporters who had been appointed by the Faculty
of Medicine in 1818. This time M, Civiale was more fortunate.’’ ‘‘ On the
22nd of March, the reporters, having the original documents of 1818 in their
possession, and examined the various modifications of M. Civiale, together with
the proofs which he offered, sent in a report, which established M. Civiale’s
right not only to the discovery of the principle, but of the means by which it bas
been carried into practice.’’—Lectures on Lithotomy and Lithotrity. By William
Coulson, Esq. Lancet, July 3, 1852.


Ir is certain not only that all mesmeric phenomena occur in
peculiar states of the system independently of mesmerism,
but that they occur in all countries and have occurred at all
times.

The furious Fellows of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical
Society who at once clamourously set down the poor man as
a vile impostor whose leg on account of agonizing disease was
amputated at Nottinghamshire without any pain ; and laughed
assent when Sir Benjamin Brodie assured them knowingly
that the man at Tinsbury, near Bath, who fell into a trance
and was insensible to the most violent treatment which the
ignorant sceptics could inflict, was an impostor, may read the
following history if they choose. But I am not at all anxious
that they should. Our cause has now triumphed over col-
leges, societies, professors, editors of journals, and practi-
tioners titled and untitled.


** About four months ago, one of the princesses died. In a neigh-
bouring province there dwelt a young female, who fell into a trance,
and who, on recovering, after having remained in that state above
two days and nights, declared herself the identical princess who died.
To prove her assertion, she maintained that she could mention every
article which the princess had possessed during her life-time. It is
reported that her enumeration of these was correct, although she
had never known the princess. The governor of the province thought
this fact so extraordinary, that he sent the poor creature to the king
of Siam. One of the princes was appointed to examine her. She
persisted in the fact that she was the princess, his sister, and again
recounted the possessions of the aforesaid princess, adding that a
mighty power had transformed her ; stating, that previously to her
trance she was very dark, but that since that period she had become
fair. Both the king and prince were so indignant, that they ordered
her to receive thirty lashes, and have the instruments of torture
applied to her hands and head. That used for the head consists of
two flat pieces of wood ; the head being placed between these pieces,


causes of pain, Clairvoyance, &c., in Siam. 37


~“


the ends are gradually drawn together, so tightly as to force the eye-
balls from their sockets, and cause an effusion of blood from the
ears. Smaller pieces of wood are placed between the fingers and
drawn together, so as to cause blood to start from the finger-nails.
These tortures were applied, the thirty lashes given, and borne in
the presence of hundreds, without a sigh ora groan. Two days
afterwards, she was re-examined ; and persisting in the same asser-
tions, was sentenced to receive fifty lashes, and again to submit to
tortures: such was the quiet fortitude with which she bore it, that
the people declared that she must be superhuman. At the end of
each punishment she mildly said, ‘I have told you, and do tell you
again, I am the princess.’ To render the situation of this wretched
individual still more distressing, one of the king’s telepoys (priests)
told his majesty, that the sacred books contained a prophecy, that
whenever such a person should arise, the kingdom of Siam would
pass to another nation. This raised the king’s wrath to despair: a
grave council was summoned to devise fresh punishment; decapita-
tion, with the extermination of her family, was proposed; but
instead of this, she was sentenced to receive ninety lashes, which
last she bore with the same fortitude as before. It was then decreed
that she should be seated on a raft of bamboo, and turned adrift on
the open sea. But the above-mentioned telepoy, touched with com-
passion, interposed in her behalf, saying, ‘ Who could tell whether
this were the very person of whom the book spoke?’ This allayed
the wrath of the king, and the poor woman was sentenced to grind
rice in the king’s kitchen during the remainder of her life!” p. 20.


IX. The Mesmervist,


He stands before a gather’d throng, strange knowledge to
unfold,

Charming the dazzled fancy like the fairy-tales of old ;

Yet must he brook the idle jest, the cold and doubting sneer,

He hath no beaten path to tread, no practised course to steer.


The wondrous science that he strives to bring to life and light,
Is softly, faintly breaking from the misty shades of night ;
And scoffing prejudice upbraids the pure and genial ray,
Because it doth not burst at once to bright and beaming day.


He tells the healing benefits that thro’ this power arise,

How sweet and soothing sleep may seal the weary mourner’s
eyes :

How raging madness may be checked, how sufferers may
obtain

The boon of deep oblivion thro’ the keenest throbs of pain.


————


378 Verses by Mrs. Abdy.


Anon he dwells on loftier themes, and shows how mind may
claim

An empire independent of the still and slumbering frame ;

Doubt ye the proofs, ye careless throng, submitted to your
view ?

Hold ye them in derision because yet untried and new?


Know that improvements ever wend a tardy course on earth ;

And though Wisdom’s mighty goddess gained perfection at
her birth,

Her children reach by slow degrees the vigour of their prime,

For the wisdom of this lower world requires the growth of
time.


None wish ye on the statements of a single voice to rest,

The marvels ye have witnessed ye are urged to prove and test ;

Survey them in their varied forms—inquire—observe—in-
spect—

Watch—meditate—compare—delay—doall things but neglect.


If ye bear in mind the lessons that to-day ye have been taught,
Ye need not lack materials for intense and stirring thought ;
And my simple lay can little add an orator’s discourse,

So gifted with the energy of intellectual force.


But I ask ye, if your cherish’d ones sharp anguish should
endure,

Which the stated arts of medicine had in vain essayed to cure,

Would it not grieve you to reflect ye might those pangs allay

While jestingly and mockingly ye cast the means away?


Mistake me not—I prize not aught however great or wise,

If held not in subjection to the God who rules the skies ;

To me all knowledge would be poor, all splendour would be
dim

All boons unsafe, all joys untrue, unless derived from Him.


And if eagerly this wondrous power I witness and approve,
It is because I know no bounds to heaven’s amazing love ;
And I cannot by the pedant rules of critic caution scan

The depths of those exhaustless gifts his mercy pours on man.


By Mrs. Abdy, widow of the late Rev. Mr. Abdy,
of St. John’s, Southwark.


( 3879

X. An instance of the effect of maternal mental impression
upon the offspring before its birth, By Mr. Wi1tu1am
Snewine. London. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


)


** The power of imagination is of three kinds : the first, upon the body of the
imaginant, including likewise the child in the mother’s womb ; the second, is the
power of it upon dead bodies, as plants, wood, stone, metal, &c. ; the third, is the
power of it upon the spirits of men and living creatures..”.—Lorp Bacon, Na-
tural History, cent. x., p. 945.


Tue power of mental impression has always been acknow-
ledged by the medical and general world: but the former
have not believed half the extent of its power; and the power
of mental impression during pregnancy has been altogether
scouted in the last half century by too many fancied-preémi-
nent medical men. All my medical teachers dismissed the
idea with contempt. In my Human Physiology so far back
as 1820, long before I knew anything of mesmerism, I ex-
pressed myself satisfied of its truth: and in the last edition
was the following statement :—


‘* Many people are satisfied that mental impressions made upon
the mother may affect the offspring. Others, as Mr. Lawrence,*
consider it needless to pursue ‘a question on which all rational per-
sons well acquainted with the circumstances are already unanimous.’
‘This belief,’ continues he, ‘in the power of imagination, like the
belief in witchcraft, is greater or less according to the progress of
knowledge, which in truth differs greatly in different countries and
heads. We know that many enlightened women are fully convinced
of its absurdity, while soi-disant philosophers are found to support
it. + So many extraordinary coincidences, however, both in the
human and the brute subject, have come to my knowledge, that I do
not hesitate to believe the common opinion to be well founded; and,
since I declared in my edition of 1820 my inclination to support the’
opinion, I find it has many supporters.t That neither all nor most


* “* Med. Chir. Trans., vol. xiv., p. 206. 1814.

+ ‘** We may perhaps be excused,’ says Dr. Fletcher, ‘from at once chiming
in with the accustomed cant that the emotions of the mother ‘‘ cannot possibly”
have any effect on its organism. We ‘‘ cannot possibly’’ explain perhaps what is
the immediate process by which such vitiated secretions have this effect, nor shall
we be able to do so, till we know a little more of the vis plastica than its nu-
merous appellations; but neither shall we be able, till then, to explain why this
effect should be impossible. It is much easier in these matters to look shrewd
and incredulus-odi-ish, than to give any good reason for our unbelief; and if the
result of a process, however well accredited, is not to be believed in, till the nature
of that process has been satisfactorily explained, we must be content to suspend
for the present our belief in our own existence.’ (Rudiments of Physiology,
pt. ii., p. 12.)’’ Mr. Lawrence’s ignorance and dogmatism are in harmony with
the want of wisdom that has been conspicuous throughout his life. For this I
pity him; the fault is in his cerebral composition. But his influence upon the
young and the superficial adult requires opposition.

t ‘“ Sir Everard Home (Phil. Trans., 1825, p. 75, sqq.), and, according to
Burdach, who considers the occurrence of monstrosity from this cause to be an


380 Effects of Imagination.


malformations can be thus explained; that pregnant women are
frequently alarmed without such consequences, even when most
dreaded, and that highly ridiculous resemblances are fancied to pre-
ceding longings and alarms which were forgotten or may be well
suspected to have never existed, is incontestable. But, in other
matters, when a circumstance may proceed from many causes, we do
not universally reject any one because it is frequently alleged without
reason. A diarrhcea will arise from ingesta wrong in quality or


incontestable fact (§ 360), Bechstein (Gemeinnuetzige Naturgeschichte, i., 17,
sq.), Stark (Archiv. fiir die Geburtshiilfe, v., 574), Schneider ( Journal fiir Ge-
burtshiilfe, x., 86; xvi., 121), Sachs ( Hist. Nat. Duor. Leucethiop., p. 3),
Balz ( Medezin. Zeit., v., 109), Klein (Meckel’s Deutches Archiv., ii., 235),
Carus (Zur Lehre von Schwangershaft, i., 217), Brandis (Hufeland’s Journal
der. Pract. Heilkunde, 1815, 38), Hoare (Gerson’s Magaz., vii., 470), Toone
(16., viii., 130), have given examples in its favour. Baer, whose name will carry
weight, relates the following fact :—

‘** A pregnant woman was greatly alarmed at the sight of a lengthened flame
in the direction of her native place ; as she was at a distance from this of 14 leagues,
it was long before she learnt the place of the fire, and this protracted uncertainty
probably acted forcibly upon her imagination, for she afterwards declared she had
the figure of the flame constantly before her eyes. Two or three months after
the fire, she gave birth to a girl with a red patch on her forehead, pointed, and
like an undulating flame. This still existed at the age of 7 years. I relate this
fact because I know all the particulars, for the individual was my own sister ;
and I heard her complain before her delivery that she had the flame constantly
before her eyes; so that we were not obliged in this case, as in most others, to
refer to the past in order to explain the anomaly.’ (Contribution to Burdach,
§ 359.)

‘In St. Giles’s workhouse is a woman 30 years old, with a remarkably small
narrow head, looking like an elderly child, very idiotic, saying nothing but aye
and no, and in incessant motion. She was born in a state of chorea, and before
her birth the mother was for the last two months of pregnancy annoyed and some-
times overcome by her violent movement. All this had followed ‘an extreme
nervous illness’ occasioned by a frightfully disgusting object thrown upon her
bosom’ in the fourth month of pregnancy. (Lond, Med. Gazette, May 23, 1833.)

“I have seen a child with so exact a likeness of a leech full of blood and
hanging down with its point highest, on the leg of the child of a lithographic
printer, that at a little distance any one would suppose a leech was there. The
mother told me that in her fourth month of pregnancy she had occasion to apply
some leeches : that one remained longer than the rest and hung down full of blood.
This rather frightened her and she dreamt about it. Mr. Hillas of Holborn,
her accoucheur, through whose kindness I saw the child, informed me that, when
the child was born and he observed the mark, he asked the mother if she had been
frightened or had longed for anything. She replied by asking if the child was
marked; and, on receiving an answer in the affirmative, said, Oh! it must be
with a leech ; and then related the same particulars which she afterwards told me.
A remarkable case was published in the Lond. Med. and Physic. Journal for
July 1828, by Mr George Bennett, so well known for his contribution to natural
history. A woman gave birth to a child with a large cluster of globular tumors
growing from the tongue and preventing the closure of the mouth, in colour,
shape, and size, exactly resembling our common grapes; and with a red ex-
crescence from the chest as exactly resembling in figure and general appearance
a turkey’s wattles. On being questioned before the child was shown her, she
answered that while pregnant she had seen some grapes, longed intensely for
them, and constantly thought of them, and once was attacked by a turkey-cock.
Both growths were successfully removed, and Mr. Bennett was kind enough to
allow me to see them. ’


Effects of mental impression on unborn offspring. 381


quantity, from cold, cathartic substances, and also from emotion ;
and yet emotion has every day no such effect. The notion is of
great antiquity, as it prevailed in the time of Jacob. How those
who believe the Divine authority of the Bible can reconcile the
success of Jacob’s stratagem* with their contempt for the vulgar
belief, they best can tell.


* “** And Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and chestnut
tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white appear which was in
the rods. And he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the gutters
in the watering troughs, when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive
when they came to drink. And the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought
forth cattle ringstraked, speckled, and spotted.’ (Genesis, xxx.) Some have ar-
gued that, because Jacob dreamt the rams which leaped were ringstraked,
speckled, and grisled, they were so. If they had been, he would have seen them
speckled, &c., when he was awake. The dream represents only that the effect
taking place was the same as if the rams had been speckled, &c.

‘**M. Girou Buzareingues mentions that a violent blow was given to a bitch

-; that she was paraplegic for some days, and, when she produced her eight
pups, all, excepting one, had the hind legs wanting, malformed, or weak. (Jour.
de Physiolog., t. vii.)

‘* Mr. Milne gives an account of a pregnant cat of his own, the end of whose
tail was trodden down with great violence and excruciating pain. She produced
five kittens, perfect except in the tail, which was in each of them distorted near
the end, and enlarged into a cartilaginous knob. (Linnen Transact., vol. ix.,
p- 323.)

‘* Such cases are explained by Burdach and others on the ground of a sympathy
between the injured part and the foetus. But the general principle of the power
of the mother’s mental impression is sufficient to embrace them. For, 1, There
must be the mental impression in these accidents. 2. Where the mutilation has
been in another individual—the male, the effect may occur ; so that mutilations
(supra, p. 1114) made intentionally or accidentally in the male have been sup-
posed capable of hereditary transmission: unless this be from mental impression
in the male. 3. Burdach, to illustrate the sympathy, cites Stark for the case of
a pregnant woman bitten severely .... by a dog and giving birth in three days
prematurely to a child with traces of lesion... . and subsequently subject to
fits of epilepsy, before which it always awoke, jumped up, and cried out that a
dog was biting him, though this had never happened. However the following
very remarkable case from the Medical Times of Feb. 29 last, suggests another
explanation. For a woman who witnessed a mutilation in another,—an amputa-
tion, produced a child with only a stump: but the sight of this stump caused
another pregnant woman to bring forth a child with a similar stump.

“**Maria Juster, of Minchinhamptom, Gloucestershire, aged six years, met
with an accident, a broad-wheeled waggon having passed over her arm, which so
much mutilated it as to require immediate amputation. Mary Brinksworth (who
was about two months advanced in pregnancy) took the child to the hospital, and
was present at the operation for the removal of the arm. At the full time of
utero-gestation she was delivered of a boy with the left hand and wrist off just
above the pronator quadratus muscle. When her child was about fourteen months
old he was suddenly shown to Maria Weston, of Nailsthorp, who was then preg-
nant and about six weeks advanced. At the sight of the child’s arm (to use her
own expression) ‘‘ she became sick and faintish,’’ and continued ill for an hour.
At the end of the nine months of pregnancy she was delivered of a girl with the
left hand and arm deficient from about the insertion of the deltoid muscle. The
arms of the two latter children which I saw presented exactly the appearance as
if they had been amputated. I took the above from the statements of the two
mothers (Mary Brinksworth and Maria Weston) of the two children at the dis-
pensary, June 4, 1839).’”’ [Mr. Capern relates that—

[‘* Dan Fowler, West Exe, ‘liverton, five months old, Nov. 2, 1850. When
VOL. X. EE


382 Effects of mental impression


“A curious fact is recorded on the authority of the late Earl
Morton. He bred, from a male quagga and a mare of seven-eighths
Arabian blood, a female hybrid, displaying in form and colour her
mixed origin. The mare was given to Sir Gore Ouseley, who bred
from her first a filly and then a colt, by a fine black Arabian horse ;
but both these in their colour and in the hair of their manes strongly
resembled the quagga. The resemblance appears to have been rather
less in the colt than in the filly. Dr. Wollaston soon afterwards
learnt a similar fact in the case of a sow, which, after littering by a
boar of the wild breed, was put, long after the death of this, to a
boar of a different breed, and produced pigs, some of which were
marked like the first boar; and even in a second litter by a third
boar some slightly resembled the first.*

** The same happens in the human subject ; for the following case
was communicated to me on undisputable authority. ‘A lady, et.
19, was married to a gentleman of a consumptive tendency, et. 21.
At the end of a year she bore him a son. The child died of hydro-
cephalus, ect. 2; the husband, the year following, leaving the lady
a widow at 22. At 26 she married again, and had issue six children,
—the last a boy. As he grew up, it was remarked by all the friends
of the first husband and admitted by the mother herself that her
sixth child was more like her first husband than his own father.
Moreover, though born of robust parents without any consumptive
tendency, he is delicate, and subject to tracheal irritation and chest
attacks ; but is now grown up, living, and in good health.’


born, his left arm was utterly useless and hung behind his back. Three days
after his birth his grandmother went to a medical man, who considered that a
muscle was deficient. A month afterwards the mother applied to this gentleman.
He said nothing could be done until the child was three months old; but sug-
gested that salt and water should be used. The same day she consulted Mr.
Capern, who then for the first time mesmerised the child. Great moisture was
produced along the course of the arm, and particularly at the finger’s-end ; this
was in July. Mr. Capern continued his operations daily for three months.
During two months the child always cried, but after that he looked up and laughed
whilst being operated upon. About the end of the first month, the mother began
to observe the fingers move, and gradually the entire arm ; then the child com-
menced to seize the articles within his reach and to raise the arm up.

[‘** The presumed cause of the child’s condition was the circumstance of a
brother of Dan having been drowned, and the first part of the body seen by the
mother being its left arm, which caused a great fright. The mother gave birth to
Dan about four months afterwards. At birth the left arm was much smaller, at
present it is much larger, than the other. During the last two months the child
has been gradually getting better ; and each time the operation is performed there
is an increase of warmth in the limb.’’ (The Mighty Curative Powers of Mes-
merism, proved in upwards of a hundred and fifty cases of various Diseases.
By Thomas Capern. p. 85.)]

** One fact runs through all these cases, and, as it alone can explain some, it
probably explains all.

* “ Phil. Trans., 1821; pt. i.

+ ‘* These facts are of high importance in a civil point of view.

‘*A married man may have a brother very like himself. He may die. The
brother may be on the same terms of friendship with the widow as before: and
the widow may marry another man, and produce a child clearly resembling the
brother because it resembles the first husband; who has influenced the offspring
of the second ; and the woman’s character may suffer unjustly.


on unborn offspring. 383


““*Qne of the most intelligent breeders,’ says Mr. Boswell, ‘1
ever met with in Scotland, Mr. Mustard, of Angus, told me that one
of his cows chanced to come in season, while pasturing on a field,
which was bounded by that of one of his neighbours, out of which
an ox jumped, and associated with the cow until she was brought
home for impregnation. The ox was white, with black spots, and
horned. Mr. Mustard had not a horned beast in his possession,
nor one with any white on it. Nevertheless, the produce of the
following spring was a black and white calf with horns.’*

“*T had a pug bitch,’ says Mr. Blaine, ‘whose constant com-
panion was a small and almost white spaniel dog of Lord Rivers’s
breed, of which she was very fond. When it became necessary to
separate her . . . . from this dog, and to confine her with one of her
own kind, she pined excessively ; and notwithstanding her situation,
it was some time before she would admit of the attentions of the
pug dog placed with her. At length, however, she did so: impreg-
nation followed ; and, at the usual period, she brought forth five pug
puppies, one of which was elegantly white, and more slender than
the others. The spaniel was soon afterwards given away, but the
impression remained ; for, at two subsequent litters (which were all
she afterwards had), she presented me with a white young one, which
the fanciers know to be a very rare occurrence. The late Dr. Hugh
Smith used to relate a similar instance which occurred to a favourite
female setter that often followed his carriage. On one occasion,
when travelling in the country, she became suddenly so enamoured
of a mongrel that followed her, that, to separate them, he was
forced, or rather his anger irritated him, to shoot the mongrel, and
he then proceeded on his journey. The image of this sudden fa-
vourite, however, still haunted the bitch, and for some wecks after
she pined excessively, and obstinately refused intimacy with any
other dog. At length she accepted a well-bred setter : but when she
whelped, the Doctor was mortified with the sight of a litter which,
he perceived, bore evident marks, particularly in colour, of the fa-
voured cur, and they were accordingly destroyed. The same also
occurred in all her future puppings: invariably the breed was tainted
by the lasting impression made by the mongrel.’

“There could be nothing but imagination in the case, detailed
by Stark,t of a pair of pigeons, which, having lost their own young
one, had a young blackbird put into their nest. This they con-
tinued to take care of during the next incubation, and their fresh
young was no longer like them, as the former had been, but in colour
and marks the perfect image of their adopted stranger.§


* “ Quarterly Journal of Agriculture.

t ‘* Intermarriage, p. 275, sqq.

t “ Beitrdgen zur Psychischen Anthrop., i., p. 291.

“‘ Frisch declares that a bird hatched by one of a different species is as unfit
for procreation as a mule; Faber, that a drake hatched by a hen copulates with
hens more willingly than with ducks; Bechstein, that a variety of pigeons with
black wings and tails, whose young are never unlike their parents in colour, have
a few red feathers in their wings or tails when they have been hatched by another


EE2


mo


38 | Effects of mental impression


“The effect of the mind in generation is shewn by the circum-
stance of a hen laying far more eggs than she otherwise would, if
one of those already laid is removed from the nest daily, though no
fresh sexual intercourse take place. Every bird lays a definite num-
ber, and if any are removed she continues laying till the number is
completed. A swallow naturally lays six eggs; but Lister, by tak-
ing some away successively, caused one to lay nineteen. The re-
markable power of the mind in maintaining the secretion of milk is
well known.

[The secretion is greatly influenced by moral circumstances.
A mother often finds a temporary decline of secretion if she substi-
tutes another child for her own or for one that she had previously
suckled for some time. A cow may give less milk when milked by
a stranger. If a mother sees her child, or even thinks of it, she
may feel her breasts filling.

“John Hunter satisfied himself experimentally of the truth of
the common assertion,—that the she-ass gives milk no longer than
the impression of the foal is upon her mind. The skin of her foal
thrown over the back of another, and frequently brought near her,
is sufficient. (Journal of the Royal Institution, No. 2.)

“This opinion coincides with the custom in Languedoc and on
Mount Caucasus, of placing a calf near its mother while milking,
from the conviction of its increasing the quantity of milk. Accord-
ing to Le Vaillant, at the Cape of Good Hope, if the calf dies, its
skin is placed on another while the cow is milking.

** After emotion of the mother, the child, if it suck the milk first
secreted subsequently, may suffer seriously in its health.

** Mr. Wardrop had removed a small tumor from behind the ear ;
all was doing well, till the mother fell into a violent passion, and
suckled her child soon afterwards, when immediately it died in con-
vulsions. He was sent for hastily to see another child in convulsions,
after taking the breast soon after its nurse had been severely repri-
manded : and Sir Richard Croft, the accoucheur who had charge of
the patient, informed Mr. Wardrop that he had seen very similar
instances. (Lancet, No. 516.)

“* Dr. Hayn declares that he was summoned to a child which had
just died in the act of sucking its mother, when she was suddenly
alarmed at the entrance of a policeman with bad news, soon after
delivery. Dr. Berlyn mentions an infant, three months old, seized
with deadly paleness, hemiplegia of the left side and convulsions of
the right, on sucking immediately after its mother had met with
some distressing circumstance. A puppy has been seized with epi-
lepsy on sucking its mother after a fit of rage. (Burdach, § 522.)]

** Every one acknowledges the power of the mind in causing both
functional and organic diseases, and in maintaining and varying the
health. Now generation is subject to all the laws of every other
function. Just as too many forget that the brain is but like every


variety which has an intermixture of red feathers. (Burdach, § 359.) If this
is true, it shows an influence not indeed merital, but capable of penetrating a
shell.


on unborn offspring. 385


other organ; that every organ has its own peculiar function, the
brain as well as the rest ; but that every organ is subject to the same
general laws, and that the brain differs not at all in this point of
view from others: so generation has been thought peculiar in every
respect. Writers speak of it as mysterious ; just as if it was more
mysterious than anything else,—as if all was not mystery to us poor
creatures. It is a process of secretion, excretion, movement, Xc.,
like other functions ; and the organs and function of generation are
subject to all the cerebral influences, healthy and morbid, to which
other organs are subject, though the function is peculiar.”


The following instance is, like mesmeric experiments and
cures in the brute division of animals, free from the pos-
sibility of a charge of collusion or trick.

It is furnished by Mr. W. Snewing, whose great cure, with
the interesting phenomena of sympathy of sensations in his
wife, and the mesmeric communication of temporary disease
from him to her and her to him, hypochondriasis from him
and rheumatism from her, may be found in Nos. XIX., XX., by
Dr. H. Holland and others equally ignorant of mesmerism.

The statement is in a letter to Mr. Baker, the able and
excellent head of my establishment.

Joun Ex.iotson.


“77, Wells Street, Oxford Street.
“ Dear Baker,—I have just returned from my father, and
during my stay there my sister told me of a case which I
thought would perhaps be interesting to the Doctor. I shall
be obliged if you will present my respectful compliments to
him, and say that the cat of a neighbour of my father’s was
caught in a rat-trap by the fore-paws, from which she was set
free, but her paws were very much mangled by the teeth of
the trap: it was a she-cat, in kitten at the time. When she
kittened, the two kittens were found to have mal-formed fore-
paws, there being only two claws on each foot. I don’t know
if this will be anything new to the Doctor, but I felt it my
duty to communicate it to him.
“With kind regards to Mrs. Baker,
“ Believe me, yours truly,
“Wa. SNEWING.
“The kittens are alive and well.”


XI. A few Notes on “ Chapters on Mental Physiology, by Henry
Holland, M.D., F.R.S., &c., &c.” By the Rev. Geurce
Sanpsy, Vicar of Flixton, Suffolk.

‘* When we reason from a hypothesis a priori, we are almost certain of run-
ning into error; and consequently, it can never be trusted to, in judging of cases


386 Mr. Sandby’s refutation


which have not previously fallen within our experience.’’—DuGALp Stewart,
Elements of Philosophy, vol. i., p. 445.


‘* Ne mea dona, tibi studio disposta fideli,
Intellecta priusquam sint, contemta relinquas.”’
Lucretius, lib. i., 47.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Flixton, Nov. 25, 1852.

Sir,—lI fear that it may be deemed somewhat presump-
tuous on my part to offer even the slightest comment upon
any portion of a medical work, more especially when the
author is so well-informed a man as Dr. Holland, to judge
from his book, must evidently be. The profession is prover-
bially both sensitive and exclusive, and views with extreme
repugnance the entrance of an unlicensed foot within its
sacred circle. “ Guai a chi tocca,’—“‘ woe to the man who
meddles with our mysteries,” is the united cry from the chief
temple in Trafalgar Square down to the humblest apothecary
in the kingdom. And when the critic, who ventures on a
dissentient voice, makes no further pretence to an acquaint-
ance with physiology than that general knowledge to which
every man of education hopes to attain, in offering an opinion
he must be prepared for aught that may happen, and make
up his mind to be insulted and sneered down. ‘“ How dare
persons as ignorant of physics and physiology as a mad dull,
bristle up against the wise on the question of mesmeric
reality?” asks one gentle assailant.* The writer has not
mentioned whether he meant wise in their own conceits, or
wise from the effect of patient study: however, let that pass.
The passage is adduced as a specimen of the language to
which the clergy, “epi8copal or dissenters,” are now a days
subject, if they presume to question the infallibility of the
physician. Under a wholesome dread, therefore, of such cas-
tigation, let it be understood, that in offering a few “ notes”


* See a recent pamphlet, entitled Clairvoyance and the Clergy, by Robert
| Hull, M.D., of Norwich, in which the impertinence of the clergy, in interesting
themselves about the recovery of the sick, the cure of the insane, and the relief
of the suffering, by means of mesmerism, when the customary methods of treat-
ment have failed, and the medical men themselves are at fault, is sharply rebuked,
and such meddling conduct painted in the blackest colours. It is made plain to
the clergy of all denominations (by a train of reasoning, however, which might
have perplexed St. Paul, who taught, ‘‘as we have opportunity, let us do good
unto all men’’) that it is their duty to let the miserable linger on in their mi-
sery, and that if they exert themselves to promote a mesmeric cure, ‘‘ they betray
their trust,” and ‘* coquet with the agents of the black art !’’
Happily, this pamphlet has been admirably answered by ‘‘an East Anglian
Clergyman,’’ (with whom I have not the pleasure of being acquainted, but whose
talents and Christian zeal I cannot but admire,) in two letters, called Washy


, Stuff, but warranted Fast Colours (Jarrold, St. Paul’s). The answer will repay
ta perusal.


of Dr. Holland’s Antimesmerism. 387


upon Dr. Holland’s work, I am not proposing to “ bristle
up,” like a wild beast, against an able writer, because his
experiences in mesmerism are not so extended as my own,
and because he has hastened to an inconsequent conclusion
from one-sided data. Dr. Holland is, at any rate, a gen-
tleman and a scholar, and will pardon the non-professional
comments of one who is anxious only for truth, and wishes
to seek it in the same spirit of inquiry with which the Chap-
ters on Mental Physiology are dictated. The bellowings of
the coarse animal that has missed his prey, and vents his
passion in noise, shall be left to those to whom, from all ap-
pearances, such an occupation would be more congenial.
But, after all, there are points even on scientific subjects,
upon which common sense, aided by careful observation and
experiment, may offer a suggestion even to the most ad-
vanced. Besides, though not a student of anatomy, I am no
tyro in logic ; and incompetent as I may be to examine with
Dr. Holland the structure of the nervous system, and to
note the distinctness of each separate fibre as it passes on in
its isolated course from the brain to the extremity, still I can
occasionally detect a fallacy in an argument, and shew that
our opponent has assumed a premiss, rather than proved it.
Moreover, as our physician has somewhat trenched upon the
ground of the theologian, and not scrupled to assert, that
phenomena, with which mesmerists are familiar, are “ mira-
culous powers”* (p. 32), and “ would alter, if they were veri-
fied, our views of the Providence ruling in the world” (p. 10),
the physician must not be surprised if the theologian, en
revanche, rambles a little upon forbidden territory, especially
as the former has himself admitted, that the subject under
consideration “ concerns the metaphysical enquirer” (p. 78).
And is it possible, that an author who takes care to inform
the reader that he admires Lucretius, and has expanded his
mind by a copious range through the literature of Germany,
can seriously believe that a faith in certain mesmeric pheno-
mena must alter his views as to the ways of Providence ?
Does our physician really mean that the moral government
of the world, by the great Creator, as regards the providential
superintendence of his creature man, is actually affected in
his estimation by the acquisition of a fresh field of knowledge,
or, is the sentence mere clap-trap for the vulgar? That his


* Upon four different occasions, at least, Dr. H. introduces the word ‘‘ mira-
culous”’ in reference to mesmeric phenomena. Again, he speaks ‘‘ of powers,
superseding all the physical laws of time and space of which we have any know-
ledge ;’’ of the ‘‘ limitation of man’s powers manifestly desiyned by his Creator”’
(p. 27): thus begging the very point at issue.


388 Dr. Holland’s subserviency


views as to the “ nature of man,” under an abnormal condi-
tion, may receive some modification, is possible: that a con-
tribution of fresh facts in physics should enlarge his notions
as to the laws of nature, is also probable: but that he should
gravely affirm, that “nothing but direct miraculous inter-
position can explain that which is proffered for his belief”
(p. 128) by the mesmerists, proves a state of mind that cannot
be contemplated without regret. Viewed under the most
favourable light, he is grossly “inconsistent with his own state-
ments. For in an able chapter, which I have read with much
satisfaction, he himself admits that “ the whole complex appa-
ratus of the sympathetic nerves and its ganglia is another
part of what we must still consider the ferra incognita in
this great domain of physiological inquiry.” Again he says,
that the “nature and offices of the ganglia are known to us
but by presumption, and this hitherto too vague to be re-
corded as matter of science.” (p. 269.) Again, “that the
connexion of the nerves with the vascular system,—their pro-
bable agency in the effects of mental emotions upon the vital
organs, &c., are all points not less obscure in every circum-
stance of present proof.” When, therefore, in accordance
with his own shewing, mesmeric phenomena are intimately
connected with the nervous system,—and when he further
allows that that nervous system is a ferra incognita of physi-
ology, surely to assert that certain effects which take their
rise in the said ¢ferra incognita can “ admit of no other name
than that of miraculous,” (p. 32) if they be true, (and that
they are true an accumulation of evidence proves almost to
demonstration) does exhibit an illogical confusion of ideas,
respecting which the less we say the better. Why does not
Dr. Holland at once acknowledge that he is not conversant
with all the laws of nature, and ‘that the facts of mesmerism
are as yet a problem for the wisest? To bring “ miracle”
and “ Providence” into a scientific treatise, as a method of
escape from a point of difficulty, is a species of argument that
we should hardly expect to meet with from a professed
admirer of Lucretius. ‘“ Nec Deus intersit” is as golden a
rule for a Denouement in physics, as it is for an epic poem.
Lucretius, too, (from whom one quotation has already been
offered, to gratify the classic taste of our opponent) presents
most wholesome counsel to those who confound miracles with
novelties :—


‘Sed neque tam facilis res ulla est, quin ea primum
Difficilis magis ad credendum constet ; itemque
Nihil adeo magnum neque tam mirabile quidquam
Quod non paullatim mixuent mirarier omnes.”
Lib. ii, 1025.


to vulgar ignorance and bigotry. 389


The question, therefore, of mesmeric phenomena can resolve
itself, after popular modern fashion, under three heads only !
Either the witnesses, who assert the truth of those pheno-
mena, many of whom are as competent to form an opinion as
Dr. Holland himself, are scandalous impostors, and not to be
believed: or the nature of man’s organization and of his
nervous system under certain conditions, is as yet most imper-
fectly known, or scarcely known at all: or (as it is suggested
in this work) the facts themselves are a miraculous deviation
from the ordinary ways of Providence! Which then of these
three positions is the true one? A philosophical inquirer,
after due examination of the evidence, would regard the
second hypothesis as the real exposition of the difficulty :
with some uncourteous assailant the first would be the ready
and appropriate answer: our fashionable physician at the
West End makes his retreat, with whispering an allusion to
miracle! Now does Dr. Holland really believe his own sug-
gestion? If he do not, (and while he is too well-bred a
man to imitate his provincial compeer, in designating the
mesmerists as fools or knaves,—so also is he too well-informed
a writer to adopt for a moment so ludicrous a solution) the
occasional introduction of such language into a work on
science displays a subordination of mind to vulgar prejudice
that is most deplorable. Or rather, what must be the condi-
tion of the so-called upper and educated classes among whom
our author naturally seeks to extend his practice, if it be
thought expedient to humour the sentimentalities of their
salons by the most cursory allusion to such absurdity?
Explanation by miracle is unworthy of a writer, who hopes to
guide public opinion, and is in many respects not undeserving
of attention. But what, after all, if Dr. Holland really
believes his own hypothesis? What if he regard clairvoyance
as satanic, and thought-reading and introvision as a depart-
ment of diablerie? The thing is not actually impossible:
there are others who do; and we may have given our author
too great credit for philosophic acumen. If that be the case,
there is nothing else to be done, but to remind him that
similar references to miracle and supernaturalism have made
their appearance on each occasion that science has first
landed the student upon a éerra incognita of physics.

Dr. Holland would feel shame at being coupled with the
many ignorant writers, who have preceded him in his own
line of argument. Take the first pamphlet that presents
itself to my hand. In my little work on mesmerism, I
referred to a sermon which was preached in Canterbury in


390 Dr. Holland’s subserviency.


1753, on the “impious” nature of inoculation.* Some of
the phrases employed by the Rev. Theodore de la Faye are
so identical with the expressions of Dr. Holland, that the
reader will smile at the parallelism. Inoculation is termed a
“ gigantic attempt to force the direction of events out of their
proper station in the hands of Almighty wisdom,”’—*“ a con-
tradiction to the laws of nature,’—‘“‘an opposition to the
Divine intentions,”—and “to the means instituted by Provi-
dence for the security of men’s lives,” and so on passim.
What is all this but Dr. Holland’s alarm respecting certain
records of clairvoyance and lucidity, which, “if verified by
sounder proof, would alter ali his views of physical pheno-
mena,—of the nature of man, and of the Providence ruling
in this world ?”” However, it is hardly fair to bind our author
too tightly down by a few expressions, thrown off at random,
to tickle the ears of some supersensitive patients. Dr. Holland
does not actually mean what he says. He knows perfectly
well, that if clairvoyance were verified to the very letter, his
knowledge of such verification would not alter his views as to
the general laws by which Providence rules the world. He
knows that the facts of clairvoyance would simply prove that
there was more in the nature of man, more in the secret
organization of his system than that which his philosophy
originally dreamt of,—that new facts did not destroy old
facts, and at the best could only change their relative posi-
tion ; and that, if mesmerism, with all its highest phenomena,
were mathematically demonstrated to be true, such demon-
stration would not affect one single law of nature that is
clearly established, but simply furnish additional items of
inquiry for the examination of the student. All this Dr.
Holland knows far better than I can tell him,—as well as that
to call results, which are contrary to his own experience, the
fruits of “ miraculous interposition,” is an illogical postulate of
the point at issue. We will, therefore, merely understand
the above language as a polite method of informing the mes-
merists, that they are neither philosophers nor honest men ;
and, thanking him for a courtesy which is so contrary to
much which we have been in the habit of receiving, though it
may be at the expense of his character as a reasoner, we will
now pass on to points of weightier matter.

The work under consideration is called “ Chapters on
Mental Physiology,” and professes to examine “the reci-
procal actions and relations of mental and bodily phenomena,


* See Mesmerism and its Opponents, 2nd Edit., p. 107.


His admission of common mesmeric facts. 391


as they make up the totality of life.” It is full of informa-
tion, shewing marks of various reading, (somewhat pedan-
tically paraded) and is written in a manner to please more
than the mere medical student. Some of the topics have a
general interest. There is a chapter on “ Medical Evidence ;”
a chapter on “the Effects of Mental Attention on Bodily
Organs;” chapters on “ Mental Consciousness;” on “ Sleep;”
on “the relations of Dreaming, Insanity, &c.;” on “the
Brain, as a double organ;” on “ Phrenology ;” and on “the
Present State of Inquiry into the Nervous System,” and
other kindred subjects. Some large portion of the book con-
tains matter which is foreign to my own studies, and upon it
I do not profess to enter; other parts I have read with plea-
sure, and not without instruction.

The author says in his preface, that “ except in the case
of one great question, which could not be put aside, he has
carefully avoided passing over the boundary of metaphysical
speculation.” And he observes again, that “he has had oc-
casion in different parts of the volume to advert to those
mesmeric phenomena and doctrines, and the topics collateral
to them, which have drawn so largely upon public attention of
late years.” And he “ believes that he is able to explain their
real nature, and the conditions on which they depend,”
through the relation of the phenomena to those other parts
of physiology, which form the subject of the book. Con-
stant references, indeed, to mesmerism make their appear-
ance throughout the volume: the topic seems never lost sight
of; and, although the author leads us to understand that the
question came in incidentally, from its bearing upon the
main subject, I own that the thought has struck me more
than once, that to give a grand philosophic death-blow to mes-
merism once for all was the real purpose for which this thick
octavo was written.

At the same time, the tone with which Dr. Holland speaks
of mesmerism and mesmerisers, is that of which we have little
reason to complain. In the first place, our facts are admitted,
i.e., what we may call our primary facts, clairvoyance and
introvision of course not coming under that head. But our
original facts, for a belief in which for years and years we
have been spit upon, trampled upon, sneered at, and regarded
as being out of the pale of rational inquirers are, at last, no
longer doubted ; the honesty of the patients is proved ; and
the accuracy of our own observation stands forth confessed.
“The phenomena are singular and striking.” (p. 31.) The
question that is now raised relates to the exciting cause of
these phenomena, and to the truthfulness of the mesmeric


392 His truisms and confessions.


theory of a transmitted agent. Here again our author writes
in a fair spirit of argument. My quarrel with Dr. Holland is
this: either he has, with his eyes open, wilfully omitted all
examination of those many facts, which militate against his
own hypothesis, an omission which approaches very closely to
a suppressio veri, of which, however, I cheerfully acquit our
opponent : or he has most improperly neglected to make him-
self acquainted with those facts by consulting the suitable
sources of information ;* and that therefore we must regard
him rather under the light of an advocate, pleading the
interests of the plaintiff alone, than that of a judge from
whom we hope to receive a comprehensive conclusion upon
the whole case.

The first chapter, which is on “ Medical Evidence,” opens
the book well; at least, it contains its fair proportion of
splendid truisms. ‘“ There can be few better tests,” says our
author, “of a sound understanding than the right estimation
of medical evidence.” (p. 1.) Thesentence would have been
more perfect, if something had been added respecting con-
scientiousness in the rejection of evidence. However, as our
author probably regards dishonesty in that respect as the test
of an unsound understanding, we may consider that the
opening sentence includes, phrenologically, all that can be
desired.

The chapter, as it continues, is full of caution as to the
future, and of experience from the past. ‘ Terms,” says he
“have descended to us, which we can hardly put aside,—
maxims which fetter the understanding,—and methods of clas-
sification, which prevent the better suggestions of sound
experience.” (p. 4.) And at page 11, there are a few remarks
of such special pertinency that I am tempted to extract the
whole paragraph.


“It must, however, be added, that on questions of medical evi-
dence there may be an excess of scepticism as well as of credulity.
Sometimes this occurs in effect of a temperament of mind (not un-
common among thinking men) which is disposed to see all things
under doubt and distrust. There are other cases where the same
feeling, not originally present, grows upon the mind of physicians
who have been too deeply immersed in the details of practice. The
hurried passage from one patient to another precludes that close
observation, which alone can justify, except under especial cireum-
stances, the use of new remedies or active modes of treatment.
From conscience as well as convenience, they come to confine them-
selves to what is safe, or absolutely necessary ; and thus is engen-


* For instance, the works of Dr. Gregory, Dr. Esdaile, &c., to say nothing
of The Zoist. :


Steady progress of Mesmerism. 393


dered by degrees a distrust of all that lies beyond this limit... .
No one can reasonably doubt that we have means in our hands,
admitting of being turned to large accounts of good or ill. Equally
unreasonable would it be to distrust the knowledge gained from a
faithful experience as to the manner of using these means, and others
which may hereafter become known to us, safely and beneficially for
the relief of disease.”


At page 3, there is one sentence, upon which we must
venture a remark.


‘* During the last twenty years I have known the rise and decline
of five or six fashions in medical doctrine or treatment ; some of
them affecting the name of systems, and all deriving too much sup-
port from credulity or other causes, even among medical men.”


Our author must at least admit that the above observa-
tions, with their context respecting “popular esteem,” will
not apply to mesmerism. Of that “doctrine or treatment,”
he has not yet witnessed anything like a decline. Mes-
merism, under its modern phase, is somewhere about eighty
years of age. It was about 1776 that Anthony Mesmer first
commenced his experiments; and at no time, except for a
very short season at Paris only, have they ever “usurped a
place in popular esteem.” On the contrary, mesmerism has
been from the first an unpopular mode of treatment,—unpo-
pular with the profession, unpopular with the press and the
public, unpopular with the religious world,—baited by fools
and fanatics, and sneered at by philosophers and the soi-
disant wise. As Byron said of freedom, some thirty years
ago, (what unhappily he would have to repeat in the present
day) mesmerism has


‘* Stream’d, like a thunder cloud against the wind.’’


For, from the first, it has had nothing in its favour but its
own inherent truthfulness. Still, in spite of every disad-
vantage, it has kept on its way steadily and bravely. There
may have been periods of intermission. There may have
been seasons in which the subject seemed lost to the general
public ; still there has always existed an undercurrent of con-
scientious men, who, knowing the value of that in which they
believed, have regularly made head against the adverse tide,
and succeeded at last in gathering round them a school of
numerous adherents. And within the last few years the ac-
cessions to the cause have been most considerable. Patients
have multiplied beyond the means of overtaking them ; in-
firmaries have been established, and are proceeding prosper-
ously, and only require larger funds to exhibit the fruits of


394 His reference of all mesmeric


still greater prosperity ;* medical men have been staggered ;
old adversaries have fallen upon a judicious silence ; and the
latest plan of attack has been the adoption of a theory, which
can only maintain its ground within a few circles, by the ob-
livious omission of all examination of the facts that make
against it. To the subject of this theory we will now spe-
cially address ourselves: but as “ decline in fashion” is one
of the tests by which our author evidently, though perhaps
not in express terms, tries the truth of a system, it seemed
desirable to refresh his memory with a few words upon the
present position of mesmerism.

The marrow of the volume is contained in the second
chapter: and it is here also that the author aims his principal
shafts against mesmerism. The chapter takes for its title,
“the Effects of Mental Attention on Bodily Organs; and the
experienced reader possesses at a glance a clue to the main
argument. Dr. Holland observes, that “it is only of late
years that sufficient notice has been taken of those peculiar
effects which depend on the act of concentrating the attention”
upon particular organs and parts of the body: and the pur-
port of the book is to illustrate and explain the effects of this
attention, or, as it may be called, the action of a stimulated
consciousness, by various instances of familiar and habitual
occurrence. Much of the matter, therefore, is both interest-
ing and instructive; the facts are curious; but whether the
train of reasoning and the inferences drawn be in all respects
anatomically and physiologically correct, is a point on which
I am unqualified to enter, yet for convenience sake we will
at once assume that they are true.

The argument, therefore, stands thus: Dr. Holland shews
that in certain morbid conditions of the human body, espe-
cially in that part of it which is called the nervous system,
mental attention, or mental expectation, or imagination or
fancy (call it what you will), plays a very powerful part, and
produces effects of a very striking and unexpected nature.

“There needs no ghost to tell us ¢hat,” a poor ignorant
mesmeriser like myself might have answered ; however, as the
statement is set forth in formal scientific language, and as a
rationale is appended to the facts which are given, we will
thankfully receive all that we are taught, and proceed to the
conclusion which is ingeniously fastened on the aforesaid
physiological peg.

* Our London Infirmary is advancing nobly, thanks to the kind care of our
admirable and conscientious Secretary. But increased funds are greatly wanted.
Patients upon patients attend every week, whom the Committee is compelled to


reject from a deficiency of mesmerisers. This I have myself witnessed often
when I have attended the board.


effec is to Imagination. 395


“Expectant attention explains,” he says, “the striking
results of what has been termed hypnotism.” Mr. Braid has
shewn that the trance is induced by the act of the individual
himself, who is made to concentrate his vision for a certain
time upon some one object. The hypnotic trance arises from
within, and not from influences without, the body.

“ Expectant attention ” explains also the phenomena pro-
duced under the name of electro-biology. A certain condi-
tion of the human body is obtained in certain temperaments
by the process of biologizing, and the results are simply the
very curious effect of an excited expectation.

And now comes the grand blow, for the infliction of which
I half believe that the whole of this mighty volume was
written. Expectant attention explains the phenomena of
animal magnetism !


“‘ Are these phenomena,” asks our author, p. 31, ‘ admitted by
all to be singular and striking,—derived from a peculiar agent or in-
fluence, transmitted from one human body to another by certain
modes of communication ? or are they the effects of various external
excitements on the sensorium and nervous system of persons of a
peculiar temperament, analogous in nature and origin to phenomena
with which we are more familiar in sleep, trance, hysteria, and other
forms of cerebral or nervous disorder ?”’


“These questions,” adds our author, “involve the very
reality of the mesmeric theory,” i. e., the theory of an influ-
ence being transmitted outwardly from one human body to
another. And Dr. Holland comes to the conclusion, and
wishes his readers to regard his position as undeniably proved,
that,


**As respects magnetic sleep or trance, in particular, whatever
its shape or degree, there is no authenticated fact making it needful
to believe that any influence is received from without, beyond those
impressions on the senses and imaginations which are capable in cer-
tain persons and temperaments of exciting unwonted or disordered
actions throughout every part of the nervous system, and especially
in the sensorial functions.” (p. 90.)


“The evidence (he adds, p. 92) is simple and convincing
as respects the main assumption that the state of mesmeric
sleep is brought on by the influence of one human body on
another.” And the effects “ justify the conclusion that all
these states” (the mesmeric, the hypnotic, the biologized,
&c., whether in a greater or less degree) “ depend on affec-
tions of the nervous system, in persons of a certain tempera-
ment and under certain modes of excitement.” ‘The whole
scope of the question is manifestly comprised in this single
point.”


396 Imagination acknowledged by Mesmerisis.


Here, then, we are at length landed upon that fatal shore
at which we unhappy mesmerisers are to receive our coup-de-
grdce. Our phenomena are allowed to be true, and the effects
curious and striking; but there is no “authenticated fact”
which makes it needful to believe, that, in the production of
these phenomena, there is an external transmission of any
agent, fluid, imponderable, or influence, from one human
being to another. The effects are real; but the result of a
disordered action within.*

Before, however, we enter upon the question of no “ au-
thenticated fact,’ let us clear the ground a little of some-
thing that encumbers our path. We must state what it is
that the mesmerisers actually do say: for the manner with
which our author has conducted his argument is apt to lead
to a wrong impression.

The mesmerisers, then, have never denied that mental
action (or imagination, if that term is more agreeable to our
opponents) has often played its powerful part in the produc-
tion of the aforesaid phenomena. As Dr. Holland has some-
times received credit for his treatment of disease where little
credit was due, when the imagination of the patient has
wrought out the desired effect, not only not in consequence
of his treatment, but sometimes actually in spite of it: so
also is it correct, that mental action has not unfrequently
lent its auxiliar hand to the manipulations of the mesmerist.
We think it quite possible, that on very many occasions at a
first sitting the expectant attention of the sick person has
greatly accelerated the action of mesmerism ; and at subse-
quent sittings we believe that the preparedness of the patient
for a repetition of the effects has by its own operation evolved
them, with but slight assistance from without. We are aware
also that all these effects have arisen spontaneously and in
the course of nature, and may have been even sometimes
self-induced ; and in regard to Mr. Braid’s experiments in
hypnotism, we are quite alive to the nature of the process by
which he succeeds, and have never dissented from that gen-
tleman’s conclusion, at least so far as they relate to the
character of his own procedure.

In regard to electro-biology, we have stated from the
very first, that the phenomena produced under that name
had their rise from the action of suggestion or imagination

* There is nothing in the slightest degree novel in this doctrine: the novelty
consists in the form in which it is put forth, and in the physiological and scientific
details with which it is overlaid. In that admirable work, Facis in Mesmerism,
by the Rev. Chauncy Hare Townshend, this question has been well considered in


the chapter on the ‘‘ Mesmeric Medium,” especially from p. 289. Second
Edition.


Effects independent of Imagination. 397


on the physical frame ; and while some parties were ascribing
everything to the “disk,” and while others were using the
language of mystery in their delineation of the exciting cause,
this journal at the very outset stripped the experiments of all
their mysterious character, and told the gaping crowds and
the perplexed savans what was the nature of the exhibition
in question.

We will give Dr. Holland the full benefit of these ad-
missions: and now we must inform him, that, after a large
and most liberal abatement for cases that might be placed
by him under any of the above heads, there will still remain
a residuum of facts in which we defy him to shew that any
approach to what he may term “ mental attention,” or the
“direction of consciousness,” could have been mixed up in
the action. There is nothing upon which I feel better quali-
fied to speak with confidence, even after I have read what
Dr. Holland has written upon testimony in his opening
chapter. Our author, then, who has commenced his work
with this significant criticism upon evidence, will please to
remember that in cases of mesmerism the large majority of
patients are necessarily prepared for the treatment that is to
be pursued; and our difficulty is to present an instance in
which the party mesmerised was quite unconscious of the act,
and quite uninstructed as to the results that might follow:
because, if it could be shewn that the slightest hint had been
given to the patient of what was about to take place, the
adversary would assert that imagination or expectant atten-
tion had wrought its work, and it would be impossible for us
to prove a negative. Have we, then, any cases in which no
previous preparation of mind could possibly have united itself
with the manipulations? We have; experienced mesmerisers
are quite alive to this question : for it is idle to suppose that the
cautious and scientific men who maintain the theory of “ trans-
mission” have not well weighed in their minds the antago-
nistic theory of “imagination.” Before we enter upon evi-
dence of a higher character,* I should like first to mention
that I have had two cases in which all Dr. Holland’s ingenious
scaffolding of facts, reasoning, and conclusion have no place
whatever. They were the cases of two of my parishioners,
two ignorant unimaginative peasants, one a strong man, and


* The attention of Dr. Holland is specially requested to Dr. Esdaile’s last
work, Natural and Mesmeric Clairvoyance (Bailliére), and more particularly to
the ninth chapter, as bearing directly on his own argument. I cannot sufficiently
express how deeply the mesmeric world are indebted to Dr. Esdaile, not only for
his noble and humane exertions in India, but also for the valuable addition that
he has made to our literature by this last unanswerable volume.

VOL. X.


FF


398 Dr. Holland ignores The Zoist


the other a young woman, neither of whom had ever before
heard of mesmerism, and neither of whom was conscious at
the time that anything was going on. So far from “ ex-
pectant attention” predisposing their nervous system for the
development of an effect, I had not mentioned to any one
what I was purposing to attempt, for I had not even thought
myself of the treatment a minute before I commenced. Both
parties were suffering from acute intolerable pain, and, while
conversing with them, I made a few passes before the face,
and in a minute or twothe most palpable effects were brought
about. All the a priori arguments of a medical college, and
all instances of failure or of imagination on other occasions
cannot destroy two positive facts, in which the rapid action
of the mesmerism, and the unconscious condition of the
patients oppose the hypothesis of Dr. Holland, that the effect
was produced through the senses by an impression on the
mind from without.* Still, however, it will be said that I
am but a country clergyman, not competent, according to our
author’s views, (Chap. I.) to form “a right estimate of the
habits and temperament of the subjects of experiment,”’—not
competent to make “due observation of the indirect or
secondary, as well as of the direct effects,” or to separate the
post hoc from the propter hoc;—and therefore I will refer him
to those who are, to Dr. Esdaile, Dr. Gregory, Dr. Elliotson,
and Dr. Ashburner, and the other accomplished medical
men, and men of science, whose writings adorn the pages of
The Zoist. It is possible that Dr. Holland may not have
seen The Zoist. But if he has not seen it, why has he not?
and why has he not referred to it? and, analyzing and sifting
its contents, refuted them if he were able? Such silence is
somewhat suspicious, for what is The Zoist? The Zoist is
the authorized repertoire of the most important facts which
bear on this department of physiology. The Zoist is no
ephemeral periodical, the production of unknown men, but a
publication which is now completing its tenth volume, and the
tenth year of its existence. To ignore a work like this, may
of course be a convenient mode of building up an hypothesis ;
but scarcely what we should expect from an author, who has
actually written a chapter on “ Evidence,” and who tells us
in that chapter that,—


“Every philosophical physician is bound to watch over these
events as they pass before him; never refusing inquiry, because
what is put forward is new or strange,—but requiring evidence in


* These cases are given in detail in the Second Volume of The Zoist, p. 380,
and in Mesmerism and its Opponents, Second.Edition, p. 135.


and all conclusive testimony. 899


proportion to the unusual character of the facts,—sifting closely
that which is offered, and rejecting all conclusions not founded on this
basis.”


—i.e., we presume, on the basis of the whole truth,—in
other words, on the facts set forth by the adversary, as
well as on the facts set forth by the author himself.
When, therefore, Dr. Holland shall have sifted closely the
Ninth Chapter of Dr. Esdaile’s last work on Mesmerism, and
the facts contained in that chapter, I will request him to sift
closely a paper in The Zoist, which has probably made its ap-
pearance since his own volume was written.* It is an article
by Dr. Gregory, Professor of Chemistry in the University of
Edinburgh, a philosopher well acquainted with the laws of
medical evidence, and an antagonist every way worthy of Dr.
Holland’s serious consideration. The article is ‘on the
Theory of Imagination as the Cause of Mesmeric Pheno-
mena.” It is full of facts, which, without giving names,
are vouched for on the testimony of Dr. Gregory himself ;
and as they enter into the very pith of Dr. Holland’s rea-
soning, I will present him with a few of the more salient
points :—

I. Dr. Gregory remarks, first of all, that even in those
experiments, in which an appeal is made to the imagination of
the patient, the best cases are not those in which a lively
imagination is observed. A vivid imagination is an obstacle
to impressibility, rather than a help to it. A larger propor-
tion of impressible subjects is found among illiterate peasants
than among persons of active intellect and high imaginetive
powers.

II. Infants, sleeping persons, and brutes have been
strongly affected by gazing, and by passes without contact.
Dupotet states that sleeping persons are peculiarly suscep-
tible to magnetic action. Dr. Gregory has seen sleeping
children and sleeping brutes strongly affected by gazing, as
well as by passes without contact ; and he refers to the report
of the committee of the French Academy of Medicine, in
1831, which admits the fact that physical magnetic effects had
been produced without the knowledge of the patient.t

In regard to the susceptibility of infants or of children who
are too young to be influenced by mental attention, I have
an interesting case to narrate, in confirmation of Dr. Gregory’s


* Zoist, No. XXXVII., Vol. X., p. 1.

+ This report is published in Mr. Colquhoun’s Isis Revelata, volume 2nd.
The committee states that a child of twenty-eight months, and a deaf and dumb
lad, were affected, though ignorant of what was done to them. (p. 218.) It
should be remembered that this committee was composed of medical men.


FF2


400 Facts without end, independent


assertion. The last time that I attended at the Mesmeric
Infirmary, a Mrs. Townsend came before the committee to
thank them for the benefit which her child had received. She
carried the boy in her arms, and told me his history. When
he was only two years of age, he fell out of bed, and the acci-
dent brought on a white swelling in the knee. He was under
medical treatment a year and a quarter, becoming worse and
worse ; till at last the surgeon who attended him, and several
medical men at the Middlesex Hospital, whither he was
taken, recommended amputation of the limb to save his life.
Happily, the mother was advised to carry him to the Mesmeric
Infirmary. At the end of the first week a favourable result
developed itself; and in the course of two months the swelling
was nearly subdued. When I saw the boy, he looked healthy
and was free from pain. The knee was stiff, but was still im-
proving: whether the stiffness will be completely reduced
may be a question: but the boy’s life and limb have been
saved ; he is healthy, and free from pain.

Now, if Dr. Holland proposes to explain this case of a
young child aged three and a quarter years by his theory
of expectant attention, he must bring forward more “ medical
evidence” than his book has yet presented.

III. It is a matter of frequent experience with practical
magnetizers, that persons who have at first been thrown into
the mesmeric sleep by the usual processes, may, if they be
highly susceptible, be put to sleep without their knowledge.
Dr. Gregory has himself seen and done this. ‘ Nay, it has
happened frequently, and on one occasion at least in his own
experience, that when the mesmeriser has been acting on one
patient, another patient, in a different room, and not aware of
this, has been put to sleep.” I beg to add that these facts
are notoriously common: numerous instances of this kind,
well-authenticated, could be established.

1V. Blind persons have been acted on, and put to sleep,
without their knowledge. Dr. Gregory has himself seen a
blind patient strongly affected, and put to sleep while he was
engaged in conversation with another person. Dr. Esdaile,
who had been long looking out for a blind man upon whom
to test the imagination theory, at last found one, and en-
tranced him in ten minutes without saying a word, and
without touching him. The particulars are curious.


“The first attempt to influence him was made by gazing at him
silently over a wall, while he was engaged in the act of eating his
solitary dinner, at the distance of twenty yards. He gradually
ceased to eat, and ina quarter of an hour was profoundly entranced.”
—(Esdaile, p. 228.)


-*


of Imagination. 401


In the Fifth Volume of The Zoist there is an instance of
a blind patient being mesmerised and affected, when there
was no possibility of his being aware of it.

V. Dr. Gregory next adduces the fact, of patients in the
sleep-waking state, distinguishing water, or any other object,
which has been mesmerised, from such as has not. He has
seen the patient pick out the mesmerised glass from all the
rest. Let me add that Dr. Esdaile (p. 232) states that he has
had numerous experiments of this nature, on which he can
rely, and in which the most effectual precautions were taken,
to prevent the cognizance of the patient. And in the 37th
number of The Zoist, p. 99, there is so striking a fact men-
tioned that I venture to repeat it, because, since it was pub-
lished, I have received the statement again from the mouth
of my enlightened and high-minded friend, the surgeon, who
was the mesmeriser on the occasion.


“One day the surgeon had been chatting with the lady’s father,
in the dining-room, during luncheon, and, at his request, shewn him,
by mesmerising a jug of water, how water is mesmerised. No one
else was in the room. The jug and a glass were always left in the
room that she might take her medicine in the water when she chose :
and after the gentlemen were gone, she went into the room, and, as
she was accustomed, poured herself out a glass of water, took her
medicine in it, but instantly sank back, supported by her mother, into
a chair, in a profound sleep, which lasted some hours. Neither
- she nor her mother knew anything about mesmerised water, and the
explanation was not conceivable, till the father and surgeon men-
tioned what had occurred between them.”


VI. Dr. Gregory next mentions a point, which Dr. Holland
will, of course, reject as not sufficiently established; but
respecting which he may be assured that there is much more
evidence in existence than he is aware of, viz., the phenome-
non of luminous emanations from the hands and breath of the
mesmeriser, rendered visible to the sleeper. Of course, these
are facts which, in Dr. Holland’s present state of mind, I am
not disposed to press. But he must be informed that the
degree of coincidence, in the observations of the mesmeric
sleepers, as to what they have seen in these luminous emana-
tions, is very remarkable, when it is considered that they
have not had the slightest knowledge of what others have
observed. Certainly, there is strong presumption from all
these representations, that something of an imponderable
nature is transmitted from the human body,—that some
power, analogous to vital force, does go out of a man when he
is mesmerising. In corroboration of this view, I will men-
tion that, upon which I do not think that Dr. Gregory has


402 Facts without end, independent


touched, the peculiar sensation of exhaustion and fatigue,
which many mesmerisers experience, for which the slight mus-
cular exertion which the process demands is quite insufficient
to account. The Rev. Chauncy Hare Townshend says,—


“‘That the mesmeric influence is capable of exhaustion and
repair, like any other physical agency, has been frequently forced
upon my conviction. When I am strongest I can best mesmerise ;


and my power declines in proportion to the fatigue consequent upon
its exertion.”’—(p. 291.)


Numerous instances go to prove, that, when persons over-
mesmerise, the benefit which the patients derive is greatly
lessened in degree, in spite of all their expectant attention.

VIL. The next point, which Dr. Gregory brings forward,
is the strange sympathy which exists between the mesmeriser
and the patient,—when the latter feels a sensation of pain, if
the operator be pricked or pinched,—and tastes that on his
palate which the operator has put into his mouth. “I have
seen the sleeper feel and taste everything felt and tasted by
the operator, while the latter stood at several yards distance,
and was concealed from sight.” This sympathy of pain I have
myself witnessed over and over again, where there could be
neither mistake nor collusion: and in regard to sympathy of
taste, I beg to refer Dr. Holland to a remarkable paper in
the Fifth Volume of The Zoist, p. 242, in which Dr. Elliotson
narrates what took place at his house, when the Archbishop of
Dublin, and the Hon. Captain Scarlett assisted in the expe-
riments. I was myself present on the occasion, and can
vouch for the accuracy of what is reported.*

The above are some of the leading points in Dr. Gregory’s
able paper: (I have purposely stopped short of the argu-
ments drawn from clairvoyance, lest allusion to such “ mira-
culous” facts should disturb our opponent’s equilibrium) and if
Dr. Holland will have the goodness dispassionately to examine
those points, and to bear in mind that they are not the state-
ments of the professor alone, but statements which are re-
affirmed and corroborated by numerous other observers, he
must assuredly begin to think that he has been somewhat
premature in his conclusions. Our sceptic has admitted that
many of the alleged effects of mesmerism are true; but he


* By the way, let me ask Dr. Holland, if he believes in the many instances
which are recorded of the effects produced on old persons when they sleep with
the young. These stories seem to show that there is (as has been well expressed)
‘*a mutual loss and gain, and interchange of vital force.”"—(Townshend, p. 199.)


If these stories be true, has not the fact a close connection with the mesmeric
theory of transmission ? P


of Imagination. 403


must now please to remember that for years and years the
reality of those very effects was denied,—and the credulity of
those who believed in them made the standing-jest of his
profession. Those, who now affirm the actuality of those
points which support the theory of some transmitted agent,
are the very same men who originally asserted the truthfulness
of those other phenomena,—the very same men who formerly
maintained the reality of insensibility to pain,—and the very
same men who proclaimed their convictions as to facts, which
Dr. Holland once ridiculed as untrue, and has now lived long
enough to see proved. Surely, here is a primd facie case for
the examination of their testimony on these other questions
of controversy! Dr. Holland speaks of “no authenticated
fact.” What constitutes, in his judgment, an “authenticated
fact?” When Professor Gregory says that he “has often,
and with every precaution, tried an experiment with mes-
merised water,” and succeeded, is not that an authenticated
fact? When Dr. Esdaile says that

“he will adduce instances of people being entranced from another
room without their having the least suspicion of his intentions, and


of a blind man being reduced, on the first attempt, to the most
intense degree of mesmeric coma,”


—are not those authenticated facts? What becomes of the
theory of expectant attention in cases of this description ?
We must pin Dr. Holland down to a categorical answer ; and
when he shall have well examined in detail (sifted closely,
are his own words) those various experiments which make
against his own theory,—and shall have pronounced his opi-
nion upon them, he will be entitled to a second hearing: till
then, we can only regard him as a partisan who values the
interest of his client beyond every other consideration, and
can merely estimate his Chapters on Physiology as a one-
sided book, which “ loves darkness rather than light,” because
light would be fatal to his conclusions.

We must have one more word with the “physician” be-
fore we part. At p. 14, it is said that this mental excitement
“ produces effects not merely on the sensations thence de-
rived, but seemingly also in many cases on the physical state
and functions of the parts concerned.” At p. 36, expectant
attention is said to be “ brought into a degree of activity in
certain habits, and to evolve many remarkable results.” At
p- 39, it is said that “the point especially meriting regard is
the evidence afforded that the physical state or function of a
part is actually altered from this cause, and not the mental
perception only.” In other words, these various passages
mean that that which is called mesmerism, but which Dr.


404 Advice to Dr. Holland.


Holland merely regards as the fruits of imagination, or mental
preparation, does work upon the physical state a very powerful
effect, evolving in its action results of a peculiar character.
Exactly so; this is what we have all been affirming for years,
only in much more simple and direct language, and with this
position superadded, viz., that these powerful effects, when
carefully directed, possess a curative action, in cases of ex-
treme disease, as Dr. Holland himself well knows. I repeat
it; Dr. Holland is acquainted with the valuable effects of
mesmerism, in an instance where medical treatment was of
slight or of no avail! Why, then, does he not recommend
it? Why does he not permit it? Why does he throw dis-
couragement around it? “ What’s in a name?” Let him
call it expectant attention, idealism, mesmerism, or sophism,
still if its action through the senses do produce such a degree
of activity in the nervous system, that pain and disease are
mitigated or removed, surely it would be the part of a hu-
mane physician to app this method of alleviation to his other
items of medical treatment.* We ask no more. We simply
say, unite the healing power of mesmerism with your other
established formulas; and as Mr. Chenevix (to whom Dr.
Holland himself refers in one of his notes) said years ago,
“if Imagination can cure diseases, then cure by Imagination,
and the sick will bless you.”

If Dr. Holland will pursue this path steadily and con-
scientiously, he will have no reason to repent of his choice.
Fresh facts, fresh truths, fresh information, will gradually
open upon him, furnishing fresh materials for future chapters,
or rather, future volumes on physiology. And the readers
of The Zoist will be delighted once more to welcome our
author under such circumstances, being persuaded that his
next contributions to science will partake more of a perma-
nent character than those of his present lucubrations. Or,
as our friend Lucretius has so happily expressed it,—

‘‘ Hee si pernosces, parva perfunctus opella,
(Namque alid ex alio clarescet) non tibi cca
Nox iter eripiet, quin ultima naturai


Pervideas, ita res accendent lumina rebus.”’
Lib. i., 1107.


Our author will perceive that I have carefully abstained
from all examination of those passages of his book which are


* The attention of Dr. Holland is particularly requested to the following
extract from the last annual report of the Mesmeric Infirmary. “ We know the
utility of ordinary medical treatment ; we have the same good opinion of the
properties of medicines, the abstraction of blood, and counter-irritation, and all
well-established medical measures, as the medical world at large: those of us who


Adolphe Didier’s Clairvoyance. 405


strictly medical in their character. Still, even with this pre-
caution, I fear that I shall yet be charged with an intrusive
interference with matters which no way become me; and
perhaps I am somewhat open to that “soft impeachment ;”
but let me assure Dr. Holland, that, if he had not tempted
me into the field by no unfrequent allusions to miraculous
agencies, I should have left his theory of expectant attention
to those amongst us who are far more competent to deal
with it.
I remain, Mr. Editor,
Your humble servant,
Grorce Sanpsy.


——


XII. Adolphe Didier’s Clairvoyance. By Mr. Barru.


‘* We know but too well that popular fancy must have some vent ; the days of
astrology and witchcraft, of ghosts and hobgoblins, have passed away and have
been succeeded by homeceopathy and clairvoyance.”—Lancet, Nov. 2, 1852;
p- 429.


Last summer, Lord , who holds a commission in the
Guards, called upon me, accompanied by a brother officer,
to request that I would attend and mesmerise a clairvoyant
for them as soon as he had arrived from Paris. One gen-
tleman was perfectly convinced from his past experience that
the clairvoyant faculty really did exist ; the other was willing
to be convinced if he could only obtain personally sufficient
evidence. He wished to obtain the evidence afforded by the
exercise not only of his reason but of his senses, and there-
fore Adolphe Didier (the brother of Alexis) was, at consider-
able expense, engaged to leave Paris for a few days and come
to London. One day, soon after their visit, 1 received a
message to go and see them as soon as possible, Adolphe
Didier being expected. I arrived before Adolphe, who was
perfectly a stranger to Lord , but had been consulted a
few years previously at Paris by his brother officer.

On Adolphe being announced, a quiet, retiring, well-
bred man entered the apartment, and, after the customary
exchange of salutations and some courteous enquiries about
his journey from the gentlemen present, I proceeded to mes-
merise him. Having ascertained that he had passed into the
clairvoyant state, and announced that he might now be in-


are medical men practise exactly as the rest of the profession practise ; but in
our private practice we employ mesmerism IN ADDITION to the means ordinarily
used by the medical profession.’” Now let the physician simply recommend
‘* expectant attention,’’ as a process of cure, in addition to the other parts of
his prescription, and his patients will thank him.


406 Adolphe Didier’s


terrogated, the question was put, “ How shall we test him,
Mr. Barth?” I replied that he must indicate how he would
be tested ; that no mesmeriser of experience would allow a
clairvoyant to be subjected to any test which the clairvoyant
objected to attempt; and therefore we would ask Adolphe
Didier what he would do and then try and ascertain if he
could do it, subjecting him to as rigid a testing process as
we could devise. On putting the question, Adolphe said he
would read in a book without having the book presented
him ; or would yisit and describe any distant place; and
would try and do anything required provided it was not in-
sisted upon if he found that he was unable to oblige them.
Lord directly reached (quite at random) a book from a
shelf, and, holding it behind him, asked, “ What book have
I now in my hand?” Adolphe Didier in a few seconds re-
plied, “ Voyage en Suisse.’ The inquirer immediately held
up the book that we might perceive that Didier had correctly
read the gilt lettering on its back. Placing the book behind
him again and without opening it, he requested that Adolphe
would read the four first lines on page 27. Adolphe imme-
diately repeated several sentences in French. On opening
the book and turning to page 27, we found that Adolphe had
correctly read four lines from the 27th page of a closed book,
held behind his querist, entirely out of all the possible range
of natural vision. He then went mentally to a nobleman’s
residence in one of the midland counties, and described it
most accurately even to the pictures and the costumes of the
portraits hanging in the dining-hall.

An hour before my interview with Adolphe, I was at the
house of a lady patient, where my servant found me and gave e
me Lord ’s note, asking my immediate attendance. This
lady had lost a very valuable and much prized brilliant ring,
which she was anxious to know something about. As I hap-
pened on perusing my note to say that I must now go and
mesmerise Adolphe Didier, the French clairvoyant, the lady
remarked, “ I wish he could tell you about a ring which was
stolen from me two years ago.” I rejoined that I would, if
an opportunity occurred, ask him about it; that I did not
know anything of his method of perceiving, but that if she
wrote her name on a piece of paper I would give it to him
and try if he could make out her wishes or discover anything
respecting the lost article. I now placed this piece of paper
in his hand. He put it to his lips and on his forehead ; and,
after a short interval of apparent reflection, he stated that it
was written by a lady, whom he described correctly ; and that
she wanted to know about a lost ring. He then described


Clairvoyance. 407


the ring; the apartment from which it was taken ; what arti-
cles were in the box where it had been previously deposited ;
who had taken it; and where it was pawned ; adding that it
would not be recovered unless the pawnbroker would admit
having received it and declare where he had disposed of it.

His description of the lady; of the apartment; of the
box, and the various articles contained therein, one article
being very curious and having therefore puzzled him much,
were all perfectly correct : the person who he stated had taken
it is deceased. There was some difficulty in ascertaining the
pawnbroker indicated by him. The party who was presumed
to be meant denied ever having taken in pledge any ring of
so great a value, and thus verification of the latter part of
his statement was not possible. This was not cerebral sym-
pathy or thought-reading. The particulars were totally un-
known to any one present, and the event to which they
referred had taken place two years previously. It is some-
what curious and corroboratory, that, on Alexis Didier being
asked in Paris, and Ellen Dawson subsequently in London,
also respecting the ring, they each described the same person
as having stolen it. For these three clairvoyants each to
have described the same person and circumstances without a
possibility of any of them knowing what the others had said,
is a fact somewhat too remarkable to be accounted for on the
ground of “extraordinary coincidence,” or “fortunate guess
work.”

I had several other opportunities of testing Adolphe’s
powers, and found him a very good clairvoyant, far superior
to the average in the extent or range of his powers, but, like
all others who do not confine their faculty to one special pur-
pose, occasionally liable to be in error. I will add an account
of the first experience of Lord ’s friend with Adolphe.
As the narrator is a gentleman and an officer in Her Majesty’s
service, and mentioned the following circumstances in sober
earnest, we are bound, I presume, to accept it as truth, par-
ticularly as there are many analogous cases in the pages of
mesmeric works to corroborate it.

About four years ago the narrator called on Adolphe
in Paris, never having previously seen him. When Adolphe
was put to sleep, the question was asked, “Can you, M.
Adolphe tell me my name and where I come from?” Ina
few seconds Adolphe replied, “‘ You come from England, and
your name is Monsieur 3” both being correct. Adolphe
might easily have perceived that his visitor was an English-
man, but to hit clairvoyantly on his surname was a feat that
very few clairvoyants have ever accomplished. The next


408 Adolphe Didier’s


remark was, “M. Adolphe! I have now in my pocket a
letter, can you tell me anything of its contents, or the cir-
cumstances to which it relates?” Adolphe presently replied,
“ You have received that letter from London, from a military
commandant,—from a place where military business is trans-
acted; in it he tells you that your commission is ready for
you if you can pass the proper examination ; and that you
are to go to a place—a brick building which I can see a good
way from London, to be examined next Tuesday.” The
letter was an official letter containing the very information
which Adolphe gave, and which might have been obtained
by thought-reading, as the questor knew the contents of the
letter in his pocket; but that which follows was pre-vision,
which is more extraordinary and not easily accounted for as
a power. Having told the substance of the letter, Adolphe
added, “ But you need not go to England till next Tuesday,
because you will not pass your examination.” The gentleman
exclaimed, “ What! shall I be rejected?” “No,” replied
Adolphe ; “you will not be rejected—you will not pass.”
The interrogator could not comprehend this; and remarked
that if he did not pass he must be rejected. Adolphe said,
“You will not pass on Tuesday—you will not be rejected—
you need not leave Paris—you will pass your examination
and get your commission, but not on Tuesday.” Of course
M. did not heed this admonition of Adolphe, but
hastened to London, and reached Sandhurst on the Tuesday
morning as ordered. However, when he presented himself
with his official letter to the examiner, it was found that,
through some oversight of secretaries or clerks, his name had
not been inserted in the list of names forwarded to them from
the Horse Guards, and that consequently he could not be
examined. He applied to the proper authorities ; the mistake
was rectified; he passed his examination a few days after-
ward, and received the commission which he now holds. Thus
all that Adolphe Didier pre-vised was verified by the event ;
the question still remains, “ How did he know it ?”
Gentlemen, I beg leave to hand you the above for The
Zoist should you have room for its insertion, and am,
Gentlemen, your obedient servant,
Georce Bartu,
4, Mornington Crescent, Dec. 4, 1852.
To the Editors of The Zoist.


Clairvoyance. 409


Postscript to Mr. Barth’s Case of Clairvoyance by Dr. Elliotson.


Two months ago I received a letter from the Rev.
Chauncy Hare Townshend, dated Oct. 6, Mon Loisir, Lau-
sanne, from which the following is an extract :—


** At Geneva I saw the brother of Alexis, Adolphe Didier, and,
having mesmerised him, I asked him to see an acquaintance of mine
at Lausanne. I did not mention whether man or woman, but he
saw the person I meant, namely, my cousiv, Miss » and said
she was going out to ride, describing her appearance, dress, &c., and
her house, very distinctly. Everything he said was verified on my
return to Lausanne. He also saw me speaking to her before I left
Lausanne, and had an anterior vision of what really Aad taken
place—a fact I never before remarked. A friend of mine, a Mr.
Lawrence, a great believer in mesmerism, also shewed me a girl in
somnambulism—a genuine case, with which you would have been
delighted. Her extase was beautiful, and (like the Okeys) she was
immediately arrested and stiffened by a pass made at a distance
behind her back. I wanted to see Adolphe, and took him to
(who was then at Geneva). He wanted Adolphe to see (in
clairvoyance) a house near Sevenoaks that he ( ) once possessed,
but had not seen for some years. The experiment was not a happ
one. Adolphe was (I think) wonderful at first, but got puzzled,
and then the incredulity of —— and destroyed the clairvoy-
ance, and went away triumphant at the failure!! ‘ Neither
would he be persuaded though one rose from the dead,’ as
truly said.

“There is a curious story that M. Woodley de Cerjat wanted
you to know. I believe he wrote it to Dickens to tell you again.
However I may as well repeat it.

“ A young lady, a friend of M. Cerjat’s, who had been with her
family at Lausanne, was taken ill at Berne with typhus fever. Her
doctor found her one day in a lucid interval (she was generally deli-
rious), but no sooner had he touched her hand than she seemed to
pass into an extraordinary state, and cried out, ‘Oh that poor child!
that pore little boy! Why did you cut his head open? How is he
now!’ The doctor, astonished, replied, ‘I left him well; I hope
he will recover,’ and tried to calm the patient. But, when he got
out of the room, he said, ‘ That was the most extraordinary thing I
ever knew in my life: I am just come from trepanning a boy whose
head had been injured, but there was no human means by which
Miss could have known it, as I am only this moment come
direct from the boy here and no one knew of the accident, nor had
Miss ’s nurse ever left the room.’ The explanation seems to
be that the fouch of the doctor’s hand threw the young lady into
clairvoyance. She is since dead, and M. de Cerjat attended her


} 9s


funeral.


There is not time to ask for Mr. Townshend’s permission


410 Censure of Dr. Robertson’s and Mr. Terry’s


to print these extracts from his letter: but seeing Mr. Barth’s
communication I cannot resist, and trust Mr. Townshend
will pardon me.—Joun EL.iorson.


XIII. Observations on the conduct of Dr. Robertson, Mr.
Terry, surgeon, and the Vicar of St. Sepulchre’s, North-
ampton.


“To me it seems that those divines who suffer this insidious jugglery to steal
among their flocks under the garb of physiology, which spurns and despises it,
betray their trust.’’ ‘* How much more aw will the people have to murmur,
if the working clergy themselves, aband sense, and their awful
regard of miracles, tolerate, teach, and testify to s an art worthy only of the priests
of Baal’”’—Dr. Hull, of Norwich. Clairvoyance and the Clergy, p. 16.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE ZOIST.


Sir,—I feel induced to trouble you with a few remarks
upon the subject of the late mesmeric proceedings at North-
ampton on account of the discreditable circumstances which
led to Mr. Millington’s resignation of the curacy of St.
Sepulchre’s.

The report which appeared in the last number of The
Zoist, to the truthfulness of which I can bear my strongest
testimony, will sufficiently show the spirit in which the sub-
ject was treated by the opposite parties. Mr. Millington, I
conceive, was actuated by the most creditable and praise-
worthy motives in delivering a lecture on the “ Phenomena
of Dreams, Mesmerism, Clairvoyance,” &c.; that lecture was
highly appreciated by a very large and respectable attendance,
lay and clerical, both from the town and neighbourhood ;
and there can be no doubt that it was extremely useful
in turning into a profitable channel the intense excitement
which had previously been created upon the subject by itine-
rant lecturers in the town.

He has acted, I think, most wisely in publishing the
lecture ; its ability and spirit will speak for themselves, and
its Christian principles will totally refute the unfounded ca-
lumnies that were circulated against him by parties from
whom we might have expected better things, especially as
they were just as ignorant of the lecture itself as of the sub-
ject matter upon which it treated.

The very announcement of the lecture called forth a public
censure, which was followed up by a kind of indirect attack
in one of the local newspapers from a surgeon in the town,
who no doubt was greatly incited thereto by the kindred in-
dignation of Dr. Robertson, who took the lead in the very


conduct at Northampton. 411


creditable (?) proceedings at the George Hotel, alluded to by
your correspondent, A. B., in the last Zoist. Should Mr.
Terry ever venture to make his appearance in public again
upon the same subject, which I by no means anticipate, I
hope he will be prepared to enlighten us all with something
in the shape of a rational argument in support of his views,
or at least that he will express himself in terms sufficiently
intelligible for men of moderate ability to understand. It
seems essentially necessary that we should know our own
minds in the first instance before we attempt to communicate
instruction to others. Had he paid a little attention to the
subject and made a few private experiments for his own con-
viction, he would not have placed himself in that indefen-
sible and ridiculous position from which no “ highly gifted
friend” could possibly extricate him. Medical men for-
tunately are just as amenable to public opinion as other
people ; and the public are very little disposed in these times
to be satisfied with hard names, contempt, and ridicule when
they are earnestly searching for the truth on any important
subject.

The great majority of the people of this country are now
far too well acquainted with the wonderful facts of mesmerism
not to smile at the ignorance, obstinacy, or incredulity of
those medical men who can only think and act with a class,
or who stand so high in their own estimation as to pronounce
an opinion ea cathedrd upon a subject which they have never
investigated and of which they simply know nothing at all,
and who are unscrupulous enough to denounce all who un-
derstand it and believe it to be a great and valuable truth as
fools and impostors or something worse ; although amongst
this number must be included very many of our nobility and
some of the greatest minds in the country.

It may be well for such men to consider how far their
conduct in this matter may be calculated to shake the confi-
dence. of the public in the soundness of their judgment in
other matters generally connected with their profession.
When plain palpable facts of the most striking and remark-
able character, presented to our senses by persons of the
most unquestionable honesty, are denounced as “ mummery,
humbug, nonsense,” it is not likely that we shall be con-
vinced that they are so without knowing the reason why.

Dr. Robertson may be a great lover of truth for aught I
know, and he may be very anxious to defend it against the
attacks of infidels and unbelievers in general; but for any
new light that he has thrown upon the subject of mesmerism
either on one side or the other, the Northampton people will


412 Censure of the Vicar of St. Sepulchre’s.


scarcely consider themselves under any great obligation to
him. And before he had accused Mr. Millington to other
parties of holding opinions of an infidel tendency and dan-
gerous to the Christian faith, common fairness would seem to
have required that he should have fully satisfied himself as to
what Mr. Millington’s opinions really were. By the course
he has pursued, and by the withdrawal along with Mr. Terry
of his subscription from the curacy in order to get rid of Mr.
Millington, he has certainly exposed himself to the grave
charge of having recourse to very different weapons from
those which we expect to find in the hands of a lover of truth
or a lover of fair play, and especially a defender of our com-
mon faith.

You have already been informed, Mr. Editor, of the
grounds of Mr. Millington’s resignation of his curacy. That
the vicar of St. Sepulchre’s should have required a pledge
from his curate which no gentleman could make, will not be a
matter of surprise to any who know him. Had he mani-
fested in this matter that independent spirit of which he is
continually boasting, but of which, I fear, he possesses very
little, instead of following the dictum of the doctors, he
would not have lost some of his best friends, and among
these, as the parishioners can testify, one of the most valu-
able of curates.

I remain, Sir, &c.,
A Specrator.*


XIV. Cure of St. Vitus’s Dance. By Mr. Cotsourne, of
Sturminster. Communicated by Dr. Elliotson.


‘“* All the therapeutic good that can be secured by this ridiculous, trumpery
art, can be got by ordinary and sober methods. Faith in his medical adviser is
required from a curable patient; and whatever good that mesmeric passes, antics,
and scaramouch movements have done, it hath been done by imagination and
through faith. Then let medical practitioners employ sober, rational proceedings,
and not descend to imitate jugglers.’".—Dr. Hull, Clairvoyance and the Clergy,
p- 16.

Sturminster, June 16, 1852.

Dear Sir,—Since my brief but well-remembered inter-
view with you in town last year, many instances of the effects
of mesmeric power have come under my knowledge, even in
this little out-of-the-world nook, including amongst them a
very interesting case of clairvoyance. Of this latter, how-
ever, I am not yet at liberty to speak : certain circumstances
connected with the clairvoyant forbid me to make the matter


* We have this gentleman’s name and address.


Cure of St. Vitus’s Dance. 413


public at present. A cure of a severe case of St. Vitus’s
dance within the past fortnight should not be withheld from
you.

John Gould, aged 19, son of John Gould, tailor, of Stur-
minster, Newton, was for some time afflicted with rheumatic
pains, and about six months ago the disease termed St.
Vitus’s dance made its appearance, and continued daily to
get worse for a month up to the Ist of June, when I saw him
for the first time since the attack. I confess the interview
was to me quite appalling ; the poor fellow had so far lost the
use of speech as to be wholly unintelligible; his limbs and
head, in fact, every muscle of his body, seemed in continual
motion ; his intellect appeared somewhat impaired: indeed
to me he looked like a maniac. Understanding that the mi-
nister of the parish had declared to him his opinion that mes-
merism would do him good, and finding my way thus cleared,
I immediately set to work without loss of time. His father
endeavoured to hold his head still while I attempted to make
passes over him; but entirely without avail, as the head, in
spite of the utmost strength exerted, would spring convul-
sively from side to side every moment. I persisted in making
passes for twenty or twenty-five minutes without producing
any apparent effect, though the patient confessed afterwards
to feeling a little soothed. Since that date I have mesmerised
him ten times on different days, each time with increased
effect, and each day shewing a gradual improvement, up to
yesterday, when the convulsive motions had so far left him
that he was able to read, and to thread a needle, and to con-
verse with very slight hesitation. He is of course still pale
and weak, but his general health is rapidly improving, and
he may be said to be convalescent.

On one of my visits I found him suffering from head-
ache, which was removed in a few minutes by placing his
back towards me and making passes from the crown of the
head down over the shoulders. On another occasion he com-
plained of severe rheumatic pain in the right shoulder, that
succumbed to a few special passes over the afflicted part. My
operations were conducted under considerable disadvantage ;
being subjected to many interruptions in the little cottage.
The case was no doubt as severe a one as is ever witnessed.

The father, mother, and patient will each bear glad and
grateful testimony to the above statement.

I am, dear Sir, yours very respectfully,
To Dr. Elliotson. W. Coxsourne.


*,* I have received a letter from Mr. Colbourne, dated
VOL. x. GG


414 Cure of Blindness of seventeen years’ standing,


Dec. 2, in which he states that the boy continued to get well
and remains well, working at his trade.

I believe that mesmerism will rarely be found to fail in
curing this disease. I have never failed except in very long
standing cases, especially in adults. Instances of the mes-
meric cures of the disease will be found in Nos. II., pp. 195
—208; X., pp. 201-6; XVII., p. 11; XIX., p. 286; XXI.,
p. 86; XXVII., p. 375 (great benefit only); XXIX., p. 53;
XXX., p. 183; ditto; XXXIV., p. 212.—J. Exxiorson.


XV. Cure of Blindness of seventeen years’ standing, with a
reappearance of measles after their suppression during that
number of years. Communicated by Mr. Barth.

“The wretched stuff contained in the pages of The Zoist, as quoted by Dr.

Maitland, I should feel degraded to pick to pieces. I am sure that the tales are

not worthy of refutation, scarcely a sneer: and how even so laborious a student


as he must be, can have the patience to copy its absurd stories, is hard to ex-
plain.”’—Dr. Hull’s Clairvoyance and the Clergy, p. 5.


TO THE EDITORS OF THE ZOIST.


GeENTLEMEN,—I beg leave to hand you for insertion some
particulars of an extraordinary cure of blindness by mes-
merism. The disease was the result of the eruption of measles
being suppressed : and the mesmeric cure of it seems to have
been attended by the reappearance of a similar eruption seven-
teen years after the suppression. The case is communicated
to me by C. D. J. Lowder, Esq., M.D., of Ryde, Isle of
Wight, who has kindly permitted me to publish his name as
a voucher for its authenticity. The mesmeriser was a phy-
sician, a friend of Dr. Lowder, and at the time was resident
in Berlin. He had been pursuing the study of mesmerism
with much ardour, and had been successful in curing diseases
with it. Dr. Lowder made notes of the case immediately
after his friend had uarrated it to him, and has in confidence
told me his friend’s name, which is withheld merely because
an opportunity of obtaining his sanction for its publication
has not occurred. I quote from Dr. Lowder’s letter to me,
written in reply to my application for his confirmation and
detail of the case, after I had heard it from a lady who was
one of his patients.

“It appears that my friend, the doctor, was pursuing
practically the subject of mesmerism in Berlin, where he
resided, and amongst other patients succeeded in curing
some slight cases of pannus.* The patient, who is the sub-
ject of your enquiry, hearing of these cures, called and pre-


A thick opake skin growing ‘over the eyes.—Zoist.


and reappearance of measles suppressed all that time. 415


sented himself as a patient pronounced incurable by the cele-
brated oculist Jiingken, under whose treatment he had long
been, and who had exhausted every means to destroy the
diseased growth which was now covering the entire cornea of
both eyes, and causing almost total blindness. His age was
24, and he had suffered from ophthalmia since the age of
seven years. He was then travelling home from school with
the eruption of measles upon his skin. They were sup-
pressed, and the eyes soon became affected ; and had gra-
dually got worse in spite of the treatment of several medical
men, till the resources of art were apparently exhausted in
the hands of the celebrated Jiingken, well known as one of
the first oculists in Europe. The doctor, on hearing the his-
tory of the case, at once declined undertaking it as being
hopeless; but his feelings of commiseration led him to yield
to the earnest entreaty of the patient, who implored him to
give it a trial. He mesmerised the patient daily for two
months without any apparent result; then there came on a
mesmeric crisis in the form of intense fetid perspiration,
compelling the patient to keep his bed. The pannus on both
eyes now began to be absorbed, and gradually disappeared
entirely: when suddenly the eruption of measles again ap-
peared upon the skin, and every trace of disease left the eyes.
My friend added that he soon after this left Berlin (about a
year before his narration to me), and that he has recently
had an opportunity of ascertaining from a friend just re-
turned from Berlin that there had been no return whatever
of ophthalmia since.”

I beg to thank Dr. Lowder for the frankness with which
he met my enquiry, and gave me permission to publish his
name. There are now so many medical practitioners who
fully believe in the curative agency of mesmerism, and even
practise it on a small scale sub rosa, but fear to have their
names publicly mentioned in connexion with the subject as
believers, lest the Lancet or Medical Times should attack
them and denounce them to the world, that we must admire
the candour of every physician who follows Dr. Elliotson’s
example and speaks what he believes to be the truth, even
when the truth relates to the professedly hated subject mes-
merism, and vouches for that truth by appending his name to
a public statement of it.


In The Zoist for October, 1851, No. XXXV., an account
of a cure of insanity was inserted, in a letter from myself to
Dr. Ashburner, who had advised that the patient should be
entrusted to me. The case was not one of a merely tem-
GG2


416 Permanent cure of Insanity.


porary character. It had become decidedly chronic: the
sufferer was invalided and sent home from India in conse-
quence of his affliction, and was confined in a private lunatic
asylum in this country between three and four years before
he came under my care; and was then perfectly cured in
twelve months by mesmerism, and restored to the full enjoy-
ment of his personal freedom. He called to bid me adieu on
the 18th of last August, in the possession of a “ sound mind
in a sound body,” about twelve months having elapsed since
his mesmeric treatment was discontinued : and he sailed for
Australia with several of his relatives about the end of that
month. I refer to this case as an evidence that our mesmeric
cures of insanity are not merely temporary alleviations but
enduring cures.
I am your obedient servant,

Grorce Barrtu.

4, Mornington Crescent.


XVI. An instance of Ellen Dawson’s Clairvoyance. Commu-
nicated through Mr. Barth.

‘* When Shakspeare introduces the supernatural, it is enough for us that in
those remote ages people believed in the existence of ghosts and fairies. But
when Bulwer and Dumas introduce clairvoyance as a part of their machinery,
and make the events depend thereon, doing so as if clairvoyance were an un-
doubted element in our human life, then the rebellious understanding rejects as
impertinent what it recognizes as false.””—Leader newspaper, Dec. 11, 1852.


‘*The calm verdict of reason is against the acceptance of the mesmeric mar-
vels, and no amount of congruity or historic coherence will make reason accept
them.’’—Jbid., Review of the Restoration of Belief, Oct. 2, 1852.


, Camberwell, Sept. 21, 1852.

Dear Sir,—You were so kind as to contrive a most
pleasant visit for my friend Mrs. E and me to your house
a short time ago, on the 6th of August, to meet and consult
Ellen Dawson; and her clairvoyance on that occasion was so
remarkable that I thought perhaps you might like an account
of it, taken down at the time, to insert in The Zoist; that
is, you can make what use of it you please.

Mrs. E. and I had taken our seats in the drawing room,
when Mr. Barth in a few minutes came in, bringing with him
Ellen Dawson, who curtsied in a modest, retiring manner,
and seated herself between us. Mr. Barth immediately fixed
a stedfast gaze upon her, at the distance of twelve feet, and
in a very few seconds she was fast asleep. He left her thus
quite quiet for a minute or two, and then, placing Mrs. E.’s
hand in hers, said, “ Well, Ellen, how do you do?” “ Quite
well, thank you, Sir,” replied she.” “ Well now, Ellen, these


Ellen Dawson’s Clairvoyance. 417


ladies want you to travel with them ; will you do so?” “ Yes
that I will,” said she; “for they are very nice ladies I see,
or I could’nt go with them.” Mrs. E. said, “I want you to
go with me, Ellen, to Terrace, Regent’s Park. I do
not live there now, but I did two years ago: and I want you
to go back to that time, on the 22nd of August, 1850.” At
first she said, “I don’t know the way there: I cannot see
how to go.” But Mr. Barth exclaimed, “Now, Ellen, go
with me from this door, and we will turn to the left, and a
little way on to the right; now, on farther and to the left
again; and now do you see Gloucester Gate before you ?”
She went with him the whole way, exclaiming now and then,
“Yes! I see, that is right—this is Terrace, I am sure,
turning to the left after you get in at the gate, with a garden
before it.” “Now,” said Mr. Barth, “this lady wants to
consult you about something that happened in this house two
years ago.” “Yes,” she replied, “something that she lost
in the front room of the second floor, over the drawing
room.” She rubbed her eyes and stopped as if she were
thinking, or rather, looking intently with her mind, and then
said, “ A small thing out of a box—it was a ring—shining ;
a diamond ring, with only one stone—very large—oval in


D>
shape—very valuable, and with something black about it,”
(it was set in black enamel.) “ It was given you by a relation
—your husband—on a particular day; and you value it so
much, that you would rather buy it over again than not
recover it. You suspected a man of taking it, but he is
innocent: it was taken out of the box, and the box left
behind, by a woman sitting in that bed-room, which was in
disorder and dark,” (they were removing.) “She did not
live in your house, but was constantly backwards and for-
wards waiting upon you. She was not tall nor stout—curious
coloured hair—reddish brown—worn plain and out from the
head : very quiet in her manners at times as if full of thought !
in very delicate health—with bad cough. She is not with
this lady now: I don’t see where she is.” Mr. Barth told
her to look and see if she could discover the woman now.
She shivered and shuddered and said, “'There’s a cloud over
me: I think she’s dead—yes! she’s dead; she died of con-
sumption some time after the robbery.” ‘Can you tell me,”
said Mrs. E., “what she did with the ring?” “She gota
good deal of money for it,” replied Ellen, “and a ticket, but
not near its value. She got a man, very respectably dressed,
to take it to a shop—a large shop—where they sell clothes
and all manner of things—not a jewellers exactly.” “Can
you describe whereabouts the shop is?” “It is a good way


418 Ellen Dawson’s Clairvoyance.


from your house—more the city way: I go to it over a bridge
—Blackfriars Bridge: there is a linendraper’s opposite, and
stalls in the street; it is a turning out of the road on the
left—a fancy baker’s on one side of it: there is a large build-
ing on the same side enclosed in gates—it looks like a school,
but inside I find it is a chapel.” She described the master
and men in the shop, and regretted she had not been asked
about it before, as she was certain she could have traced and
found it by being put in her clairvoyant state. All that
Ellen Dawson said corresponded exactly with what Alexis
and Adolphe Didier had stated (one in Paris, the other in
London), and neither of the three had heard a single word
or hint of the circumstances of the loss, and each of the three
related the exact facts.

Mr. Barth then turning to me asked me if I had anything
about me connected with the person I wished to consult her
about ; a lock of hair, or handwriting: but the only thing I
had was an ivory brooch with stags carved upon it, given me
nearly seven years ago by the person. My hand being in
hers, she felt the brooch, and I told her I wanted her to
travel with me to the person who gave it me, and try if she
could see him, and tell me what he was doing at the present
time. “The gentleman who gave you this,” said she, “isa
near relation, but not a brother—he is your husband, and
he’s not in London now: he is gone away in a large ship far
off: he went about a twelvemonth ago. I see him quite dis-
tinctly: he is not tall—rather stout—light complexion-—
whiskers growing.” (I laughed and said, “Then the climate
must suit them, for he had none at all while in England.”)
“ He has a good head—wide forehead rather than high, but
deficient at the upper part of the back ; so that he has not
those social qualities that make him fond of home: he is a
roving disposition, and likes going about rather than settling.
He will never stay at one thing long: is very fond of music—
it looks like his business—he plays by ear—sings sentimental
songs of his own composing—he has a high voice, alto they
call it.” I asked her whether she could discern any pecu-
liarity about the hands or feet. She cast her closed eyes
downwards as if trying to see, and said, “ His feet are like
any other person’s; but his hands—there’s something strange
about the left hand—he holds it in this way,” (imitating so
exactly what I have often seen that I could have believed him
before me, and could feel no doubt that he was present to
her ;) “he generally hides it—it is deformed—and he was
born with it so. He seems to have written, but you have
not got the letter: he is looking well, and stout, and sun-


Dr. Klein Grant's ignorance of Mesmerism. 419


burnt, and has seen hardships: he was more comfortable in
England than he is now: he did not remain at Port Philip—
that is a nasty place—he is gone far up the country, and has
got to the gold-diggings: he is in a hut just now with some
others, and they are obliged to do a great deal for themselves.
I can smell wine, and smoking, and cooking. He has not
been long there: he met a friend who was going, and per-
suaded him to go too: he doesn’t work very hard—he doesn’t
like work—he makes the others work. He has a good bit of
gold already, which he has turned into money, and he thinks
of coming home to surprise you. He will come home, and
you will hardly know him except by his hand; but it will not
be for a twelvemonth or more, but you will hear of him soon
through a friend.”

Ellen’s whole description is wonderful in its truth. I
could but sit and listen in the greatest astonishment. I asked
her if I had any other relation in Australia besides him.
“Yes,” she said, “at Port Adelaide you have a brother—he
is quite a young man: I see him—he has a wife and child—
and another—a baby,” (the birth of the latter has been since
announced to us.) While her eyes were still fast shut she
described our personal appearance most accurately, Mrs. E.’s
and mine, saying that I was darker in complexion, eyes, and
hair than Mrs. E.: that we had striped silk dresses on alike,
and the various colours that each had on. With kind com-
pliments.

Believe me, dear Sir,
Very faithfully yours,
J A 8 ad


To George Barth, Esq.


XVII. Dr. Esdaile and Mesmerism in Perth. Communicated
by Dr. Elliotson.


“It is a pretty notorious fact that in persons endowed with good health and
good sense animal magnetism generally produces no effect whatever. It has been
frequently asserted that all the effects of magnetism may be produced on suscep-
tible individuals without their being aware that any attempt is being made to
magnetize them—as when the operator comes unobserved behind them. This, if
established, would sufficiently prove that there must be some real agency in the
case independent of any impression on the mind or senses of the patient: but
this assertion requires much more substantial evidence than has yet been adduced
to obtain credence from cautious enquirers.

‘* Such are the powerful effects of animal magnetism. Of these phenomena,
some, as being both in their nature possible, and attested by respectable wit-
nesses, are worthy the attention of sober-minded persons. For example, there


* We have all the names and addresses. —Zois¢.


420 Dr. Klein Grant’s ignorance of Mesmerism.


is no doubt but that various states of insensibility, convulsion, &c., may be
produced in certain individuals by the pawings and starings called mesmeric.
Again, with respect to the mesmeric somnambulism, although the editor has
Sound all the alleged cases of this nature which have come under his own observa-
tion to be mere impostures, there is, he conceives, no great improbability that
genuine cases of the kind may sometimes occur ; because, since it is unquestion-
able that somnambulism occurs as a morbid phenomenon in common sleep, there
seems no reason why it may not present itself as a parallel phenomenon of the
morbid sleep or stupor called mesmeric. With respect to clairvoyance and
universal lucidity, those physiologists who have actually witnessed such pheno-
mena may believe in them ; but the greater part of physiologists never have wit-
nessed them, and it may be safely predicted that they never will.

‘*Mesmerism has been applied to the treatment of diseases, and it does not
follow that because animal magnetism is an imaginary agent, no remedial effects
are to be obtained from the processes styled mesmeric. With respect to the
pathological revelations and therapeutic lights, said to be derived from clairvoy-
ance, every person gifted with common sense may be left to form his own judg-
ment thereof: but there are probably many cases of nervous diseases in which
the influence of the sensorium as directed and concentrated on certain parts of
the mesmeric processes, might produce highly beneficial effects.

‘This subject yet remains to be investigated in an impartial and scientific
spirit: the mesmerists have been actuated by fanaticism, and the antimesmerists
by prejudice.’’—Lexicon Medicum ; or, Medical Dictionary. By the late Robert
Hooper, M.D., F.L.S. Eighth Edition, revised, corrected, and improved, by
Klein Grant, M.D. London: 1848.*


Perth, Dec. 9, 1852.

My dear Dr. Elliotson,—It will give you pleasure to learn
that the importance of mesmerism as a medical agent is be-
coming as apparent in the far North as in the farthest East,
in spite of the utterly groundless assertion that Europeans
are rarely and with great difficulty mesmerised. I had no
opportunities of experimenting upon Europeans in India for


* Persons endowed with good health and good sense are as frequently affected
as others.

The proofs of effects on persons not aware that mesmerisation was being
attempted are endless.

The designation of the passes as pawings is another illustration of the vulgarity
which usually characterizes the opponents of mesmerism. Dr. Klein Grant was
present at my house when some of the finest and most unexceptionable cases of
mesmerism were shewn: some of which have appeared in The Zoist.

If the greater part of physiologists will never witness clairvoyance, it will
be their own fault.

The therapeutic lights shine strongly enough in the records of mesmeric cases.

The display of Dr. Klein Grant’s ignorance is carried on to the end, where
he supposes that nervous affections are the only diseases in which it is beneficial.

If the medical profession would stoop from their giddy height to read The
Zoist, they would escape from exposing themselves for the next generation to
laugh at.


Many wonder how I have been able to bear up against the dire hostility and
coarse abuse of my professional brethren. I have borne up because I knew that
I had taken all possible pains to ascertain the truth of mesmerism. I knew that
I had taken equal pains with every medical subject before I advocated it, and that
everything which I had advocated had at length been admitted. Twenty years ago,
I was a medical witness in a cause in which Mr.-Thesiger was the junior counsel on
the opposite side. When I had given my testimony unfavourably to him, he


Sir Frederick Thesiger. 421


surgical purposes: but those who were mesmerised for me-
dical diseases were in general susceptible to the desired degree
for the cure or alleviation of their complaints, and every day
since my return home has proved the correctness of what I
advanced in my pamphlet (Mesmerism as an Anesthetic and


suggested to the senior counsel who had cross-examined me to ask whether I did
not use the stethoscope : and his purpose was to shew that I was fool enough to use
it, and therefore my evidence not worth attention, I replied, ‘‘ Yes, in all dis-
eases of the chest ;”” and the Judge, Lord Abinger, scouted the absurdity of my
being the less qualified to give good evidence in the case,—one of epilepsy.*

Sir Frederick Thesiger is not aware that his name is sure to endure in the annals
of medicine as that of an English barrister whose hope to disparage a physician in
a court of justice by signalizing him as an employer of the stethoscope proved in
what contempt the use of this instrument was once held by the majority of the
medical profession in England, some of whom had unquestionably abused his ig-
norance as many now abuse the ignorance of their patients on the subject of
mesmerisin.

This very day, Dec. 15, 1852, I was a second time a medical witness in a
cause in which the same barrister was on the opposite side. But what a change !
The case was one in which my evidence depended upon observations I had made
with the stethoscope. These I had to detail. The Judge, Chief Justice Jervis,
comprehended them all, and they formed an important part of the medical evi-
dence and greatly contributed to the success of my side: and £2000 damages
were awarded to my deceased patient’s family. Sir Frederick Thesiger, now
leading counsel and Attorney-General, made no attempt to sneer at the stetho-
scope, but accepted all the symptoms ascertained by me with it as he did the rest.
Neither, must I add, did he sneer at mesmerism and attempt to damage my evi-
dence by it: and this I regard as a proof of the firm root which mesmerism has
taken. That this was from no love of me was clearly shewn by his conduct to-
wards me. For he told the Jury that I wished to have it believed that I knew
more than anybody, and was so determined to appear right that I had said what
positively I had not said. I had stated that a heart might be overgrown out-
wards (excentric hypertrophy), so that its external bulk was increased: or that
its overgrowth might be inwards, and its bulk not increased but its substance
thickened and its cavities lessened, and that this is called inward overgrowth
(concentric hypertrophy). I added that some writers deny the latter form, and
regard the appearances as the result of very strong muscular contraction before
death. But I distinctly declared that I begged not to give any such opinion. To
have regarded the thickening of the heart in the individual case as the result of
strong contraction was impossible, for the bulk was not less than natural, as it
must be when the increased thickness and the diminished size of the cavities are
caused by very strong contraction. To have said this could have answered no
purpose; for my sole object was to urge the fact that the case in question was
one of greatly increased thickness inwards with great diminution of the cavities.
How this state was produced, mattered not: its existence was my point.

The Chief Justice summed up immediately after this address, and delivered a
most able charge, mastering completely all the medical parts of the case, and
stating correctly all that I had said.

Had Sir Frederick Thesiger thus attacked me in the cross-examination I
could have fought with him: but he courageously deferred it till I was not per-
mitted to reply. To represent me fancying I knew everything and, right or wrong,
determined to be right, was vulgar enough: but to declare I had said what I did
not say, and had said this to serve a purpose, was an accusation which he would
not have ventured to make in private life: and I cannot conceive why a man, when


* See my Harveian Oration, p. 65, English version.


422 Mesmerism and Dr. Esdaile in Perth.
Curative Agent), “that the depressing influence of disease
will be found to reduce Europeans very often to the impres-
sible condition of the nervous system so common among the
Eastern nations.”

Nothing would please me more than to be able to spend
my now superfluous leisure in curing and relieving the af-
flicted by my personal exertions: but, unfortunately, I dare
not indulge in this gratifying employment from the exhaus-
tion and subsequent suffering it always causes me.

It has been supposed, it seems, that because I noticed in
the Dedication of my pamphlet to the doctors the sneering
question, ‘‘ Why does he not do the same here as in India?
let him do so the same in our hospitals, and we will believe
him,” &c.: it has been supposed, I say, that some such offer
had been actually made to me. But, in justice to our or-
thodox brethren, I must say that no one ever had the impu-
dence to make me any such proposal. This would have been
a safe bravado, as it is well known that all I have done has
been through the agency of others, and that I declined to
mesmerise in person before the Mesmeric Committee in 1846,
“on the ground that this was needless and injurious to my
health,” (see Mesmeric Committee’s Report.)

If any such impertinent offer had been made to me, the
following would have been my reply :—

“To 8. Sawbones, Esq., Surgeon.

*‘ Sir,—In reply to your obliging offer to permit me to perform
your hospital duties and to satisfy you of the truth of mesmerism
without any trouble on your part, I have the honour to inform you,
that seeing I refused to mesmerise in person before the Government
Commission in 1846, when my honour and reputation were at stake,
I feel still less called upon to injure myself in attempting to satisfy
a person for whose judgment I have no respect, and to whose opinion
I am quite indifferent.—I am, &c.”
pleading as a barrister should depart in the least from the rules of conduct which
are observed among gentlemen in private society.

Seven years ago, the late Lord Chancellor Truro, then Attorney-General and
known as Sir Thomas Wilde, was engaged for Mr. Dyce Sombre, acknowledged
ultimately to be lunatic, and I gave evidence against the poor madman’s sanity.
In the Court of Chancery, where of course I was not allowed to speak, this
barrister said, ‘‘ It was his duty, as counsel for Mr. Sombre, to insist that what-
ever errors or follies he had been guilty of, he never was, and is not now, a lunatic,
or incompetent to the management of his property or person. Men might shew
their confidence in Dr. Elliotson, or believe in mesmerism, and escape a commis-
sion ; but let them, from peculiar habits and feelings, entertain a suspicion of their
wife’s fidelity, and they laboured under the delusions of insanity, and must be
confined for life.""—-Morning Chronicle, July 16, 1844. ‘‘ Dr. Elliotson, with
his ideas respecting mesmerism, was, in his opinion, quite as insane as Mr. Dyce
Sombre.’’— Times, July 17th. Lord Chancellor Lyndhurst, so far from gravely


rebuking Sir Thomas Wilde for this foul language, began joking with him.—Joun
ELLioTson. 4


Ignorance and intolerance in the Perth Infirmary. 423


Although my hands are tied, those of a medical man have
been actively employed of late in curing a variety of diseases
by mesmerism. Dr. Fraser Thomson, physician to the Perth
Infirmary, had been misled, like the great bulk of the doc-
tors, by the confident and ignorant dogmatism of the medical
journals, and had never thought mesmerism to be worth a
moment’s serious consideration till my late pamphlet* fell in
his way. He saw that the facts therein related were of a
description to preclude the possibility of mistake, and, like a
reasonable being, he set about experimenting for himself in
his hospital. His success in the mesmeric treatment of disease
was great and rapid, but, as he will soon make public the
results of his practice, I shall only relate to you two cases
that fell more particularly under my own observation.

A young woman, aged 20, suffering from periodic vomit-
ing of blood with constant sickness at stomach for a year
past, was sent from a distance by her friends to the Perth
Infirmary. Her illness had followed a suppression of the
catamenia: she had been drenched with all kinds of physic,
and bled, leeched, and blistered periodically for the discharge
of blood from the stomach, but all to no purpose. You can
readily believe Dr. Thomson also discharged all his orthodox
artillery against her with no better effect, and then as a
“dernier resort” asked me if I thought it a case likely to be
benefitted by mesmerism? I replied, that in my opinion it
was, and encouraged him to try. All medicine was left off,
and at the end of a week’s mesmeric treatment the girl was
much better. This was no sooner apparent, than Dr. Thom-
son’s colleague in the Infirmary (who had offered me all his
patients to practise mesmerism upon a few days before)
thought it his duty to call a meeting of the directors, and to
inform them that he would resign if the practice of mes-
merism was permitted in the hospital. Dr. Thomson ceased
to mesmerise the girl in consequence of this, and she soon
became as bad as ever. Her friends on seeing this removed
her to private lodgings, and Dr. Thomson soon resumed the
exclusively mesmeric treatment of her, and again with im-
mediate benefit. Her general health, digestion, and spirits
rapidly improved, and her waist, which had been measured
at the commencement, was found to have decreased four
inches in circumference by the end of a month. Towards the
end of the month she predicted in her sleep that she would
become unwell in three days, and during the night-time:
which was exactly fulfilled by the event. Her health was


* To be had of Bailliere, Regent Street, price 1s.


424 Second beautiful Mesmeric Cure.


thereupon fully re-established, and she has remained perfectly
well ever since,—a period of five months. She exhibited
many fine and interesting mesmeric phenomena during her
treatment, but it is to the important medical fact of the
speedy curé of this long, severe, and intractable disease by
mesmerism alone, after the failure of all the orthodox reme-
dies, that I now desire to attract the attention of intelligent
men. When Mesmer offered to prove the existence of his
animal magnetism to his brother doctors by curing diseases
before their eyes, he was told by the orthodox authorities,
“ that in medicine cures went for nothing,’ which gave occa-
sion to the wags to say, “ Then medicine and the art of curing
are two different sciences, and have nothing in common.”

The next case occurred in my own family. My niece,
aged 15, had been disordered in her general health for some
time, and had not been able to go out for the three last days
in consequence of a severe pain in her left knee that made
her dead lame. Dr. Thomson, being her medical attendant,
proposed one day to try what local mesmerising would do for
her knee. He accordingly commenced making passes from
the knee to the toes, and in a quarter of an hour the pain
was entirely gone! and she walked with perfect ease. She
had also been suffering frequently from a pain in her left
side during the past year, and I asked her if she then felt it?
She replied that she did. Upon which I said to Dr. Thomson,
“Seeing that she is so sensitive to local passes, you could
probably put her to sleep, and remove the pain in her side
also; it is worth trying. If you succeed, you may be sure
that there is no imagination at work, for she is a very matter-
of-fact young lady.” “That is so much the better, is it not ?”
said she laughing ; and Dr. Thomson commenced mesmeris-
ing her generally. In ten minutes she was profoundly en-
tranced, and insensible to all noises and pricking with a pin.
Muscular power was quite extinguished, and her limbs could
be tossed about as if they did not belong to her. She was
demesmerised after half an hour; awoke free from pain, and
went out and walked two miles. The pain in the knee never
returned, and she informed us that she had been laid up for
several weeks in London with an attack of the same kind,
for which the knee had been poulticed, &c., secundum artem.
I ought to have said that she had never been mesmerised
before. The pain in the side having returned, she was en-
tranced a second time in a few minutes, and I said to Dr.
Thomson, “ Although she did not hear her aunt or me speak
to her the first day, she may possibly hear you, and you may
try to make her a somnambulist.” Dr. Thomson had not


Low estimation of medical men explained. 425


spoken to her the first day, but he now called her by name,
and she answered, “ What?” “ Do you feel the pain in your
side now?” “Yes.” Will mesmerism cure it?” “Yes.”
“ How many passes will be required?” Without a moment’s
hesitation she replied, “ Four”’ Dr. Thomson continued
without speaking. “ Four!” cried she: “it’s gone!” and
from that moment she heard all her mesmeriser said, but no
one else. You may inform the editors of the Edinburgh
Monthly Journal that Dr. Thomson’s patients become much
oftener and more readily somnambulists than the Asiatics I
have been accustomed to see, and he succeeds quite as often
in mesmerising his subjects. When my niece was thrown
into the profound trance, she usually awoke with a great
sense of fatigue (a very unusual circumstance), and local
mesmerising was therefore substituted, which always removed
the paroxysms of pain in the side in a few minutes, and had
the contrary effect of exciting her whole system agreeably.
In fact, she felt and looked as if exhilarated by wine, and
the excitement lasted for a good while afterwards. The pain
in the side was soon removed, and she got quite well without
a grain of physic. How few young women are so lucky in
like circumstances !

It will appear incredible to the next generation of doctors,
and to all reasonable men in this even, that cases like the
above, reported by medical men of long standing, great ex-
perience, and tried veracity, could not gain admittance into
any medical journal in the year 1852, and would never have
been heard of, but for the volumes of The Zoist.

The medical journals are constantly lamenting “the low
estimation in which our profession is held ;” and who can
wonder at it, if the public judge the profession by them.

I am, very truly yours,
James EspAt.e.


XVIII. Phenomena observed in Mesmerised Water.


‘The wisest, the most logical, the honestest men of the medical profession,
scout with ineffable scorn the theory of the mesmeric sect, that there is an animal
magnetic fluid. How dare persons, as ignorant of physics and physiology as a
mad bull, bristle up against the wise, the logical, the unmercenary ; confiding in
a few medical heretics, whose honour or whose mental power must be doubted.” —
Dr. Hull, Clairvoyance and the Clergy, p. 13.

Mrs. 8S. S., a very respectable person living in my family,
found, on watching the hands during the process of mesmer-
ising, that she could see streams of light like sunbeams pass-
ing from the fingers. At the time when this first occurred
she had never been put into a mesmeric state. On some


426 Mesmerised Water.


occasions she has seen light stream from the eyes, and appear
as a halo over the head of different persons. She has fre-
quently watched the process of mesmerising water, and de-
scribes it as it appears to her as follows.

The light falls from the fingers till it reaches the bottom
of the water, resting there till the whole surface of the bottom
is covered. It then begins to rise till it reaches the top of
the water, making the whole very bright. This part of the
process occupies from four to six minutes, varying with the
quantity of the water and the strength of the mesmeriser.
When the water is quite full of light, a movement like boil-
ing or the motion of the waves of the sea takes place, in-
creasing till the whole quantity of water is in commotion,
one wave pushing on another. This disturbance then gra-
dually subsides, and the water becomes quite still.

From experiments made with a view to determine the
time occupied by the process, it appears that the time, during
which the “boiling” goes on, nearly corresponds with that
required to bring the water to the boiling point. The expe-
riment has been repeated many times with the same observer
always with the same result.

On meeting at the Mesmeric Infirmary with a young girl,
aged 13, who, during the process of cure’passed into a par-
tially lucid state, I begged her to describe what she saw
when water was mesmerised. She had never been questioned
on the subject before. Her description coincided with that
given by Mrs. S., with these variations. She spoke of “ blue,”
instead of “light,” and she said she saw the water full of
very small insects, which dropped down as the “ blue” de-
scended, “killed as if by a flash of lightning.” When the
water was charged she spoke of its bubbling up, moving and
boiling over “ like the waves when the sea is rough,” described
the gradual subsiding of the excitement, and told me when
the water became still. I did not, as in the former instance,
note the time taken up by the process, but the whole seemed
to occupy about ten minutes; the period of the first part
corresponding as well as could be guessed with that taken up
by the second.

The third person from whom I heard a description of
the changes produced in water by mesmerism, was the matron
of the Mesmeric Infirmary, some time previous to her ap-
pointment to that institution, and when she had heard no-
thing of the phenomena of mesmerism. She was in com-
pany with Mrs. S., who is connected with her by marriage,
watching the influence as it proceeded from Mr. Capern’s
hands. Her description corresponded with those I have given


Mode of producing ordinary sleep. 427


above, except that she seemed to be more dazzled by the bril-
liancy of the light than her sister-in-law, who was observing
it at the same time. Both exclaimed at once when the boil-
ing subsided.

Since that time a lucid patient, who had never heard the
subject spoken of, gave Mr. Capern, the secretary, a descrip-
tion agreeing with the other statements. Like the mesmer-
ised girl mentioned before, she spoke of the appearance as
* blue.”

I hear that small fishes on being put into water com-
pletely mesmerised drop lifeless to the bottom. I have not
verified this experiment, but it agrees with the statement of
the first lucid patient.


S. E. De M.


Note.—The water to be mesmerised should fill about one-
fourth part of a plain tumbler. The tumbler should be placed
on the palm of one hand, with the fingers of the other hand
pointing downwards into it. The position of the hands should
not be changed. It interrupts the process to throw or dart
the fingers at the water.*


XIX. A new method of producing Sleep. By Mr. James, of
the Society of Friends. Communicated, with a Note,
by Mr. Janson, of Exeter.


‘* Spirit tapping will come before the public in the usual way, and have its
day, like mesmerism, unknown tongues, and other like phenomena, leaving the
ignorant as mystified as ever, as they open their eyes to some new wonder.”’—
Family Herald: a domestic magazine of useful information and amusement, Dec.
11, 1852: p. 522, column 1.


Bannow Grammar School, New Ross,
County Wexford, Ireland, Oct. 25, 1852.
Mr. James to Mr. Janson.

I beg to make you acquainted with a new fact which I
think I have discovered relating to the science of mesmerism.
I have no doubt as to the reality or the utility of the circum-
stances which I am about to state, and I have not seen any
thing like it in any of the few mesmeric publications which
I have read. Perhaps you will mention it to Dr. Elliotson :
he may consider it worthy of a notice in The Zoist.


* Instances of the appearance of light will be found in Nos. XIII., pp. 124—
139; XXI., p. 100; XXIII., pp. 225-6, the facts here are very remarkable ;
XXIV., p. 342; XXVIL., p. 283; XXIX., pp. 46, 47, 372; XL., p. 375.


428 Mode of producing ordinary sleep.


It is an easy and simple process of putting myself asleep
(I suppose the natural sleep) merely by the employment of
the will and attention in making imaginary passes ; that is to
say, passes in thought only from the top of the head down
over the face.

I have long found it difficult to procure a proper allow-
ance of sleep; sometimes lying awake the whole night, and
very frequently getting no sleep for several hours, and at the
same time feeling so irritable, nervous, and restless, that I
could not read in bed with any degree of comfort or satis-
faction. From time to time I have adopted various means,
and often found benefit from them: for instance, I have
sometimes risen in the middle of the night, and gone out to
walk for an hour: at other times worked at some mechanical
employment ; washed the surface of the body in cold water ;
spent some time in reading, or writing, or smoking tobacco.

I generally obtained some hours of sound refreshing sleep
by one or other of these methods. But one very cold night,
about a month ago, as I lay awake, and did not much relish
the notion of getting up, I began to think of some other
means of procuring


‘* Tired nature’s sweet restorer, balmy sleep :”’


And as I reflected that many, to whom I had given a few
mesmeric passes for head-ache, tooth-ache, &c., had slept
well afterwards, I thought perhaps I might be able to apply
the same medicine to myself. I accordingly made five or six
passes with one hand, and then settled myself comfortably to
sleep, continuing mentally to draw down over my eyes an
imaginary sort of sleeping influence, and in two or three mi-
nutes I was fast asleep.

On the next night I tried the effect of thought or will
alone without any manual operation, and was almost instantly
transported to the land of dreams. Ever since I have inva-
riably practised this simple plan, once, twice, or three times
each night, as occasion requires ; so that I think I have more
than a hundred times put myself asleep, and, by a voluntary
effort of the will, I positively


‘*weigh my eyelids down,
And steep my senses in forgetfulness.”
I have often counted the number of passes necessary, and
find them generally from three or four to twelve, and some-
times as many as forty. They never once failed ; and I never
since was obliged to rise for the purpose of trying the effect
of smoking or anything else. I rest well every night, and
have been in better health and spirits every day.


Books received. 429


Having well tested this experiment, and feeling fully
assured of its truth, and thinking it must be of great service
to many persons who cannot procure necessary sleep, I now
take the liberty of making it known to you; and, although I
do not find it an easy matter to describe, I hope you will be
enabled to understand me.

You, Sir, were the means of making me acquainted with
mesmerism by writing me a letter, and sending me the April
number of The Zoist. This is my apology for troubling you
with this communication.

With grateful acknowledgments, I now bid you farewell.


NOTE BY MR. JANSON.


I do not suppose there is anything really mesmeric in
Mr, James’s process; it appears to be simply an effect pro-
duced by soothing and fixing the mind, without any effort of
thought. Many have been in the habit of producing a similar
effect by imagining a steadily continued series of motions;
as, for example, imagine you are looking at a gap in a hedge,
through which a large flock of sheep are escaping. You
watch them (mentally), and seem to see them popping through
in regular succession, each with a slight leap, as he clears the
hedge-bank : and before all the flock is through, you will be,
as Mr. J. poetically expresses it, “transported to the land of
dreams.” However, this process of imaginary mesmeric
passes may be even still more effective.

There is moreover something so truly innocent in the idea,
that I think even the most virulent of the “ Satanics” (a race
by the way that is now very rife, and rapidly increasing)
could hardly, I think, find drass enough to raise a serious
objection to it.

H. U. Janson.


BOOKS RECEIVED.


Mesmerism considered in connexion with Personal Responsibility.

The design of this pamphlet is to “ warn the ignorant and unwary of the
paramount necessity ’’ of being upon their guard against mesmerism, inasmuch
as Scripture tells us that whoever consults with familiar spirits, or is an enchanter
or necromancer, &c., is an abomination to the Lord. ‘* Mesmerism is a fact, a
reality, —not an imposture, nor a mere creature of the imagination’’ (p. 5), but
the writer also tells us, that there are ‘‘ sach things as magic and witchcraft, and
curious and unlawful acts,—which God condemns, and of which He prohibits the
use, under the most terrible penalties.”

We certainly had hoped that the bearing of Scripture upon mesmerism, in the
sundry passages referred to, had been explained away long ago. In Vol. VII. of
The Zoist, p. 401, it is said (in a paper which we should strongly recommend to
the consideration of the writer) :—


VOL. X. HH


430 Books received.


“‘ Even supposing that it were proved that all the cases of magic, witchcraft,
&c., on record were in reality mesmeric, we can perfectly understand the reason
of the prohibitions given to the Jews. It was designed to put down all attempts
to resort to the aid of demons. Whether the attempt were successful or not,
whether the demons were real or imaginary, makes no difference as to the moral
character of what was forbidden. And the reason of the prohibition no longer
exists, when men have ceased to believe in or to attempt anything of the kind.
No one would now scruple to ornament his furniture with a brazen figure of a
serpent, because there is no danger now of its being an object of idolatrous
worship, like the brazen serpent which king Hezekiah (very wisely and rightly)
‘broke in pieces.’ ’’ (Review of Dr. Maitland’s book by A. B.)

It is, however, perfectly idle to waste the time of our readers by a grave refu-
tation of the well-intentioned nonsense of this pamphlet. Fanaticism will have
its course, and fanatics must have their say. What arguments can avail with a
writer who says that ‘‘ there is more than sufficient evidence to prove that there is
spiritual or supernatural operation” in the action of mesmerism? And cer-
tainly we should like to learn who is the ‘‘ eminent medical man” who admits that
in mesmerism “ there is a twofold operation, physical and spiritual, natural and
supernatural !’’ He may practise mesmerism, and be a good and religious man,
as our author assures us; but his system of reasoning must be a curiosity.

The following are the three ‘‘ alarming and dangerous results ” which follow
from the practice of mesmerism, according to the sage notions of the pamphleteer.

“Ist. It has a weakening and defiling effect on the spirits of those who use
it!’”’ (Of this we have seen nothing. We know, however, that it has a strength-
ening and purifying effect on the bodies of those who employ it.)

‘*2ndly. Satan uses it, where it is accompanied by clairvoyance or necro-
mancy, in order to introduce falsehood in religious practice arid doctrine.

** 3rdly. It helps on the increasing infidelity and neology of these days, and
some already are found to ascribe the miracles of our Lord to mesmeric power.”’

When the author shall have endeavoured to prove the above extraordinary po-
sitions by a slight approach to evidence and with the exercise of a little reasoning,
it will be time enough for us to think of replying to him after a serious fashion.


Clairvoyance and the Clergy. By Robert Hull, M.D. London: 1852.
Price Threepence.

We cannot advise any one to read this vulgar and weak piece of ignorance
and fury.


Washy Stuff; but warranted Fast Colours. Being two letters in reply to
Clairvoyance and the Clergy. By an East Anglian Clergyman. London: 1852.

This is the production of a gentleman, with a well-trained and well-informed
intellect.


A Lecture on the phenomena of Dreams, Mesmerism, Clairvoyance, &c. By
the Rev. Thomas S. Millington, late Curate of St. Sepulchre’s, Northampton.
1852. Price One Shilling.

It is grievous that the medical profession so neglect their duty as to leave the
task of such lectures to the clergy.


Soul: or the Hebrew word Nephesh, with the Greek word Psuche. By
William Glen Moncrieff. Edinburgh: 1852. Price Threepence.

The design of this pamphlet is to give a plain view of the Hebrew and Greek
words in the Bible that are translated soul ;—the former being Nephesh, and the
latter Psuche: and to shew that their meaning is widely different from that of
the English word soul as employed theologically.

The author informs us that Naphesh, which springs from Nephash, to breathe,
is in many passages actually translated breath ; in many others, creature or ani-
mal; in many others, life; that in many others it signifies person ; in some a
dead body; in some that it describes certain of the powers, desires, appetites,
or mental states of man.


>


Books received. 431


He next informs us that Psuche, which radically means dreath, is frequently
translated life ; frequently signifies personality ; sometimes dead persons ; some-
times a power or mental state ; and in one passage a fish,—Rev. xvi. 3, “ and every
living soul (psuche) died in the sea.”’

We have always contended that man is a material body, endowed with certain
properties or powers, existing from a certain composition in certain circum-
stances: and that, when he dies, he dy nature ends for ever: but that the Chris-
tian doctrine declares he will enjoy immortality,—will live again, not in virtue of
his nature, but by a miracle (see Nos. I1I., p. 288; XII., pp. 421-6; XXI,,
p- 112; XXIX., pp. 68-9; XXXIV., pp. 125-6; XXXIX., pp. 313-5); and
Bishop Law, it will be seen at p. 314, says, “‘ But neither do these words, nor
any other, so far as I can find, ever stand for a purely immaterial principle in
man, or a substance, whatever some imagine they mean by that word, wholly
separable from, and independent of, the body.’’ When he lives again, the
Scripture declares that his condition will be different. To us it is incomprehen-
sible: we have not faculties to comprehend it: but it is termed spiritual. What
is natural must be learnt from experience and reasoning on experience: what is
supernatural, as a future state, must be believed on supernatural authority.

With all this the author agrees: for he thus concludes :—

‘*1st. From the preceding pages, is it not fully evident, that the scriptural
idea of a soul and the theological one are as different as could be imagined? As
for ‘immortal souls,’ and ‘ deathless souls,’ and ‘ unquenchable souls,’ &c., the
Bible knows nothing of them: such language is common in prayers, sermons,
treatises, and even newspapers, but the very opposite is the inspired representa-
tion of our nature. Dust we are, and unto dust we shall return. Men are
mortal ; we need to ‘seek for’ immortality, Rom. ii. 7. The Bible-description
of man is ‘ corruptible man,’ Rom. i. 23. ‘The wages of sin is death; but the
gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord,’’ Rom. vi. 23.

‘2nd. If to be a ‘soul,’ is to be immortal, then all breathing animals in the
world, great as the elephant, small as the insect, are immortal also, for they are
as much souls as man. Do none of these creatures die? Is it not true that the
beasts ‘ perish ?’

‘* 3rd. Since the ‘soul of man,’ is the fragile life of a man, or simply the
mortal man himself, it is evident that, when a man dies, a soul dies; when a man
is destroyed, a soul is destroyed ; and when a man is saved from death, a soul is
saved from dissolution and corruption. Thus, when a man dies he becomes
necessarily as if he had never been. This fact is explicitly affirmed in Job x. 18,
19. So far from continuing to think, his thoughts perish, Ps. cxlvi. 3, 4,—he
now knows nothing, Ecc. ix. 5, 6,—he, however pious before death, cannot now
praise the Lord, Ps. cxv. 17,—he is asleep till the resurrection-trumpet shall
sound, Dan. xii. 2; 1 Thess. iv. 14.

‘* 4th, The only prospect of the dead recovering consciousness, is, therefore,
by a resurrection. Hence the importance of that Scriptural doctrine,—a doctrine
now nearly forgotten, at least rendered, through the dogma of immortal-soulism,
singularly valueless. We are helped thus to see the force of Paul’s language, and
it is only in the light thrown by Scripture on man, that it can at all be accurately
understood,—‘ if Christ be not raised—they (the believing men) also which are
fallen asleep are PERISHED ;’ i. e., they have ceased to be for ever. ‘If after the
manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if
the dead rise not! let us eat and drink, for to-morrow WE pik,’ 1 Cor. xv. 32.
How can it be forgotten that the only consolation the Divine Redeemer had for
the weeping Martha was ‘ Thy brother’—has gone to glory ? no—‘ thy brother
SHALL RISE AGAIN.’ And what else had Paul for the bereaved Thessalonians ?
1 Thess. iv. 14 18, ‘ The dead in Christ sHaxu aise first.’

‘* 5th. Glory be to the Son of God, who hath brought ‘ life and immortality ’
— incorruptible life—‘ to light through the gospel,’ 2 Tim. i. 10. ‘ Now is Christ
risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept,’ 1 Cor. xv.
20, 23.

‘* How awfully the Life-Giver, the blessed Redeemer,—who is the only Im-
mortalizer,—has been dishonoured, by telling men that they are all mortal beings !


132 Notices to Correspondents.


To the wicked it is said their ‘end is destruction,’ and how can good men continue
to affirm their end is preservation ; life instead of death? ‘The wicked shall
perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat of lambs; they sHALL
CONSUME, INTO SMOKE SHALL THEY CONSUME AWAY,’ Psalm xxxvi. 20.

“6th. At present believers have a constitution of being similar to Adam, of
whom it is written, ‘the first man Adam was made (into, Greek eis) a living
soul,’ 1 Cor. xv. 45; Gen. ii. 7. This is the animal state, or the state in which
human beings live by breathing, out of which every one may ascend to a higher
constitution or sublimer mode of existence, as all the true saints ultimately shall.
This second stage, or state, is called the ‘ spiritual’ one, in 1 Cor. xv. 46. ‘ That
was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural (psuchikon—literally,
soulish or soulical), and afterwards that which is spiritual,’ for, the apostle says,
‘there is a natural (psuchikon—soulical) body,’ or being, and ‘there is a spi-
ritual body,’ or being, v. 44. Speaking of the dead saints and their resurrection,
he declares, ‘ It is sown (laid in the grave) a natural (soulical) body,’ or they lie
down soulical ; ‘it is raised a spiritual body,’ or they are resurrected spiritual,
v.44. Into this,—the higher and purer state of humanity, the living saints will
be instantaneously changed at our Lord’s appearing ; and all must undergo this
transformation, that is, be spiritualized, whatever may be the full import of the glo-
rious language used when describing their destiny, since ‘ flesh and blood (soulical
humanity ?) cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither doth corruption inherit
incorruption,’”’ v. 50. But, blessed be God, every saint may exclaim, ‘as we
have borne the image of the earthly (Adam), we shall also bear the image of the
heavenly’ (the Lord from heaven), v. 47.

‘* It seems, -hen, Scriptural to tell- men that, through the Redeemer, they may
yet be spiritualized, or BEcoME spirits. At present men have a spirit—‘ the
spirit of life from God,’ Rev. xi., 11, that evanishes when the man (if is not the
man) dies, like his thoughts which perish on that very day, Ps. cxlvi. 3, 4; but
in the kingdom of God men may live as spirits yet, equal to the angels of light.
That is the second, the perfect, the spiritual, the divine condition of humanity ;
and in this state Jesus himself now exists, the model and the fountain of the
change that is, ere long, to be wrought upon his martyrs and friends.

‘“‘ So far, then, from sous being immortal, the Scripture teaches us, when it
is rightly understood, that it ought to be our holy ambition, and our earnest
prayer, that we may yet CEASE To BE SOULS, and BECOME sPIRITs. Souls aie
not immortal; men must merge into spirits if they are to live for ever in the
incorruptible kingdom. The soulical form of humanity must perish, being cor-
ruptible, for ‘ flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God;’ spirit alone
abides, since it alone is adapted for ceaseless duration. Thrice blessed are they
who shall CEASE TO BE SOULS, or creatures living by breathing; and become
like the spiritual Lord from heaven, when he descends the second time without
sin unto salvation. Amen. Alleluia.’

We wish everybody to read this threepenny book.


The Disruption of the Church and its remedy. By Alexander Alison, Esq.,
author of the Future. Second Edition. Brighton: 1852.


Morse’s Patent. Full exposure of Dr. Charles T. Jackson’s pretensions to
the invention of the American Electro-Magnetic Telegraph. By Hor. Amor
Kendall, late Postmaster-General, U.S. Washington: 1852.


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.


The communications from Dr. Ashburner, Dr. Burg, Mr. Capern, Mr.
Chase, Dr. Collyer, Dr. Elliotson, Mr. Hannent, Dr. Laurie, Mr. Parker, and
Mr. Thompson, are unavoidably postponed.

Mr. Alfred Laughton is referred to Dr. Esdaile’s Article.

Mr. Wallace is informed that the Academy has made no:such report : clair-
voyants have been punished.


.


END OF VOL. X.

==============================================================================

INDEX.


Sag ON IN pic's va shinade cabo ecce ticace de baes Savksensar
Acupuncture ...... PETeTECPrerrrererrrerere re ee
Adolphe Site's Chibongeies o6 e0 oe Cece cece ns sone secesveseecevees


Alderson, Dr., his egregious folly .. ..
Aldis, Dr., his folly


Alexis Didier’s Clairvoyance ..


Amenorrheea, cured with the ended setliaties of nae eevee
Anemia, cured with the external application of brass ...........+-.


Anti-Glorioso . : ees
Arm—rapid cure of, at of a “— out.
Asthma, cured. . coca “a

Aylieff, Mr., his 1 Rlectro- Biology .


Barq, De., om Motal-cure 2... cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccees


Bacon, Lord, on the power of Imagination ....
Barham, Mr., his address ......
Barth’s, Mr., Contributions


Bishop of Calcutta, his testimony to the truth of eens.
Blindness of seventeen years, cured ...... 20.2 20seeeceeececeers


Brande, Professor, his conduct and castigation ............ 00.0000


259, 260,


253,


120,
40, 4 414,


333,


ee SECTS GOED & ia ds cd We tA de ee de beeen Chesswed sees


Buckley’s, Major, death..........
Burn, pain of, cured ........ 220+.


Burnett, Dr., his book on Crime and Insanity..............


Burton, Lieut., Mesmerism in Scinde and other Eastern Countries ......


Bushnan, Dr., his untruth........ Jateenbes
Calcutta Hospital, disgraceful state of .........+.-
Cane, Mr., on Electro-Biology .. . .


Capern, Mr., his successful cases ........-2+2 e+ se eeee


Carpenter, Dr., on Electro-Biology ............++4++


418233


- 288,


+» 203,


page
377
278
409
278
369
221
261
256
153
297
163
151
229
379
158
416
287
415
348
158
120
168
103
177
309
291
147
&e.
116


iv


page

Cat, apparent benefit in a . , nitnd akin 169
Cautley, Rev. Joseph, his admirable saiaiale, rreTTTr re 316
Ceylon Overland Observer: its wisdom caneaee 187
Cholera, Asiatic, advantage of external adhe ite metals in.......... 129
Coetain, Caleta meet 66 oc os oe ccescccccwesesdssccadseccsscseveecs SRF
Clairvoyance ..........+e++-++- 37, 142, 183, 221, 333, 349, 375, 405, 414
Clement, Mr., his fine cure ...........00.00. 93
Colbourne, Mr., cure of St. Vitus’s Rie pewees 412
Coma, cure of a singular 186
Cough, Spasmodic, cured ..... ree 71
Crampton, Sir Philip, his sad conduct .... 35
Cutamcous Dicsase, severe, CUred .. ..'.. cc cccccccccccccccscccccccess 96
Davey, Dr., bis moblle comduct 0 os occ csc ccccccccccagsccece de 1
Dawson, Ellen, her Clairvoyance ...........++++00 414
Debility, cured coeees 164
Delivery, utility of ieee ie. oecee 102
Descartes, his narrow views exposed by th the » Edinburgh pean ee oie - e
Despondency, cured. . Cee ercescccccosccccesececesoes - 163, 204
, cured with external \iasiiadiion OL COPPER o.ccsccccecces BME

brass... 248

De la Garde, Mr., his laughable folly ... 7 oar 311
Deville, Titus, his false report ............+ 177
OE Weg MEE GEN wi08 60 0k caesencescvens 120
Dropsy, Ovarian, cure of ..........eee000+ -+» 333
Druitt, Mr., his ignorance and folly ...........0eeeeeeeeeeeeeees 294, 302
Dublin Mesmeric Association Nine wn weet aehe ten as 327
Dublin University Magazine : its grave language.............-+++.++-. 80
East, Mesmerism of old in the ......... 177, 203
Egerton, Hon. Captain, testimony to the value of ration ee
Electro-Biology, absurdly so called ce cvecees 147, 151, 177
hs, Se, I Sr cae ch dle aardeee tear ee cow auee tea eaee? Ee
Elliotson, Dr., answer to Dr. Fraser oe 72
, cure of severe Cutaneous Disease ........ 96

—_—- , remarks on some incorrect medical names...........-.. 129
—_———— —, cure of singular case of Coma. . «oe 186
——, on the Effects of Metals applied t to nanan! Patients -- 269

—— —_———, on Christian Materialism. . nineiea 313
——, advice in a case of Senile Sibeatinen 322
———, castigation of Professor Brande ...........++- 333
——_——_——,, cure of Inflammation ...........secceseeeceeeceeees BAT
— a singular Nervous Affection 364


, on the power of Imagination ....
Epilepsy, cured


- 205, 317


379


Dati
al —_


———


INDEX. Vv
page
PT eee ee et 69
Esdaile, Dr., his work on een, 4 Eel. cecccccece 225
, his account of Mesmerism in Perth .........20+++--e0+- 419
Essex, folly of a doctor in........... covesccccccee “RID
Eyes, Inflammation of, cured ieneeks e 317
Flintoff, Mr., Surgeon, his folly and more .......... 294
Foster, John, his wise advice en iteeauenensaee © 181
Fraser, Dr., his remarkable folly .............+e0eeees 72
Gall, his belief in Mesmerism ie sieeten take 351
Goalvaniem, its utility ......ccccccscccccccccccsccccccccsescccs 145, 388
Gazette, London Medical, its ignorance. . so.cecress 68
» its sanity aii on eaten ccowcccscccsce ESB
, its antimesmeric absurdity and injustice........ ib.
Georgii, Dr., singular Swedish case .......... 183
Gout, speedy cure of .. ° coee op bNeeeews ecaneece, Me
Governor of Batavia, his emuae to the Medical Profession tne
Grant, Dr. Klein, his ignorance of Mesmerism ......-...eeeeeeeereee 419
Gregory, Dr., his proofs of Mesmerism and lente not ithe io.
tical . eiewns kein bad TN Senses. cntkeeebes~'xe eqnneehen Agee
Grosvenor, hiewh sneitiaeenst to Nisin. ere ery 271
Bieie, Die., Bin GOORIN «ao. 00:0 05:00.00,00:00 00-00. 00108 181
Hamburgh, barbarous state of . 299
Head-ache, violent, cured . re ee ee re ets nnehen: ee
, ‘with the external asians of som. 259
- steel .... 275
Herald, Panstigy, ita wemdlevtngs oo.0.00.00cccccccscccccesvcccoccesccss 6687
Holland, Dr., his foolish course exposed .......... 220+ e008 385
Hudson, Captain, his cures and )abours 171
Hughes, Mr., Wis cures ...0.00-ccccccccccccccces eee oeencton ane
a ee 84, 92, 410, 412, 414, 425
Humphreys, Mr., his cure.......... 374
Hysteria, relieved ith $a:0 cee NN Re.o0 56 Senerneen Kelas pene
Hysteria, cured with the mad application of brass .......... 253, 256, 259
bell- anil ee 254
English steel ..... 260
Illusions, visual and acoustic..........+++ coccosce 183
Imagination not Mesmerism ........0ee+sseereecenecseveceresccee 1,396
Imagination, utility of acting upon ance se eranvecvenenessece. 18
mn, POWET OF 0. cece cece cccccvcccccccecesscese by Baby 34D
India, recent Mesmeriom in .....cccccccccsesccccccccccscccssccccce 287
Inflammation, cured . wag een eee
Insanity, cured with the partner wnihetien - steel ee 264


Mesmerism


359


vi


page

Insensibility in Siam, case of..............seeeeeeee: 375
Introvision, verified ie - 307
James, Mr., method of inducing Se: 427
Janson, Mr., his address iesislacahaulincabn Nase 215
satiate Whe, Peeniatinte . eee ae

SE CEE, GREE 5s 0 0.0 06 00 bd Se RH Es oo veer 0cae cee esVeer dee 69
Knee, inflammation of nine years, cured ...........000seeeeecececeee 173
, stiff, cured . 71, 92

, diseased, ail. sein anialiari 92
Lacordaire, Father, his lation of Sicieaiiien, dws daeeecsnenee Ae
Laurie, Dr., prolongation of life, and relief of Epilepsy iivmweesescee! GD
tn nn I I os. cy aul oe Rbbh.00s 0 0 eb eee eene 422
Laurie, Mr. P., Si edd dP aa ei wee 1
Leader newspaper, its ignorance of Mesmerism ............-+.+0+0-++ 416
Le Mott, M., his nonsense 325
Levity of the human body . 303
Lightning, effects of, cured 309
Lithotrity, original neglect of 375
EO AO, COIN oo 0.0 ve cece cecccece 317
London Mesmeric Infirmary ........ 194
Lowder, Dr., his contribution .... 414
Luxmoore, Mr., his address ............... 213
Tadivarat, Lord, bis conduct 0.0.00 cc cccccccccccccses 422
Majendie, Mr. Ashurst, his address .............++ 215
Mansfield, Mr., his alleged “ induction ”’ 226
Mantel!, Dr., his folly 347
ee ENED ines div Win sie' singin Wie 65s a 0 Uaree du NS abate k anew”
Mayhew, Mr., his cures. ° 69
, case of true ‘iSeieenien ee aueata « 807

Medical Times, its sad conduct under the late editorship 1, 15
Metallic Disc delusion exposed .. 0.40.00 00 debe tbés ebisnssece”” SE
Metals : the wonderful benefit of their external iain ccccccccss S89, 20
es MINE oi5'6.5.53 Sass uh be as Oe us 80be be ed endeto tems
Miles, Capt. Falconer, his services to Mesmerism ..... 327
Millington, Rev. T., his most noble conduct 31li
rae re 369

Milnes, Mr. Monckton, M.P., his aie ienkece wea 207
M‘Neile, Rev. Mr., his nonsense answered .. .........2.ccccecccecece 96
Moncrieff, Mr., his pamphlet on the word Soul .................5 430
Morrison, the Hygeist, his antimesmeric folly . 140, 147
Motherwell, Dr., benefit in Hysteria and Spinal emeteeas in Australia .. 37
y BE CUD OE TUNG 65 dese sic ce ctisvcdisiestsveswes RSD
—————-—-- om Cyarinn DUGRGY.. cece se esccecccsscecess SB


4


Nervousness, cured. .


Neuralgia, cured. . hog ana ait ube be Ra beee ee 89, 162, 166, ‘202204,
, cured with annals cegietiien of steel .
copper .
j Non-Wist on the transference of hearing to the abdomen .............-
7 —————_— Levity in the human subject. . beece
Northampton, cruel medical opposition at . aye .- Sil,
Nottage, Mr. G. S., his fearless exposure of the Metallic Dise delusion
Pee
} Operations, painless...................... 85, 86, 152, 165, 280, 291,
Pain, Domne OE cies, GOON oa ae ink oeicicciesinsice beck teasdeeeeues
Ps CUE o's aise anien si aipaleeind ca aie Oeaeialalte eaapeamareston
% Palsy, long and intense, cured .................+.++ 140, 163, 166, 167,
; with the external application of brass ......
. ere
Parker, Mr., of Exeter, his contributions... ...........000cesececceecs
address .......
j Peed, Rev. Mr., his testimony to the truth of ienien nl aati cure © of
| a thumb and arm.
Pepys’s Diary, on the Lovley oft the eee tne.
Petetin, Dr., his wonderful observations .. 2.2... cccccccccccececcsses
Pheedrus, on credulity and incredulity ........


Phelps, Mr., his cures sas

Penguamey, wallaring te, CUION oo oo. 00 00 6005 05 6060 06 be 0ece onan sn te ee
PE ID i. 506k 9 56.05:4044 25 004s cd aeeied or thane eee ee
Provincial Association, its wailie move .

EE SI: eI AE TTI


Ranking, Dr., his conduct as a journalist... .... 2.2.0... .0ceeeeeeeeees
Bice, Tie... Rie camrelen tp TI 06 oe 6c oc be cece tc vcndnsvecssens

; Rheumatism, cured.................+.+++- 92, 163, 168, 169, 181, 202,
Rhing, Rev. Mr., his sad antimesmeric conduct ...........+.0-+0+0005


Robins, Mr., his enlightened and honest conduct
Robinson, Dr., his cruel folly ...........-.- eae
* Roman Catholics not adverse to Mesmerism...................+.-- 101,
ee, Se DOOD 662 s.0k cc ccecetaess ee
Rowe, Dr., forbids Mesmerism to a patient...........-0eeeeeeeeeeeee
Salpetriére at Paris—its horrors eee
Sandby, Rev. G., account of Dr. Cuan 8 stectnee oes

—, his address
refutation of Dr. Holland...


Saunders, Mr., on Electro-Biology (abe heeete eed aeen a ee aha
, his cases Pe ee ee
RR Aa ES


Satanical—silly ideas .. .. 2... 0. ee ce eeee ee ceeececeeeee 96, 294, 389,


369
244
246
170
303
410

48
270
299

80
164
204
259
262

84
215


294
305
352
303
359

90
290
311
317
152
299
204
100
367
324
152


156
130
106
216
385


108
167


Viii


Sciatica, cured ere rere
Sensibility of contact and violence not identical brie eteseeuwereeae
Set, Purmanund, his Calcutta Hospital Report ........ 2... 0.22.50
Siam, a case of Insensibility and Clairvoyance in.. .. .
Siete, Genmenn Of, GOMOR. . os 0000 cc bese cesecccccces
Simmonds, Mr., renders an operation painless
Sleep, common, how producible
Sleeplessness, cured er
teicites: Sirntedent Castes .. seeeh sand eared enna
Sedalia MN os oy cians snhaovncencundeons
Soul, erroneous notions respecting the word
Spasm of Eyelids, cured. . oe et eee ee
Spencer, Mr. Herbert, Theory of Pepalation ie ndnee aemnaen
DERG, COTE n occ cccvccweccrseeccensccsecccececscocecsseeoce Me
le I IN ics ceccasinvedonccessecs Mosmecesacene, GEE
I, TR ND ak oie 68 oc viens diletndncon cesses eccanaens Ee
Stephenson, opposition to bee .. 0.2.2.0 ccccccsciccccccccccccesccs 1B
een, Ss, Meee aieepention .. coe Maenassekos saetekhen OMNI
ee
Zagter, Dr. Alived, bie GeaasGlty 2... oc cccccccccccccessccessccncsce SYS
Temper, bad, cured ......... a /5d Se ind icin agenda ideo alata aati 70
Terry, Mr., his folly and falsehood, . shegiienwneay edgy kien del ae
Thesiger, Sir Frederick, his cool ways at the Bar .................... 421
Thompson, Mr. H. S., his splendid cure ........--..cccsscccsececsee 80
Tooth-ache, cured . ase ob 60 ease ee ennt ss eeopeesueken
Townshend, Rev. C. H., Sieiaein.. ch 0 Sa edte 60 ence eiudthangeee
I ood osc a csscex.cvdscwavassncoanten 170
Tremor, cured ......... ue ceceaewbed pete cavees sieake) La
Truro, Lord, his disaveditahle conduct . eeudenpe te oteres cats cade SE
I oh ka sb nu obs 0.00 Mh des ke ob waeeeedeeee 90
Voice, loss of, cured .......... csccsesees GOD
Vomiting, daily, cured with the external sentiation of iti, coccecce SE
Wakley, Mr., his continued folly and violence........ 37, 140, 147, 186, 307,
364, 405.
Walshe, Mr., his conduct as a journalist ........................ 229, 209
WE, ID, nn code ke pick be 0k 000.00 bckuncaeeteumens eae Ve
Watt, opposition to him. . PUR ES ba 0s Cb 0s Ddieweod eds sevess eneeer ne
Cndieusateniiat,. ny eee oe 70
Webb, Dr., his mesmeric Jaton operations in India ............-++- 298
Wilkins, Serjeant, his treatment of Dr. Davey .............. 220.0000 1
Wood, Dr. W., his book on Insanity .......... juxtcess (ME
Woodrow, Mr., his account of the Calcutta Meeasite Hospital
